 
 

 

 
 

 
  
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

2018-19 

COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN 

(CEP) 

 
 
 
 

 

DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 

13K595 

School Name: 

BEDFORD ACADEMY HIGH SCHOOL 

Principal: 

ADOFO MUHAMMAD 

 
 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                          
 

 

 

 

 1 

 

Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline  

 
 
Section 1: School Information Page 
 
 
Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page  
 
 
Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) 
 
 
Section 4: CEP Overview  
 
 
Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  

  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction 
  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment 
  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers 
  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership 
  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties  

 
 
Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS)  
 
 
Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) 
 
 
Section 8: Title I Program Information  
 
 
Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 
 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          2 

 

 

 
School Name: 

BEDS Code: 

Grades Served: 

School Address:  

Section 1: School Information Page 

 

School Information 

 

Bedford Academy High School 

13K595 

School Number (DBN): 

 

 
330643 

 
9-12 

 
1119 Bedford Academy High School 

 
718 398-3061 

Phone Number: 

 

718 636-3819 

Fax: 

 

Adofo A. Muhammad 

Amuhammed@schools.nyc.gov 

School Contact Person:  

 

Adofo A. Muhammad 

Email Address: 

 

Principal: 

UFT Chapter Leader: 

Parents’ Association President: 

SLT Chairperson: 

Title I Parent Representative (or 
Parent Advisory Council 
Chairperson): 

Student Representative(s): 

 

CBO Representative: 
 

 
Steve Burrell 

 
Pending 

 
Steve Burrell 

 

Mr. Muller 

 
Pending 

 

 
YMCA 

 

 

District Information 

 

Geographical District: 

13 

 

Superintendent’s Office Address: 

Ms. Janice Ross, I.A. 

Superintendent: 
1396 Broadway Brooklyn, NY 11221 

 

 
JRoss@schools.nyc.gov 

Superintendent’s Email Address: 

 

718-455-4635 

Phone Number: 

 

Fax: 

 

 
 

Field Support Center (FSC)  

 

Brooklyn North 

Bernadette Fitzgerald 

FSC: 

 

Executive Director: 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          3 

 

131 Livingston Street Brooklyn NY 11201 Rm 501 

Executive Director’s Office Address: 

 
Bfitzge2@schools.nyc.gov 

Executive Director’s Email Address: 
718-935-3954 

 

Phone Number: 

 

Fax: 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          4 

 

Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page  

 

All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this 
Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to 
support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention 
Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal 
number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with 
Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. 
 
Directions: 

 

1.  List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 
2.  Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization 
(CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an 
asterisk*. 

3.  SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member 

does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, 
which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT 
member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval.   

4.  The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file 

in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. 

 

Name 

Adofo A. Muhammad 

 
Steve Burrell 

 
Ms. Nurse 

 
N/A 

 
Mr. Muller 

 

Faisal Alam 

 

Duncan Yeboah 

 

N\A 

 
Parent 

 
Parent 

 
Parent 

 

Position and Constituent Group 

Represented 

Signature 
(Blue Ink) 

*Principal or Designee 

*UFT Chapter Leader or Designee 

*PA/PTA President or Designated Co-
President 

DC 37 Representative (staff), if 
applicable 

Title I Parent Representative or 
Parent Advisory Council Chairperson  

Student Representative  
(optional for elementary and middle 
schools; a minimum of two members 
required for high schools) 

Student Representative  
(optional for elementary and middle 
schools; a minimum of two members 
required for high schools) 

CBO Representative, if applicable 

 
Member/Carmel Taylor-Flowers 

 
Member/Lavern Campbell 

 
Member/Elander Williams 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          5 

Name 

 

parent 

 
Teacher 

 
Guidance Counselor 

 
Teacher 

 
Administrator 

 
Administrator 

 
Teacher 

 
Teacher 

 
Pending 

 

 

Signature 
(Blue Ink) 

Position and Constituent Group 

Represented 

Member/Lynette White 

 
Member/ AlieshaJohnson 

 
Member/ Mr. Burrell 

 

Member/ 
 

Member/ Ms. Lavache 

 
Member/ Mr. Muhammad 

 
Member/ Alexander Terry 

 
Member/ CarmaAnderson 

 
Member/ Ms. CasildaThomas 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          6 

 

Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan  

 

The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to 
support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing 
school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, 
monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. 
This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the 
school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, 
Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. 

Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools 

The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect 
the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms 
where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity 
and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and 
classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more 
attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and 
Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our 
families and students. 

Strong Schools, Strong Communities  

The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, 
educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school 
prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult.  

The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers 
and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of 
schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, 
school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that 
all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New 
Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students.  

The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development 

The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and 
external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase 
learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently 
ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan 
(CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school 
community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and 
address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for 
students. 
 

Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish 
high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the 
Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community 
members concrete ways to improve. 
 
In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in 
consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to 
participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a 
comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          7 

 
the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all 
the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements 
work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing 
that it likely addresses other elements as well. 
 

The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools  

Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards 
are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical 
thinking skills. 
Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, 
and challenged by their teachers and peers. 
Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. 
They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous 
improvement. 
Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, 
developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. 
Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by 
welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. 
Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school 
and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value 
each other. 

 

The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools 

In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in 
improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative 
and qualitative data. 

NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) 

The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by 
coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality 
Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 
Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below:  

I.       Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) 
II.    School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4)  
III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and 

Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) 

  
School Quality Guide  

The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to 
set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to 
accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also 
available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s 
practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. 
For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. 
The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of 
similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set 
based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. 

 

Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          8 

 
Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, 
professional development, and parent and family engagement. 
 
To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in 
improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will 
serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the 
administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish: 
 
 
 
It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School 
Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the 
joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% 
parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% 
budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent 
and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on 
establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. 

a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; 
a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) 

 
Next Steps for CEP Development 

School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  

  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the 

requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655. 

  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability 

status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year. 

  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed 

by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are 
SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you 
monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school 
community know when you’ve reached your goal. 

  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action 
plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement. 

  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I 

schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). 

  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall 

cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action 
plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. 

Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful 
implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to 
accomplishing desired results. 

Section 4: CEP Overview 

 

1.  What is your school’s mission statement? 

Bedford Academy High School is a unique school in regards to its population demographics, size of its institution and 
its unorthodox methodology of instructional sequences. We aim to foster an environment in which everyone is 
supported and valued by teachers, parents, guardians and staff. In order to achieve this, we commit to the following 
core values at Bedford Academy: 

  Communication between all members of the Bedford Family 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          9 

 

 

 

  Trust in the staff's professional responsibility to guide the students academic social and emotional 

development 

  A supportive environment that both challenges and nurtures all members of the community 
  A high standard of integrity and character on which every member of the community holds each other 

accountable 
Investment in community spirit to be instilled in the heart and minds of all community members 

 

2.  Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, 

including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented.  

We will develop five majors that will help to build our leadership model: Pre-Engineering (NYU/Polytechnic 
University), Pre-Med (York College), Pre-Law (U.S. Attorney’s Office/Medgar Evers College), Pre-Education (York 
College) and Liberal Arts (Medgar Evers College). According to Alan M. Blankstein’s Failure is Not an Option leaders 
must possess what is known as a Courageous Leadership Imperative (CLI). The aforementioned is defined as acting in 
accordance with one’s own values, beliefs, and mission – even in the face of fear, potential losses, and failures. 
Leadership is a skill-set that will assist with improving pupil performance levels on state assessments, heighten 
graduation rates, and increase the numbers of scholars attending college/universities on three levels: City, State and 
private institutions. This year Bedford Academy will fulfill three basic leadership themes, which will be developed in 
grades 9 through 12, in addition to our College readiness program: 

(1) Self to Family-Grade 9 

(2) Self to Community-Grade 10 

(3) Self to World-Grade 11 

(4) College Readiness and Preparation-Grade 12 

Bedford Academy through the implementation of rigorous instructional methodologies and the incorporation of the 
Common Core Learning Standards, the Integrated Algebra course was taught in the first and second semester using a 
double block methodology, once the scholars complete the course, the scholars will venture into Algebra 
II/Trigonometry or Geometry. 

Instruction: Through the implementation of uniform and rigorous instructional methodologies (such as inquiry based 
learning and instructional differentiation) and the incorporation of the Common Core Learning Standards, all scholars 
will be expected to be able to take and pass the June Regents examinations in Integrated Algebra, English, U.S. History 
and Living Environment. This methodology for success lends itself to the implementation of strategic programming 
that will serve multiple purposes including credit accumulation and the initial instructional support required in the 
first two years of school to ensure academic success and college and career readiness. Once the scholars complete 
the required courses, they will programmed for English 3 and students displaying above average proficiency will move 
into Advanced Placement English, Chemistry or Earth science, Global Studies or AP World History and Algebra 
II/Trigonometry or Geometry. We will utilize an on-line homework program called Castle Learning and double block 
specific classes in order to provide more time for the instructional rigor. We will base student success on the following 
outcomes: student progress reports, student marking period grades, student failure reports, attendance trends, and 
Regents Examination scores.  

Needs of Diverse learners and Academic and social support structures: The need for a cultural relevant curriculum will 
be put in place but from a pluralistic approach seeking to value all of New York’s and America’s diverse cultures. After-
school tutoring in small groups will be created to address students who are struggling to meet the CCLS standards in 
ELA, Mathematics, Science and Social Studies. A Saturday Academy allowed students additional opportunity to 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          10 

 

receive assistance. In addition, scholars will be provided tutorial services through intense 9 am to 9 pm tutorial 
services three to four weeks prior to their Regents examinations in January and June.  

 

3.  Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. 

There is a perpetual initiative to offer college level courses to ninth graders which will prepare them for upper level 
college courses. All in-coming freshmen were expected to take four Regents examinations at the end of their first 
academic school year. The exams are as follows: U.S. History, Living Environment, English and Integrated Algebra. 
Therefore, the designs of the curriculum are rigorous. Upon the completion of the Integrated Algebra exam which was 
provided in June of this current school year, scholars will either move into Geometry or Algebra II/Trigonometry. All 
students will move into the school AP United States History program in the Fall semester. For all ninth graders, a 
leadership course will be taken, however as we move forward the leadership class will now have a specific theme 
based approach called the Self to Family, this program will introduce students to a leadership course called 
“Discovering Leadership within the Family”. The basic aspects of the class will be to develop the learners’ sense of self 
in relation to their families. In addition, they will explore ways that they can affect change in said community. 
Learners will be aided in developing skills and strategies that will help them to develop and refine basic leadership 
qualities such as: enthusiasm, work ethic, goals, scholarly maturity and willingness to discover solutions to problems. 

 

4. 

Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over 
the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. 

Progress being made: 

● Our objective was to test our freshman scholars in Integrated Algebra CC, U. S. History, Living Environment and the 
English Examination CC , we had to recalibrate this prospective predicated upon scholars not being ready for the 
Common Core English exam in the 9 th grade, therefore we have utilized the antiquated examination. Based on 
preliminary analysis, the aforementioned exams should exceed 90% proficiency rates in relationship to scholars 
passing the previously mentioned exams. Out of 100 freshman that we have in the building at least 60% to 70% of the 
scholars will obtain 3 to 4 Regents examinations in their first year. 

● The implementation of our SAT program targeting juniors seems to have been a monumental success predicated 
upon the preliminary data received from College Board. The class targeted juniors in their first semester and was built 
into their schedule and held twice a week by Kaplan instructors. Scholars then were encouraged to take the 
examination in the early spring of 2018. Once again although the data s superficial, scholars have related that the 
prep sessions astronomically helped them become more prepared to take the SAT examination.  

● Implementation of a Study Hall targeting junior scholars within the framework of their day in order to assist them 
with homework, studying skills, complete projects and serve as a respite from the rigorous class load they were 
provided with. 

● Double blocks of English and Science provided scholars with the opportunity to gain the additional skills they 
needed to do better in their aforementioned classes with a smaller classroom setting and additional instructional time 
in courses they struggled in previously 

● The implementation of Male\Female gender based Civil Liberties classes, which will take place on Friday's from 1:44 
pm to 2:30 Monday through Friday, allowed scholars the opportunity to gain a more in-depth analysis of 
constitutional issues and Supreme Court cases. In addition, the course provided scholars with more time to become 
familiar with historical ethos and develop grit based on the time periods the class was given 

● Continued implementation of the junior and senior seminar courses which serve as the bridge to college and 
university acceptance. The courses are taught by our guidance counselor and focuses on: Resume writing, studying 
the demographics of the colleges and universities students wish to attend in conjunction to developing college essays, 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          11 

 

personal statements, conducting research to acquire grants and scholarships; scholars must apply to CUNY, SUNY and 
private institutions 

● College and University Tour Programs: This year we visiting the Congressional Black Caucus, in addition to Howard 
University, Morgan State University, Georgetown University, George Mason University in addition to our annual SUNY 
visits and Ivy league tour 

Key areas for focus for next year: 

● Working to develop a mores comprehensive math and science program to promote student outcomes in CC 
Geometry, CC Trig and earth science, in addition expand on our CTE Program and provide more scholars with access 
to College programs which grant College credit through our partnerships with LIU, St. Joeseph's College. Monroe 
College, Columbia University and Medgar Evers College 

● Involving more teachers and community stakeholders in the decision processes 

● Developing more programs and instructional support for struggling scholars which is inclusive of study halls, tutorial 
services and 9 to 9's 

● Additional College tours to CUNY/SUNY/HBCU's and Private College and Universities 

● Developing a comprehensive student government that promotes students voice 

● Creating a more comprehensive professional learning community 

● Implementation of additional AP courses and the utilization of the CLEP examinations as a benchmark for student 
success and college readiness 

 

Our focus this year will be to provide additional services to both our general education and special needs scholars 
through promoting healthy lifestyles, providing mental health assistance, a schedule that is predicated on double 
blocking math and building academic and social/emotional service programs inside of the day more than ever 
before .  

 

 

 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          12 

 

 

School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 13K595 

School Configuration (2018-19) 

Grade Configuration 

09,10,11,12 

Total Enrollment (2017-
18) 
English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 

364 

SIG Recipient (Y/N) 

Transitional Bilingual 

N/A 

Dual Language 

N/A 

Self-Contained English as a Second 
Language 

Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) 

# Special Classes (ELA) 
# Special Classes (Math) 

# Visual Arts 
# Foreign Language 

% Title I Population 
% Free Lunch 
% Limited English Proficient 

2 
2 

 
14 

% American Indian or Alaska Native 
% Hispanic or Latino 
% White 

# SETSS (ELA) 
# SETSS (Math) 
Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) 
# Music 
# Drama 
# CTE 
# Dance 

38 
46 

5 
1 

# Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) 
# Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) 

School Composition (2017-18) 

71.0%  % Attendance Rate 
67.0%  % Reduced Lunch 
1.6% 

% Students with Disabilities 

Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) 

% Black or African American 

1.1% 
10.7%  % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 
3.0% 

% Multi-Racial 

Personnel (2015-16) 

Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) 
% of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate 
% Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 

8.3 
0% 
5% 

# of Assistant Principals (2016-17) 
% Teaching Out of Certification 
Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) 

Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) 

ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 

Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 

N/A 

N/A 

Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 
Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-
17) 

Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) 

ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 
Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 
4 Year Graduation Rate 

Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 

98% 
93% 
97.6% 

1.2% 

Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 
US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 
6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) 
% ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures 
(2015-16) 

Reward 
In Good Standing 
Focus District 

Priority School 

Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) 

No 
Yes 
Yes 

Recognition 
Local Assistance Plan 
Focus School Identified by a Focus District 

No 

Focus Subgroups 

N/A 

Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) 

Elementary/Middle School 

Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) 

American Indian or Alaska Native 
Hispanic or Latino 
White 
Students with Disabilities 
Economically Disadvantaged 

American Indian or Alaska Native 
Hispanic or Latino 
White 
Students with Disabilities 
Economically Disadvantaged 

American Indian or Alaska Native 
Hispanic or Latino 
White 
Students with Disabilities 
Economically Disadvantaged 

American Indian or Alaska Native 
Hispanic or Latino 
White 
Students with Disabilities 
Economically Disadvantaged 

American Indian or Alaska Native 
Hispanic or Latino 
White 
Students with Disabilities 
Economically Disadvantaged 

American Indian or Alaska Native 
Hispanic or Latino 
White 
Students with Disabilities 
Economically Disadvantaged 

N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 

Black or African American 
Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander 
Multi-Racial 
Limited English Proficient 
ALL STUDENTS 

Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) 
Black or African American 
Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander 
Multi-Racial 
Limited English Proficient 
ALL STUDENTS 

N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 

Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) 

N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
High School 

Black or African American 
Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander 
Multi-Racial 
Limited English Proficient 
ALL STUDENTS 

Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) 

N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
YES 

Black or African American 
Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander 
Multi-Racial 
Limited English Proficient 
ALL STUDENTS 

Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) 
Black or African American 
Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander 
Multi-Racial 
Limited English Proficient 
ALL STUDENTS 

N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
YES 

Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) 
Black or African American 
Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander 
Multi-Racial 
Limited English Proficient 
ALL STUDENTS 

N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
YES 

No 

N/A 

6 
5 

 
 

92.3% 
6.0% 
12.6% 

77.2% 
3.3% 
5.8% 

0 
26% 
4.4 

N/A 

N/A 

99% 
98% 
97.5% 

67% 

N/A 
No 
No 

N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 

N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 

N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 

YES 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
YES 

YES 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
YES 

YES 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
YES 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          13 

 

 
 

Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans 

 

Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, 
motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged 
in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. 

Part 1 – Needs Assessment   

Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and 
formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not 
limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. 
Number responses accordingly. 
 
1.  What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element?  Indicate the data trends, source and year. 
2.  What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? 

Indicate the data trends, source and year. 

 
Our school does an incredible job of prep in relationship to preparing our scholars for the NYS Regents examinations. 
We are also making a transition to training all of our teachers in Advanced placement proficiency in order to develop a 
more rigorous instructional practice for our students.  

Priority Needs:  

 

Strengthen our special needs services by proving intervention services that are inclusive of small instructional 
circle, tutorial services, Regents prep, and pull-out sessions that emphasize fundamental math, science, 
English and historical elements 

  Create a social emotional environment that expands the teachers and students collective relationship to 
foster mentorship and cultural/social development. Bedford Academy has established Family groups that 
meet on Friday's during 9th period.  

  Develop individual action plans for struggling students 
 
  Expansion of CLEP examinations and the further implementation of our dual credit program with Medgar 

Increase student participation in AP courses, all freshman scholars will take AP U.S. History in the 9th grade 

Evers 

  Develop more student voice and choice in the school culture by implementing a student advisory board 
 

Strengthen the bonds between the teachers and administrative staff through transparency, mutual planning 
and governance 

  Expand teacher parental outreach through digital platforms that include Engrade and Remind. Furthermore, 

parent meetings in addition to e-mails, phone calls and mailings will expand parent outreach efforts 

  Create a culturally responsive environment for all scholars 

 

 

 

 
Part 2 – Annual Goal 

Indicate  your  school’s  2018-19  goal  for  improving  student  outcomes  and  school  performance  that  addresses  this 
element  of  the  Framework  for  Great  Schools–Rigorous  Instruction.  Your  goal  must  be  responsive  to  the  identified 
priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-
bound.  

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          14 

 

● By June 2019, all teachers will enhance instructional strategies that promote student centered instruction. Scholars 
will be given supports to expand on their social and emotional development. Scholars will take and become more 
proficient on their Regents Examinations. By June of 2019, all teachers will increase their competency in connection with 
developing higher order questioning techniques. In addition, 11th and 12th grade scholars will improve their SAT and AP 
scores by 50 to 100 points. 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          15 

 
Part 3a – Action Plan 

Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies 
your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for 
this Framework for Great Schools element, including: 

Target 
Group(s) 
Who will be 
targeted? 

Timeline 
What is the 
start and 
end date? 

All scholars 

Summer 
2018 to June 
2019 

Administration and 
teachers 

  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional 

 

development, and/or systems and structures needed to 
impact change. 
Strategies to address the needs of students with 
disabilities, English language learners, and other high-
need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, 
SIFE, STH). 

Provide a comprehensive pre- college experience through the 
implementation of a College Blitz that incorporates scholars 
visiting colleges and university's in and out of the metropolitan 
area during the first month of school followed by a series of 
social and emotional workshops that target staff and students. 
Furthermore, Bedford has partnered with Medgar Evers College 
for multiple programs which are inclusive of dual credit 
programs, tutorial services in math and science in addition to 
college professors teaching a double block class in preparation 
for scholars to be CUNY and SUNY proficient. Bedford Academy 
also has established dual credit programs with Long Island 
University and a partnership with Columbia University. In the fall 
of 2019, bedford Academy will also partner with Syracuse 
University in an effort to provide additional college access 
programs. 

 

Instructional programs include the following: 
CC Algebra 

CC Geometry 
CC Trigonometry 

Pre-calculus 

AP Statistics 

AP Calculus 

AP Computer Science 

Robotics 

 

Living environment 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          16 

 

Earth Science 

Chemistry 

Physics 

AP Biology 

AP Environmental Science 

 

 

AP U.S. History 

AP World History 

AP Participation in Government 

AP World Geography 

AP Capstone/Seminar 

Historical Perspectives 

Black Studies 

Sociology 

Participation in Government 

Economics 

 

AP Music Theory 

 

English 1-8 

AP English language 

Ap Literature 

 

Mandarin 

Spanish 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          17 

 

French 

 

Health 

Physical Education 

 

Male/Female Empowerment 

College and Career Preparation 

Junior Seminar 

Senior Seminar 

 

Study Hall 3 times a week, tutorial service Tuesday's and 
Thursday's seek to ensure student development in connection to 
ELL's, Black and Latino males and Special Needs Scholars. 

 

Achieve Now Academy designed to assist special needs scholars, 
general education scholars, ELL's, and Black and Latino Males. 

 

 

-Provide Professional development workshops in Unit Planning 
and Lesson Plan Studies, in an effort to provide teachers with 
more training in planning and preparation and longitudinal 
efforts to create better outcomes for scholars 

-Provide Professional development workshops on developing 
optimum leaning environments, enhancing culture and teacher 
mindsets, building teacher capacity, and creating a 
transformational team that specializes in developing a 
professional learning community and expanding student 
centered instruction 

-All Teachers  -November 

2018 to 
January 
2019 

-All Teachers  -November 

2018 to 
January 
2019 

-Administration, 
Central office 
personal and 
teachers 

- Administration, 
Central office 
personal and 
teachers 

-Cultural Relevant Pedagogy and Implicit Bias Training 

-All Teachers  -January 

2019 to June 
2019 

-Administration and 
teachers 

 
 

 
3b – Parent and Family Engagement 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          18 

 

How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York 
State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible 
for implementation and oversight. 
Bedford Academy Parent outreach program will include the following: 

providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., 
literacy, math, and use of technology; 

● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision 
making in support of the education of their children; 

● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor 
their child’s progress; 

● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 

● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in 
languages that parents can understand; 

● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve 
outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other 
members of the school community; 

The school’s Parent Involvement will be strengthened through the SLT, Executive Board and the formation of a school 
advisory board that will serve as an additional outlet for parent concerns, initiatives and programs.  

 

 
Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 

Part  4a.  Indicate  resources  you will  leverage  to  achieve  this  annual  goal  and  implement this  action  plan,  including 
human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 
The summer bridge program will serve as the primary source of acclimation for incoming scholars, resources are 
shifted to support the program during the month of July, programming will be tailored to fit the needs of the scholars 
and additional teacher’s teams will help support the scholars targeted.  

 

The allocation of funds for Bedford Academy is in part predicated on our quest to make sure all of the school's 
Cohort's are College University ready: 

 

 

AYP by Cohort in Math and ELA: 

 

Cohort S: 

CUNY Math 98.8% 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          19 

 

CUNY ELA 96% 

 

SUNY Math 63% 

SUNY ELA 96% 

 

Cohort T: 

CUNY Math 86.8% 

CUNY ELA 98.9% 

 

SUNY Math 60% 

SUNY ELA 97.9% 

 

Cohort U: 

 

CUNY Math 70%% 

CUNY ELA 93% 

 

SUNY Math 43% 

SUNY ELA 92% 

 

Cohort V: 

 

CUNY Math 98% 

CUNY ELA 100% 

 

SUNY Math 98% 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          20 

 

SUNY ELA 90% 

 

 

Graduation Projections for 2017: 98.8% our goal is 100% 

 
Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 
Title III, 

X 

Tax Levy 

X 

Title I SWP 

 

Title I TA 

 

Immigrant 

Title II, 
Part A 

 

Title III, 
Part A 

 

 

C4E 

 

21st Century 

Grant 

 
Part 5 – Progress Monitoring  

 

SIG 

 

PTA Funded 

 

In Kind 

 

Other 

Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement 
planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 
 

The bench mark that will be examined will be the transition from one marking period to another and an analysis of 
the following data points: 

 

Student Progress Reports/Engrade 
Student Marking Period Grades/3 marking period grades per semester 
Student Failure Reports/examined every marking period 

 
 
 
  Attendance trends in Bedford's Tutorial Program/Attendance and student trends in report cards and progress 

reports 

  Regents Examination scores/January 2019/June 2019/August 2019 
  Teacher anecdotal reports/Teacher Grade Meeting/departmental Meetings 
  Teacher Team reports/Teacher Grade Meeting/departmental Meetings 
  Accumulation of Dual credit from college and university partnerships 
  Attainment of 3,4 and 5’s on AP examinations 
 

SAT/ACT test scores that are above 1200 

Furthermore, an analysis of teacher midterm meetings and reflections will serve as benchmarks for progress and 
realignment when needed. 

 

 
Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January 
Regents, etc.) 
Student Progress Reports 

● Student Marking Period Grades 

● Student Failure Reports 

● Attendance trends in Bedford's Tutorial Program 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          21 

 

 

● Regents Examination scores 

● Teacher anecdotal reports 

● Teacher Team reports and notes 

 
Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action 
plan, if applicable. 

 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          22 

 

Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans 

 
Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and 
school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. 

Part 1 – Needs Assessment   

Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and 
formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not 
limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. 
Number responses accordingly. 
 
1.  What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element?  Indicate the data trends, source and year. 
2.  What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? 

Indicate the data trends, source and year. 

3.  What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? 
● Increase student participation in AP courses and introduce the CLEP examination as an instrument of College credit 
accumulation and proficiency in pre-college courses. In addition to AP classes, scholars will expand their participation 
in the college programs we currently have at St. Joseph's College, Monroe College, Columbia University and Medgar 
Evers College 

 

The measurement of the aforementioned programs completion is based upon the scholars attendance rates, 
accumulation of credits and scores on AP examinations.  

 

 
Part 2 – Annual Goal 

Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this 
element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the 
identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, 
and Time-bound. 
Develop additional relationships with colleges/universities to promote the acquisition of college credits for all 
scholars. at least 100 students will be involved in our dual credit program with Medgar Evers College in either 
Mathematics, English, Science or Social Studies. 

 

College Dual Credit Program: Based on the scholar’s success in the Summer Bridge Program and an analysis of their 
study habits, freshman scholars, along with sophomores, juniors and seniors will have the opportunity to take our 
dual credit programs at Kings borough Community College and Medgar Evers College. The dual credit program is 
designed to provide scholars with high school credit and college credit simultaneously. 

Kings borough Community College Dual Credit Program: 

Mass Communication Modern Humanities: Arts and Ideas Introduction to College Planning Career and Life Planning 

Target will be 100 scholars 

Medgar Evers College Dual Credit Program: 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          23 

 

History 101 World 
Civilizations 

History 102 World 
Civilizations 

History 200 The Growth and 
Development of the USA 

Bio 201 General 
Biology 

Political Science POL 
101 

Introduction to 
Political Science 

English 112 College 
Composition 

MTH 151 Pre-
Calculus 

 

 

 

Target will be 200 scholars, 185 scholars have already completed some of the course work 

ST. Joseph’s College Program: 

BIO 115- Introduction to Human 
Inheritance 

CJ 158- Criminal Justice 
Administration 

ENG 105- Creative 
Writing 

 

CS 101- Child Psychology and 
Development I 

23 scholars are currently involved in the program, 30 additional scholars will be targeted 

Medgar Evers College/CUNY: Health care Careers Pipeline Project: 

Eng. 112- College 
Composition 

CS 151- Introduction 
to Computing 

SSC- Society, Culture 
and Social Change 

CS 140- Computer 
Science Seminar 

Eng. 150-College 
Composition 3 

CS 241 Discrete 
Structures 

CS 244 Object-
orientated 
Programming 

Eng. 212 World 
Literature: The Evolving 
Canon 

MTH 202 Calculus I 

University Physics I 

8 scholars are currently involved in the program which provides scholars with the opportunity to graduate high 
school with an Associate Degree.  

 

Microsoft Certification Pathways: 

Based on three levels- Computer Science, Productivity and IT Infrastructure. Scholars will be able to acquire skills in 
coding, software development, programming, digital literacy and MTA security fundamentals. Four staff members will 
be developed. In turn the staff members will teach courses designed to provide certifications for scholars involved in 
the program. 

25 scholars will be targeted 

 

Algebra for All  

125 scholars will be targeted 

 

LINCT:  

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          24 

 

Situated within CUNY Collaborative Programs, LINCT to Success is a college access, transition and success program 
that strives to increase college success rates by restructuring the HS senior year through literacy, math and college 
access and success instruction, and college placement testing, and by integrating additional social supports to smooth 
the transition into and through college. Focus will be to increase the SUNY and CUNY Math and ELA scores. Scholars 
have already been identified in Cohort U. 

30 scholars in both math and English are being targeted 

 

Financial Literacy: 

The program is based on the philosophy that teaching students the math underlying financial instruments will better 
position them to make good financial decisions in the future. In addition, the program also believes that showing how 
algebra, probability and statistics can be used to evaluate financial problems will raise students’ engagement with 
mathematics. 

25 scholars will be targeted 

 

College Now: Medgar Evers College/New York City Technical College: 

25 scholars are being targeted 

 

LIU:  

Dean Roland Robinson provides enrichment courses twice a week to selected Bedford Academy scholars (25 Scholars) 

 

Monroe College: 

Jump start classes are offered once per week during both fall and winter semesters and students may register in 
either September or January for each semester, respectively. Students must adhere to the college attendance policy 
and complete required exams and assignments to earn a grade and be awarded college credit. Monroe grants three 
college credits for each class successfully completed. Course include the following: 

Principles of Accounting 

Introduction to Business 

Introduction to Marketing 

Introduction to Hospitality Management 

Introduction to Travel and Tourism 

Speech Communication 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          25 

 

Psychology 

25 scholars are being targeted 

 

AP Courses: 

AP US History (100) 

AP World History (100) 

AP Participation in Government (20) 

AP English Language (50) 

AP Literature (30) 

AP Music Theory (15) 

AP Biology (20) 

AP Environmental science (25) 

AP Statistics (25) 

AP Calculus (25) 

AP Capstone program( 25)  

 

255/360 SCHOLARS HAVE TAKEN AP CLASSES THIS PAST YEAR 70% OF BEDFORD ACADEMY 

STEAM: 

 

Summer Bridge 

The program is designed to assist scholars in their acclimation process to high school and develop a sense of academic 
expectations, rigor, and long term planning and preparation for high school and beyond. 

CTE course in conjunction with Westinghouse High School 

The course is designed for rising sophomores to take Spanish and or Economics/ Participation in Government in order 
to take college courses in their junior year 

College and Career Readiness 

Strategic approach toward maximizing the number of scholar’s acquiring high school and college credit in order to 
ascend to college preparation. The workshops and seminars are designed to assist scholars through their high school 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          26 

 

maturation and develop the skill-set and goals necessary to reach college and more importantly be prepared to stay 
and graduate from college. Front-loading High school credits and front-loading Regents exams in order to make sure 
scholars have achieved High school requirements at the end of their sophomore year.  

Male Empowerment 

Classes will meet five days a week. The program is designed to be integrated into student’s daily schedules to support 
academic demands and expectations coupled with developing the scholars Textual Lineage (Dr. Alfred Tatum). The 
Text used is Nathan McCall’s, Makes Me Wanna Hollar and The Pact, Both text are designed to make sure scholars 
analyze the pitfalls of adolescent behaviors. The utilization of weekly journals helps to develop reflective practices and 
develop grit and determination in young black, Latino and Asian young men. The course is also designed to enhance 
the scholars reading comprehension, public speaking and critical thinking skills. 

Female Empowerment 

Classes will meet five days a week. The basis of the class is designed to assist young black, Latino and Asian young 
ladies develop a voice and choice in their life while accumulating credit’s, becoming successful on their Regents 
examinations and developing academic resiliency in high school, college and beyond. Major projects include analyzing 
social and emotional fears, which create damage within the academic development and success of the 
aforementioned ethnic and racial groups of scholars. In addition, scholars will create an anthology of their work 
throughout the year. The program is designed to enhance female awareness in social, emotional and environmental 
dilemmas that adversely affects Black, Latino and Asian young ladies. 

In an effort to provide the current freshman class and current sophomore class with a college readiness program 
when they become juniors, it is imperative that Global Studies be streamlined to one year as opposed to two. 90% of 
the current sophomore class will take and surpass the Global Studies Regents examination in one year as opposed to 
two. Once the scholars have obtained the Regents in Global Studies they can move into Advanced Placement World 
history classes. This year’s data is yet to be totally received.  

 

 

In an effort to provide the current freshman class and current sophomore class with a college readiness program 
when they become juniors, it is imperative that Global Studies be streamlined to one year as opposed to two. 90% of 
the current sophomore class will take and surpass the Global Studies Regents examination in one year as opposed to 
two. Once the scholars have obtained the Regents in Global Studies they can move into Advanced Placement World 
history classes. This year’s data is yet to be totally received.  

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          27 

 
Part 3a – Action Plan 

Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies 
your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for 
this Framework for Great Schools element, including: 

  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional 

 

development, and/or systems and structures needed to 
impact change. 
Strategies to address the needs of students with 
disabilities, English language learners, and other high-
need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, 
SIFE, STH). 

Target 
Group(s) 
Who will be 
targeted? 

Timeline 
What is the 
start and 
end date? 

Key Personnel 
Who is responsible 
for implementing 
and overseeing the 
activity/strategy? 

Scheduled classes in an effort to double block time in order to 
give scholars the opportunity to have more time on task to 
master the curriculum 

10 th ,11 th , 
and 12 th 
grade 
scholars 

Summer 
2018 to 
June 2019 

Administration and 
teachers 

Provide Tutorial Services for scholars  

Castle Learning on-line homework system 

Khan Academy 

Diagnostic exams given in January and May of 2018 

- 

- 

- 

 
 

 
3b – Parent and Family Engagement 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to 
support  the  whole  child?  Include  the  timeline  and  identify  key  personnel  and  stakeholders  responsible  for 
implementation and oversight. 
Bedford Academy is providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their 
achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; 

● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision 
making in support of the education of their children; 

● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor 
their child’s progress; 

● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 

● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in 
languages that parents can understand; 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          28 

 

● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve 
outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other 
members of the school community; 

The school’s Parent Involvement  

 

 
Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 
Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including 
human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 
Tax levy vision for improvement, AP for All, Tax Levy funds, Strong school strong communities, Title iv safe and health 
funds, Title I SWP, Title I NYSTL Funds, and Tax Levy Achieve Now funds.  

 
Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 

X 

Tax Levy 

X 

Title I SWP 

 

C4E 

 

21st Century 

Grant 

 
Part 5 – Progress Monitoring  

 

 

Title I TA 

SIG 

 

 

Title II, 
Part A 

PTA Funded 

 

 

Title III, 
Part A 

In Kind 

 

 

Title III, 

Immigrant 

Other 

Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement 
planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 
Assessment of the validity of the program will be based on the following dynamics: 

● Student Progress Reports 

● Student Marking Period Grades 

● Student Failure Reports 

● Attendance trends in Bedford ’s Tutorial programs 

● Regents Examination scores 

● AP scores 

● CLEP Examination scores and college credit accumulation 

 
Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 
Student Progress Reports 

● Student Marking Period Grades 

● Student Failure Reports 

● Attendance trends in Bedford ’s Tutorial programs 

● Regents Examination scores 

● AP scores 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          29 

 

 

● CLEP Examination scores and College credit accumulation 

 

Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action 
plan, if applicable. 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          30 

 

Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans 

Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success 
and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional 
development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. 

 

Part 1 – Needs Assessment   

Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and 
formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not 
limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. 
Number responses accordingly. 
 
1.  What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element?  Indicate the data trends, source and year. 
2.  What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? 

Indicate the data trends, source and year. 

Teachers are constantly involved in the professional development process and are conducting action research in 
relationship to student emotional development, crisis intervention, the structure of Academic Intervention Programs, 
the formation of SAT Prep Programs and conduct professional development workshops that include the 
implementation of technology into the classroom and deconstructing Item Skills Analysis in conjunction with 
assessments. 

 

 
Part 2 – Annual Goal 

Indicate  your  school’s  2018-19  goal  for  improving  student  outcomes  and  school  performance  that  addresses  this 
element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified 
priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-
bound. 
Create and sustain a Professional Learning Community through the development and implementation of teacher team 
meetings on two levels, grade wide and department wide. In addition, weekly Professional Development Workshops 
take place to increase collaboration.  

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          31 

Target 
Group(s) 
Who will be 
targeted? 

Timeline 
What is the 
start and 
end date? 

Key Personnel 
Who is responsible 
for implementing 
and overseeing the 
activity/strategy? 

All teachers 

July 2018 to 
June 2019 

Teachers and 
Administrators 

 
Part 3a – Action Plan 

Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies 
your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for 
this Framework for Great Schools element, including: 

  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional 

 

development, and/or systems and structures needed to 
impact change. 
Strategies to address the needs of students with 
disabilities, English language learners, and other high-
need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, 
SIFE, STH). 

In an effort to create synergy and collective understanding of the 
values and mission of Bedford Academy, a comprehensive 
professional development plan will created which will be based 
on the framework of Alan Blankstein’s Failure Is Not an Option 
program. The program is based on the following 6 fundamental 
points: 

● Common Mission, Vision, Values, and Goals  

● Ensuring Achievement for All Students: Systems for Prevention 
and Intervention  

● Collaborative Teaming Focused on Teaching and Learning  

● Using Data to Guide Decision Making and Continuous 
Improvement  

● Gaining Active Engagement from Family and Community  

● Building Sustainable Leadership Capacity  

● Teachers will be expected to create goals for themselves and 
students. The goals will be assessed on an interim basis in 
February and analyzed again in June for competency. Each 
individual teacher will be interviewed during the month of 
September by me in an effort to ascertain their personal and 
student related goals. During the conference, the teacher will 
help to develop their own individual professional development 
plan which will focus on three core areas: 

1. Planning and Preparation 

2. Instruction 

3. Classroom Environment 

● Engage in a comprehensive online grading program designed 
to engage parents and students in real time up to date progress 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          32 

 

reports which will enhance their professional practice and create 
a stronger cohesive bond with parents. 

● Implement an action plan which outlines the first semester’s 
guidelines for teachers and benchmarks they are expected to 
meet on a monthly basis. In addition, a collective of teachers will 
help develop the second semesters action plans which will also 
focus on the following: 

1. Assessments 

2. Guidance  

3. Academic Intervention Services 

4. Implementation of Technology 

5. Parent Involvement 

● Engage in an assortment of planning teams which include but is 
not limited to: 

1. Community Outreach 

2. Attendance Committee 

3. College Advising 

4. Freshman Watch Program 

5. Cabinet Team 

6. Grade Meetings 

7. Data Inquiry 

8. Senior Affairs 

 

 

The goal of Bedford Academy’s professional development 
program is predicated on the need to develop sound data driven 
instructional practices in tandem with strengthening our teachers 
social-emotional knowledge base that will in turn assist our 
scholars who are involved in Bedford based programs, which 
include Male Empowerment, Female Empowerment, SAPIS based 
workshops, Family Groups and the newly formed Fundamental 
Fridays which seeks to work with students with out of the class 
activities which range from UNESCO, Ed-Rising, Gaming and 
Computer Programming, Chess, Speech and Debate, Yearbook 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          33 

 

Committee, Student Government and Internships with the 
United States Attorney’s office, The New York Amsterdam News 
and the Newspaper Club and a Book Circle/Club. The 
aforementioned programs serve as clubs and will promote the 
social and emotional growth of our scholars and the teachers 
that Bedford Academy services. 

 

Our school will have two primary learning tools this year that we 
will focus on for the forthcoming school year. The first learning 
tool will be based on the text Blended Learning in Action: A 
Practical Guide Toward Sustainable Change by Tucker, Wycoff 
and Green. The basis of the longitudinal book study will focus on 
the full integration of technology in all curriculum areas and 
classrooms throughout Bedford Academy. There will be an 
extreme push to introduce Blended Learning in all four major 
curriculum areas this forthcoming year. The Book talk 
accompanied with targeted professional development should 
serve as a catalyst of change at Bedford Academy’s approach to 
instructional soundness. 

 

 

 

In order to further enhance our transition into a new digital 
frontier, Bedford Academy will engage into a new partnership 
with IO Education, formerly known as datacation. The basis of 
this new partnership will based on several fundamental ideals: 

  Deepen student engagement by making grades, 

 

assignments, calendar and progress readily accessible 
Simplify and centralize student and parent messaging 
through one channel 

  Real-time push notifications alerts students and parents 

to updates 

  Automatic translation from 50 different languages 

improves 

 

Incorporate additional digital resources which include Castle 
Learning, Apex as both as both a credit accumulation and 
supplementary source of instructional support, introduction of 
the Khan Academy Classroom as another digital resource for 
inside and outside of the classroom and as an additional tool for 
academic intervention services. Furthermore, Bedford Academy 
will engage in exploring Google classroom to transition to a 
paperless school environment as much as possible. Bedford 
Academy will also incorporate Vocabulary.com. Vocabulary.com 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          34 

 

was utilized as pilot program in our 11th grade AP English class, 
however we will expand the digital resource this year. 

 

Bedford plans to create a real Professional Learning Community 
that services all teachers in all curriculum areas.  

- 

- 

- 

 
 

 
3b – Parent and Family Engagement 

- 

- 

- 

- 

-  

- 

- 

- 

- 

How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies 
to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and 
identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 
Bedford Academy will provide materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their 
achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; 

● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision 
making in support of the education of their children; 

● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor 
their child’s progress; 

● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 

● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in 
languages that parents can understand; 

● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve 
outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other 
members of the school community; 

The school’s Parent Involvement  

 

 
Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 

Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including 
human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 
We will providing compressive professional development programs to train our teachers to become leaders, mentors 
and advocates for children, in addition to becoming fully certified as adjunct professors and trained in all AP courses. 

 
Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 

X 

Tax Levy 

 

C4E 

 

 

Title I SWP 

21st Century 

Grant 

 

 

 

Title I TA 

SIG 

 

 

Title II, 
Part A 

PTA Funded 

 

 

Title III, 
Part A 

In Kind 

 

 

Title III, 

Immigrant 

Other 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          35 

 
Part 5 – Progress Monitoring  

Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement 
planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 
● Teacher Failure Report 

● Student class grades 

● Student Progress Reports 

● Student competency on Regents examinations 

● Environmental Survey Results 

 
Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 
There are a plethora of instruments of measure that will be used to assess progress , which include the following: 
Student Progress Reports, Student Marking Period Grades, Student Failure Reports, Attendance trends in Bedford ’s 
Tutorial programs, Regents Examination scores, AP scores and  CLEP Examination scores and college credit 
accumulation. There are three specific time periods in which progress is assessed, September, February and June. 
Teachers goals, action plans and measurable progress for fulfilment of their goals is assessed, along with individual 
classroom student achievement.  

 
Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action 
plan, if applicable. 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          36 

 

Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans 

 

Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and 
nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional 
support that drives student achievement. 
 
Part 1 – Needs Assessment   

Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and 
formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not 
limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. 
Number responses accordingly. 
 
1.  What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element?  Indicate the data trends, source and year. 
2.  What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? 

Indicate the data trends, source and year. 

Data trends reveal that we must enhance student performance in the following areas: 

CC Geometry 

CC Trig 

Earth Science 

Chemistry 

Enhance student performance in SAT's 

 

 
Part 2 – Annual Goal 

Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this 
element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the 
identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, 
and Time-bound. 
● Student Progress Reports 

● Student Marking Period Grades 

● Student Failure Reports 

● Attendance trends in Bedford ’s Tutorial programs 

● Regents Examination scores 

● AP scores 

● CLEP Examination scores and college credit accumulation 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          37 

 
Part 3a – Action Plan 

Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies 
your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for 
this Framework for Great Schools element, including: 

  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional 

 

development, and/or systems and structures needed to 
impact change. 
Strategies to address the needs of students with 
disabilities, English language learners, and other high-
need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, 
SIFE, STH). 

- 

Small group instruction and peer to peer assistance will help 
scholars who are struggling to meet academic expectations. A 
summer bridge academy is used for both struggling scholars and 
newcomers. The systems help to acclimate scholars who are new 
to high school and are designed to assist scholars who need extra 
assistance  

- 

- 

 
 

 
3b – Parent and Family Engagement 

Target 
Group(s) 
Who will be 
targeted? 

Timeline 
What is the 
start and 
end date? 

Key Personnel 
Who is responsible 
for implementing 
and overseeing the 
activity/strategy? 

- 

- 

- 

All scholars 

2 days a 
week 

Teachers and 
Administrators 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

How  will  your  school  engage  parents/families  and  support  their  understanding  of  Effective  School  Leadership  and 
strategies  to  promote  parent  leadership  and  engagement  in  order  to  support  their  children  at  home?  Include  the 
timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 
Bedford Academy's Parent and Engagement program is called Building Bridges and will primarily be focused on the 
following themes: 

  Creation of a school climate and structure that supports family involvement. 
  Provide families with a list of required mastery skills for each subject taught at the grade levels we have. 
 

Invite families to share hopes for and concerns about children and then work together to set student goals. 

Bedford Academy will furthemore create and sustain the following conditions that promote and reduce parents 
feelings of disconnection: 

  Be sure the first contact with parents is a positive one. 
  Communicate with parents straightforwardly and simply, avoiding educational "jargon." 
  Ensure that all parents have regular access to clear, concise, and easily readable information about their 

children's school and classroom. 

  Ask parents to share their concerns and opinions about school, and then address those concerns. 
  Accommodate parents' work schedules. 
  Accommodate language and cultural differences 

The time line will be from July 2018 to June 2019 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          38 

 

All staff members will be responsible for the implementation  

 

 
Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 
Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including 
human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 
Tax levy resources will be used to develop and enhance programs previously outlined.  

 

Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 

X 

Tax Levy 

 

C4E 

 

 

Title I SWP 

21st Century 

Grant 

 

 

 
Part 5 – Progress Monitoring  

Title I TA 

SIG 

 

 

Title II, 
Part A 

PTA Funded 

 

 

Title III, 
Part A 

In Kind 

 

 

Title III, 

Immigrant 

Other 

Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement 
planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 
Every classroom teacher will be expected to have the following instructional approaches present in their lesson: 

Increase student instructional engagement 

 
  Promote higher order thinking questions 
  Develop Standards based Syllabus 
  Encourage group work and the use of peers as resources (collaborative learning) 

Assessment and Data: 

Student Progress Reports on-line program 
Student Marking Period Grades 
Student Failure Reports 

  Diagnostic exams in all curriculum areas  
 
 
 
  Castle Learning usage trends 
  Attendance trends in Tutorial programs 
  Regents Examination scores should range from 75 to 100 
  AP scores should range from 2 to 5 
  CLEP Examination scores 

 

Assessments provide an on-going opportunity to understand the needs of each of our scholars and that data will be 
used to target students, who need assistance in a variety of curriculum areas, guide teacher reflections, professional 
development workshops, in the case of our ELL population the data will provide strategies that support ELL’s oral 
language development including accountable talk, group, solo presentations, and cooperative grouping. These 
instructional strategies encourage students to use English to negotiate meaning, encourage authentic use of the 
language in new and flexible ways and will help to prepare students to meet the state standards and assessments. 

 
Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 
● Student Progress Reports 

● Student Marking Period Grades 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          39 

 

 

● Student Failure Reports 

● Attendance trends in Bedford ’s Tutorial programs 

● Regents Examination scores 

● AP scores 

● CLEP Examination scores and college credit accumulation 

 
Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action 
plan, if applicable. 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          40 

 

Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans 

 
Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a 
welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. 
 
Part 1 – Needs Assessment   

Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and 
formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not 
limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. 
Number responses accordingly. 
 
1.  What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element?  Indicate the data trends, source and year. 
2.  What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? 

Indicate the data trends, source and year. 

There is a perpetual drive to develop college level preparation for scholars coming into high school at a much earlier 
time than before. All in-coming freshmen are expected to take at least 3 to 4 Regents examinations; the natural 
progression of the exams the students should be expected to take is Living Environment, CC Algebra, CC English and 
United States History. Students will also be put into a math foundations course to better prepare them Geometry and 
Algebra II/Trigonometry. In addition, students will be given a wiring foundations course to strengthen their analytical 
skills to better prepare for the CCLS standardized examinations. Through the lens of direct instruction and the 
constructivist methodology, scholars are expected to obtain the previously mentioned indicators of success.  

 

Support Structures/Strengths 

 

  Tutorial services on five levels: Monday through Thursday, Saturdays, small group instruction built within the 
day utilizing the teachers prep period, peer to peer tutorial services and 9 to 9’s 3 to 4 weeks prior to any high 
stakes examinations (Regents/SAT/AP Exams) 
Summer Bridge Program: Focused in July specializing in math, science, social studies and English 
Summer Participation and Government/Economics class: The classes are designed to front load courses 
primarily for rising sophomores in order to have scholars focus on College/University classes in their 
Junior/Senior years 

 
 

  Push-in Model: for Ell’s and Special needs scholars which emphasizes co-teaching and collaboration 
 
  Blended Learning: program which utilizes APEX, a DOE approved service provider to assist struggling scholars, 

Family Groups: utilizing the Saturday’s to build relationships between staff, scholars and parents 

provide the acquisition of credits and remedial level instruction and finally offer a basis for our AP 
examination preparation 
Junior Seminar: assist students in understanding the college process, college life and the college application 
process. 
Senior Seminar: assist students in the college application(s) process which is done on three levels 
CUNY/SUNY/Private 

 

 

  College Tours: The tours take place during the Fall and Spring semesters to acclimate scholars to the process 
of college applications, expectations and financial aid needs in addition to developing a sense of purpose and 
drive in scholars related to aspiring future college/university scholars. 

  Male and Female Empowerment classes: with the specific objective in mind of developing fundamental, 
enduring positive attitudes, behavior patterns, and practical life management skills that will help to shape 
male and female scholars 
Leadership classes: are the foundation of the schools overall theme on a social, developmental and 
instructional level. The fundamental goals of the classes are to dramatically affect scholar’s view of 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          41 

 

 

themselves as human beings, to improve their intra and inter-personal relationships, and to prepare them to 
be self-determining responsible, shareholders (citizens) in today’s society 

  Weekly Professional Development Meetings: teachers have the ability to share best practices, anecdotal 

information on scholars, reflect and learn new strategies to incorporate in order to enhance student 
outcomes 

 
Part 2 – Annual Goal 

Indicate  your  school’s  2018-19  goal  for  improving  student  outcomes  and  school  performance  that  addresses  this 
element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the 
identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and 
Time-bound.  
Increase student development in SAT scores and AP scores. Through rigorous instruction, scholars should be able to 
master the following:  

 
 

 
 

Scholars learn to support their conclusions with evidence and logical arguments 
Scholars learn to synthesize several sources of information and references in order to draw conclusions and 
then evaluate these conclusions 
Scholars are encouraged to engage in individual reflection in order to organize and understand the world 
Scholars experience insights as they think through a problem or inquiry activity, and draw inferences that allow 
them to go beyond the simple acquisition of facts and information by learning how to see implications and 
apply them to other situations 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          42 

Target 
Group(s) 
Who will be 
targeted? 

Timeline 
What is the 
start and 
end date? 

Key Personnel 
Who is responsible 
for implementing 
and overseeing the 
activity/strategy? 

Teachers, 
Parents and 
Students  

September 
2018 to June 
2019 

Teachers and 
Administrators  

 
Part 3a – Action Plan 

Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies 
your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for 
this Framework for Great Schools element, including: 

  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional 

 

development, and/or systems and structures needed to 
impact change. 
Strategies to address the needs of students with 
disabilities, English language learners, and other high-
need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, 
SIFE, STH). 

Further implementation of our teacher teams will help to 
facilitate instructional development and expertise in Common 
Core Learning Standards and the continued implementation of 
peer to peer intervention programs, tutorial service programs 
which included after-school instruction coupled with our 
Saturday Academy will continue to supply scholars with the 
assistance they need to make sure they are academically sound. 

 

Small group instruction and peer to peer assistance will help 
scholars who are struggling to meet academic expectations. A 
summer bridge academy is used for both struggling scholars and 
newcomers. The systems help to acclimate scholars who are new 
to high school and are designed to assist scholars who need extra 
assistance. 

 

Parent workshops, grade-wide meetings and PTA meetings help 
to close the gap between parent and staff members in an effort 
to build extended family relationships.  

-Professional development Workshops centered around Unit 
Planning and Lesson Plan studies 

Teachers - 

-Professional Development Workshops centered around building 
a transformation Team to enhance Bedford's learning 
environment, culture and mindset, teacher capacity and 
enhancing Bedford's professional learning community 

-Teachers 

-November 
2018 to 
January 
2019 

-Teachers, 
Administrators and 
the Central Office  

-January 
2019 to June 
2019 

-Teachers , Learning 
Innovation Catalyst 
and Administrators  

- 

 
 

 
3b – Parent and Family Engagement 

- 

- 

- 

If  any,  list  the  Community  Based  Organizations  or  other  partnerships  that  support  parent/family  and  community 
engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          43 

 

Bedford Academy will provide materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their 
achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; Parent workshops include grade-wide meetings which 
outline the specific curriculum challenges and expectations for all grades. Furthermore, workshops for parents include 
social and emotional trainings for all parents.  

● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision 
making in support of the education of their children; 

● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor 
their child’s progress; 

● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 

● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in 
languages that parents can understand; 

● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve 
outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other 
members of the school community; 

The school’s Parent Involvement includes volunteering for 9 to 9's, chaperoning school trips and implementing parent 
workshops to increase student outcomes. Furthermore, parents are made aware of workshops sponsored by the 
Adelaide L Sanford Institutethat deconstructs educational trends, curriculum changes and instructional best practices 
from a city, state and national perspective. The Adealide L. Sanford Institute (ASI) believes that removing the barriers 
that prevent all of our children from accessing a high-quality public education is an essential step to achieving access 
to the economic, social, and political resources that are needed to support strong families who live in a global society. 
ASI also recognizes that to accomplish this goal, there must be a deliberate and focused effort to build community 
awareness and strong partnerships with families and community leaders. Research findings and experiential evidence 
are clear; where parents are well informed; meaningfully and actively engaged; their children are successful in school. 

 

 
Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 

Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including 
human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 
Tax levy funds will help to propel the success of our programs in addition to any grants or outside funds 

 

Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 

X 

Tax Levy 

 

C4E 

 

 

Title I SWP 

21st Century 

Grant 

 

 

 
Part 5 – Progress Monitoring  

Title I TA 

SIG 

 

 

Title II, 
Part A 

PTA Funded 

 

 

Title III, 
Part A 

In Kind 

 

 

Title III, 

Immigrant 

Other 

Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement 
planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 
Assessment and Data: 

  Diagnostic exams in all curriculum areas 
 
 
 

Student Progress Reports on-line program 
Student Marking Period Grades 
Student Failure Reports 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          44 

  Castle Learning usage trends 
  Attendance trends in Tutorial programs 
  Regents Examination scores 
  AP scores 
  CLEP Examination scores 

 

 

Assessments provide an on-going opportunity to understand the needs of each of our scholars and that data will be 
used to target students, who need assistance in a variety of curriculum areas, guide teacher reflections, professional 
development workshops, in the case of our ELL population the data will provide strategies that support ELL’s oral 
language development including accountable talk, group, solo presentations, and cooperative grouping. These 
instructional strategies encourage students to use English to negotiate meaning, encourage authentic use of the 
language in new and flexible ways and will help to prepare students to meet the state standards and assessments. 

 

 
Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 
There are a plethora of instruments of measure that will be used to assess progress , which include the following: 
Student Progress Reports, Student Marking Period Grades, Student Failure Reports, Attendance trends in Bedford ’s 
Tutorial programs, Regents Examination scores, AP scores and  CLEP Examination scores and college credit 
accumulation. There are three specific time periods in which progress is assessed, September, February and June. 

 
Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action 
plan, if applicable. 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          45 

 

Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS)  

(Required for All Schools) 

  

Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services 
(AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records 
need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area 
listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. 
 

Type of program or 
strategy (e.g. 
repeated readings, 
interactive writings, 
etc.) 

Method for delivery 
of service (e.g. small 
group, one-to-one, 
tutoring, etc.) 

Tutorial Services 

 

When the service is 
provided (e.g. during 
the school day, 
before or after 
school, etc.) 

Monday through 
Thursday and will 
also be provided on 
Saturdays 

The program will 
begin on Tuesday, 
October 23, 2018 and 
end on Tuesday, June 
4, 2019 

 

Type of Academic 
Intervention Service 
(AIS) 

English Language 
Arts (ELA) 

Mathematics 

Criteria for 
determining AIS 
services (For 
additional guidance, 
refer to NYSED’s 
memo.) 
After-school tutoring 
in small groups will 
be created to address 
student who are 
struggling to meet 
the state standards in 
ELA. In addition, 
scholars will be 
provided tutorial 
services during 
intense 9 am to 9 pm 
tutorial services 
three to four weeks 
prior to their Regents 
examinations in 
January and June of 
2018. 

 
After-school tutoring 
in small groups will 
be created to address 
student who are 
struggling to meet 
the state standards in 
Mathematics. In 
addition, scholars will 
be provided tutorial 
services during 
intense 9 am to 9 pm 
tutorial services 
three to four weeks 
prior to their Regents 
examinations in 
January and June of 
2018. 

 

● Small group 
(Tuesday, 
Wednesday and 
Thursday) 

● One to One 

● Peer to peer 

 

● Small 
group(Tuesday, 
Wednesday and 
Thursday) 

● One to One 

● Peer to peer 

 

Tutorial Services 

 

Monday through 
Thursday and will 
also be provided on 
Saturdays 

 

 

The program will 
begin on Tuesday, 
October 23, 2018 and 
end on Tuesday, June 
4, 2019 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          46 

 

Science 

Social Studies 

At-risk services (e.g. 
provided by the 
Guidance Counselor, 
School Psychologist, 
Social Worker, etc.) 

After-school tutoring 
in small groups will 
be created to address 
student who are 
struggling to meet 
the state standards in 
Science. In addition, 
scholars will be 
provided tutorial 
services during 
intense 9 am to 9 pm 
tutorial services 
three to four weeks 
prior to their Regents 
examinations in 
January and June of 
2018. 

 
After-school tutoring 
in small groups will 
be created to address 
student who are 
struggling to meet 
the state standards in 
Social Studies. In 
addition, scholars will 
be provided tutorial 
services during 
intense 9 am to 9 pm 
tutorial services 
three to four weeks 
prior to their Regents 
examinations in 
January and June of 
2018. 

 
The students that will 
be serviced will be 
provided counseling 
and strategies to deal 
with conflict 
resolution, peer 
mediation and 
character 
development. 

● Small 
group(Tuesday, 
Wednesday and 
Thursday) 

● One to One 

● Peer to peer 

 

● Small 
group(Tuesday, 
Wednesday and 
Thursday) 

● One to One 

●Peer to peer 

 

Tutorial Services 

 

Monday through 
Thursday and will 
also be provided on 
Saturdays 

 

The program will 
begin on Tuesday, 
October 23, 2018 and 
end on Tuesday, June 
4, 2019 

 

Tutorial Services 

 

Monday through 
Thursday and will 
also be provided on 
Saturdays 

 

 

The program will 
begin on Tuesday, 
October 23, 2018 and 
end on Tuesday, June 
4, 2019 

 

One to one and 
group sessions 

 

Based on individual 
mandates, needs and 
circumstances 

 

The students that will 
be serviced will be 
provided counseling 
and strategies to deal 
with conflict 
resolution, peer 
mediation and 
character 
development 

 

 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          47 

 

Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH)  

 

Directions: 
-  All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. 
-  All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. 
 
Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) 
As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the 
federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and 
report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support 
your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: 
http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf   

Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 

 

1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your 
school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE 
systems and may change over the course of the year.) 

2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. 

The services provided will be based on the following: 

1. Tutorial Services weekly and on Saturday's 

2. 9 to 9's 

3. College/University Tours 

4. Dual credit classes with Medgar Evers College 

5. Dual credit classes with Columbia University 

 

Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 

1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your 
school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 

Preliminary 
data 
indicates 
that there 
is 1 
student 

 

Preliminary 
data 
indicates 
that there 
is 1 
student 

 

2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          48 

 

The services provided will be based on the following: 

1. Tutorial Services weekly and on Saturday's 

2. 9 to 9's 

3. College/University Tours 

4. Dual credit classes with Medgar Evers College 

5. Dual credit classes with Columbia University  

 

3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary 
housing.  If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation 
Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question.  If your school did not receive an allocation 
and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. 

Unknown amount 

 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          49 

 

Directions: 

Section 8: Title I Program Information  

 

  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1. 
  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2. 
  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3. 
  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4. 
 

If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response 
can be found. 

  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. 

 
Part 1: Title I Status 

Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. 

 

Schoolwide Program (SWP) 

X 

Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools  

 

Non-Title I 

 
Part 2: All Title I Schools 

2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) 

Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support 
including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. 
A comprehensive professional development plan will be created which will be based on the framework of Alan 
Blankstein’s Failure Is Not an Option program. The program is based on the following eight fundamental points: 1. 
Common Mission, Vision, Values, and Goals 2. Ensuring Achievement for All Students and Systems for Prevention and 
Intervention 3.Collaborative Teaming Focused on Teaching and Learning 4. Using Data to Guide Decision Making and 
Continuous Improvement 5.Gaining Active Engagement from Family and Community 6. Building Sustainable 
Leadership Capacity 7. Implement and reflect on the pedagogical use of the Common Core Learning Standards for our 
teachers 8. Utilize Charlotte Danielson’s framework in my assessment of teacher’s instructional practices. Teachers 
will be expected to create goals for themselves and students. The goals will be analyzed by the principal and discussed 
in September of each year and assessed on an interim basis in February and analyzed again in June for competency. 
Teachers will focus on four key areas: Planning and Preparation, Instruction, Classroom Environment and Professional 
Responsibilities.  

 

 
2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development 

Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, 
paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS).  
 

A model of instruction is a pattern of pedagogy, which can identify; the instruction must have goals and a rational. My 
goal is to take students where they are and take them where I want them to be. Therefore I have elected to utilize 
two models; one is called the Constructivist model, while the other is considered to be somewhat of a business 
model, Direct Instruction. According to John Saphier and Robert Gower, direct instruction is utilized primarily to build 
skills. In my experience scholars coming from the middle school experience have a true lack of basic skills primarily in 
the core areas, however a note-taking component will be added for our struggling scholars classified as ELL’s and 
Special Needs scholars. In order to attack this belief head on students will engage in our instructional core as they 
enter into our Summer Bridge Program, which last for 4 to 5 weeks during the summer time, if students are unable to 
attend or fail to comply, an instructional safety measure will be inherently built-in. Scholars will be taken through a 
battery of diagnostic exams during the first week of class to determine their competencies in the core courses 
whether they attended the previously mentioned five weeks of summer school or not. The basis of our system is to 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          50 

 

make sure the students are assessed and that the current teacher who may or may have not taught the student 
during the summer bridge has another layer of data to assess the scholar’s strengths and weaknesses. 

 

Professional development will focus on the following areas: 

1. Student Centered Instructional Practices 

2. Socratic Circles 

3. Integration of technology into all curriculum areas 

4. Alignment between the Scope and Sequence, Lesson Plans and Common Core Standards 

 

 

 
Part 3: TA Schools Only 

3a. Use of Program Resources 

Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 
 

Through the implementation of rigorous instructional methodologies and the further incorporation of the Common 
Core Learning Standards, the Integrated Algebra course will be taught in the first semester using a double block 
methodology, once the scholars complete the course, the scholars will venture into Algebra II/Trigonometry or 
Geometry. 

There is a perpetual initiative to offer college level courses to ninth graders which will prepare them for upper level 
college courses. All in-coming freshmen are expected to take four Regents examinations at the end of their first 
academic school year. The exams are as follows: U.S. History, Living Environment, CC English and CC Integrated 
Algebra. Therefore, the designs of the curriculum are rigorous. Upon the completion of the CC Integrated Algebra 
exam which will be provided in January or June of every school year, scholars either move into CC Geometry or 
Algebra II/Trigonometry. Students who demonstrate a comprehensive acumen for writing during the Summer Bridge 
Academy will be entered into the school AP United States History program in the fall. For all ninth graders, the Self to 
Family program will introduce students to a leadership course called “Discovering Leadership within the Family”. The 
basic aspects of the class will be to develop the learners’ sense of self in relation to their families. In addition, they will 
explore ways that they can affect change in said community. Learners will be aided in developing skills and strategies 
that will help them to develop and refine basic leadership qualities such as: enthusiasm, work ethic, goals, scholarly 
maturity and willingness to discover solutions to problems. 

 

 
3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program 

Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., 
providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from 
the regular classroom during regular school day). 
 

The need for a cultural relevant curriculum will be put in place but from a pluralistic approach seeking to value all of 
New York’s and America’s diverse cultures. After-school tutoring in small groups will be created to address students 
who are struggling to meet the CCLS standards in ELA, Mathematics, Science and Social Studies. A Saturday Academy 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          51 

 

will also allow students additional opportunity to receive assistance. In addition, scholars will be provided tutorial 
services through intense 9 am to 9 pm tutorial services three to four weeks prior to their Regents examinations in 
January and June. In addition, a system of small group instruction 

within the framework of the day that allows for a 10 to 1 ratio between teachers to students will serve as another tool 
to address the academic and social development of scholars. 

 

Scholars must learn how to clearly articulate their ideas as well as to collaborate on tasks effectively by sharing the 
burden of group projects. Scholars will exchange ideas and will learn to "negotiate" with others and to evaluate their 
contributions. This is essential to success in the real world, our leadership classes will expose our scholars to a variety 
of experiences in which they will be exposed to a variety others' ideas 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
Part 4: SWP Schools Only 

4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only)  

Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary 
school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early 
intervention services, etc.). 
N/A 

 

 
4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments 

Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate 
multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to 
improve instruction.    
 

I once read a book by the noted educational expert Alfie Kohn; the book was titled The Schools Our Children Deserve: 
Moving beyond Traditional Classrooms and Tougher Standards. In chapter eight entitled Education at Its Best, Kohn 
discusses how teachers can develop deeper more comprehensive thought processes in the students they are charged 
with teaching. Although I do not subscribe to the totality of Kohn’s construct, one section of the aforementioned 
chapter intrigued me. Kohn went on to write, “Someone once said that a student who gives a wrong answer actually 
might be answering another question. The teachers job is to find out what that question is. More broadly, his job is 
to see things from the student’s point of view, to get in the habit of imagining how an idea or assignment is likely to 
appear to children of this particular age”. Additionally, Kohn also went on to write that “A classroom where mistakes 
are our friends isn’t a place where anything goes or accuracy doesn’t count. It’s a place that has transcended a 
behaviorist model of learning and, consequently, a place where students feel safe, take chances and ultimately 
learn more.” 

 

I believe that Kohn was describing the courageous leadership imperative through the lens of the constructivist 
instructional model. The constructivist model can trace its origin back to Greece. The father of this model of teaching 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          52 

 

is Socrates. Socrates asked directed questions that led his students to realize for themselves the weaknesses in their 
thinking. The Socratic methodology is a critical tool in the way constructivist educators analyze their students' learning 
and plan new learning experiences for the scholars they are charged with teaching. The Constructivist model 
encourages scholars to critically think and lends itself to the CCLS. Critics of the methodology cite that students have 
to have a strong educational foundation for it to work; stable home environments, or the argument is that it does not 
benefit ELL’s or Special Needs scholars. 

 

Assessments provide an on-going opportunity to understand the needs of each of our scholars and that data will be 
used to target students, who need assistance in a variety of curriculum areas, guide teacher reflections, professional 
development workshops, in the case of our ELL population the data will provide strategies that support ELL’s oral 
language development including accountable talk, group, solo presentations, and cooperative grouping. These 
instructional strategies encourage students to use English to negotiate meaning, encourage authentic use of the 
language in new and flexible ways and will help to prepare students to meet the state standards and assessments. 

 

 

 
4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools 

Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and 
Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible 
for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide 
plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the 
consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and 
purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, 
and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount 
each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the 
intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. 
Program Name 

Fund Source 
(i.e. Federal, 
State or Local) 

Funding Amount 
Indicate the amount 
contributed to 
Schoolwide pool. 
(Refer to Galaxy for 
school allocation 
amounts) 

Place an (X) in Column A below to verify 
that the school has met the intent and 
purposes of each program whose funds are 
consolidated.  Indicate in Column B, section 
references where a related program activity 
has been described in this plan. 

Column A 

Column B 

Verify with an (X) 

Section Reference(s) 

Title I Part A (Basic) 

Title II, Part A 

Title III, Part A 

Title III, Immigrant 

Tax Levy (FSF) 

Federal 

Federal 

Federal 

Federal 

Local 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
1Explanation/Background: 
Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and 
programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and 
advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools 
may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          53 

 
State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This 
gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students.   
 
Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a 
single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual 
identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool 
to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds 
used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from 
which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to 
combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used 
conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the 
dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds.  
 
Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages: 

  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program 

separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different 
sources when accounting for their use. 

  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the 

statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., 
semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent 
and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended 
beneficiaries are met. 

 
2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as 
follows: 

  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to 
improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes 
provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH). 

  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement 

plans that aims to  improve instruction and address the identified needs  

  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in 

grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not 
available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional 
program. 

  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, 
develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and 
achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another 
purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-
quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in 
effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the 
participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language 
instruction programs. 

  Title III Immigrant:  Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of 

English language acquisition and content area achievement. 

 
Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated: 

  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and 
programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent 
representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities 
funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with 
student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. 
IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education 
designed to meet their individual needs. 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          54 

 

 

  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by 

the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          55 

 

Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)  

 (Required for All Title I Schools) 

 

Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and 
representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will 
participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I 
program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson 
that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the 
parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school 
will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic 
achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family 
Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. 
 
The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current 
S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent 
Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent 
involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen 
family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy.  
 
Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample 
Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) 
as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. 
 
 

Parent and Family Engagement Policy 

Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. 
The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of 
parents and community in the school. 13K595, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every 
Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen 
the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is 
designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the 
education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent 
Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community.  

 

13K595 will support parents and families of Title I students by: 

Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students 

 

● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., 
literacy, math, and use of technology; 

● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision 
making in support of the education of their children; 

● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor 
their child’s progress; 

● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 

● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in 
languages that parents can understand; 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          56 

 

● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve 
outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other 
members of the school community; 

The school’s Parent Involvement  

 

Parental Involvement and School Quality 

The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all 
parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The 
school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement 
policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school 
surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and 
enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school.  

 

In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the 
school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership 
Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for 
additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: 

● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I 
program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title 
I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; 

● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated 
directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; 

● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as 
described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; 

● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent 
Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support 
and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills;  

● Maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. 
The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the 
parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and 
inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents 
each month and file a report with the central office.; 

● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, 
grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and 
technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home;  

● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State 
accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review 
Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 

● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of 
children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          57 

 

the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable 
sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); 

● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning 
or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and 
allow parents to provide suggestions; 

● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed;  

● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and 
workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; 

 

 

The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: 

Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement 

 

● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; 

● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; 

● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher 
Association) and Title I Parent Committee; 

● supporting or hosting Family Day events; 

● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; 

● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; 

● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their 
children’s progress; 

● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school 
activities and student progress; 

● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, 
and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. 

 

 

School-Parent Compact (SPC) Template 

 

School-Parent Compact (SPC) 

13K595, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is 
implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between 
the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, 
agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          58 

 

improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure 
that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. 

 

 

I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum 

Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating 
children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: 

 

● using academic learning time efficiently; 

● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; 

● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; 

● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; 

● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the 
Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); 

 

 

I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships 

Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: 

 

● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be 
discussed as well as how this Compact is related; 

● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students 
participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to 
be involved; 

● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds 
are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; 

● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation 
services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education;  

● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of 
participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; 

● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent 
Involvement Policy and this Compact; 

● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results 
for each child and other pertinent individual school information;  

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          59 

 

● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents 
each year; 

 

 

Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: 

I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff 

 

● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited 
English speaking parents;  

● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff 
member; 

● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to 
observe classroom activities; 

● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences;  

 

 

I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents 

Provide general support to parents by: 

 

● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment 
for parents and guardians; 

● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their 
child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of 
parents can attend); 

● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all 
members of the school community; 

● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents;  

● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in 
this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; 

● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and 
consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; 

 

 

 

II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          60 

 

● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate 
procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; 

● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and 
his/her age; 

● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; 

● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes);  

● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; 

● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports 
and/or quality family time; 

● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; 

● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; 

● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education;  

● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by 
prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; 

● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; 

● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy 
and this Compact; 

● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn 
more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; 

● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on 
advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams;  

● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; 

 

 

Student Responsibilities: 

 

III. Student Responsibilities 

● attend school regularly and arrive on time; 

● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; 

● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; 

● show respect for myself, other people and property; 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          61 

 

 
 
 
 

● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; 

● always try my best to learn. 

 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          62 

 

DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT 

GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY 

SUBMISSION FORM 

2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR 

 

DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information 

necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English 

language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a 

part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the 

services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should 

be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily 

available on file in the school.  When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces.  For 

additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. 

Part I: School ELL Profile 

 

 

 
 

A. School Information 

District  13 
School Name   Bedford Academy High School 

Borough  Brooklyn 

School Number   595 

 
B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant 

principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. 
 

Principal   Adofo Muhammad 
Coach  N/A 
ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher  
 N/A 
Teacher/Subject Area Ms. Alexa 
Encarnacion/History 
Teacher/Subject Area type here 
Related-Service Provider Out Sourced 
Superintendent Ms. Karen Watts 

 

Assistant Principal  Cluny Lavache 
Coach N/A 
School Counselor  
Steve Burrell 

Parent  type here 

Parent Coordinator Ms. Tate-McMullen 
Field Support Center Staff Member Ms. Ulubabova, Ms. Torres,      
Other (Name and Title) Ms. Holmes 

C. Teacher Qualifications  
Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section.  Press TAB after each number entered to calculate 
sums and percentages.  
     
Number of certified 
ENL teachers currently teaching in the 
ENL program 

Number of teachers who hold both content 
area/common branch and TESOL certification 

0 

0 

0 

Number of teachers who hold both a 
bilingual extension and TESOL 
certification 

Number of special education teachers 
with bilingual extensions 

0 

0 

0 

0 

Number of certified 
bilingual teachers not currently 
teaching in a bilingual program  
Number of certified foreign 
language/world language teachers 
providing home language arts 
(HLA) to students in bilingual 
programs [applicable to grades 7–
12] 
Number of teachers currently 
teaching a self-contained ENL class 
who hold both a common branch 
license and TESOL certification 
[applicable to grades K–6] 

Number of certified 
bilingual teachers currently 
teaching in a bilingual program 

Number of certified ENL teachers 
not currently  teaching in the ENL 
program  

 

0 

0 

D. Student Demographics  

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          63 

 
Total number of students in 
school (excluding pre-K) 

361 

Total number of ELLs 

01 

ELLs as share of total student population 
(%) 

0.28% 

 
 
 
Part II: ELL Demographics 
 
 
 
 
 
A. ELL Programs 

This school serves the following grades (includes 
ELLs and non-ELLs) 
Check all that apply 

 
 
This school offers (check all that apply): 

K

    1

    2

     3

     4

     5

 

6

   7

     8

    9

     10

     11

    12

 

Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) 

Yes

             No

Dual language program (DL) 

Freestanding ENL 

Yes

             No

Yes

             No

 

 

 

If yes, indicate language(s):            

If yes, indicate language(s):            

 

 
Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a 
separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. 
 

Bilingual Program Breakdown 

School 
Year 

Lang. 

Opened 
(e.g., 2013-14) 

 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

1 

 
 

2 

 
 

4 

 
 

3 

 
 

K 

         

         

       

       

         

         

         

         

Program 
TBE 
TBE 
TBE 
DL 
DL 
DL 
Total 
 
 
 
Part III: Assessment Analysis 
 
 

 
 
0 

 
 
0 

 
 
0 

       

       

 
 
0 

 
 
0 

5 

6 

7 

8 

         

         

         

         

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

       

       

       

       

 
 
0 

 
 
0 

 
 
0 

 
 
0 

9 

0 
 
 
0 
 
 
0 

10 

11 

12 

0 
 
 
0 
 
 
0 

0 
 
 
0 
 
 
0 

0 
 
 
0 
 
 
0 

Tot # 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 

After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 

1.  What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, 

teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? 
Teacher-created assessments in conjunction to the MoSL baseline assessment are used to assess literacy skills so that teachers 
can identify learning gaps and plan their lessons accordingly.  Teachers are able to identfy the student's strengths and 
weaknesses in the areas of listening, reading , speaking and writing.  Based on the data teachers will be able to share best 
practices during grade level and department meetings to improve student performance.  
 

2.  What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 

 
 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          64 

 

3.  What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL 

Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? 
Paste response to question here:    
 

4.  What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered?  

 
 

5.  How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-
5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.]  
N/A 
 

6.  What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? 

([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS].  
NYSESLAT indicates that the student is Advanced in requiring 180 minutes of services a week in English and or another content 
area. 
 

7.  What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? 

 

 

 
 
 
Part IV: ELL Programming 
 

Programming and Scheduling Information 

1.  How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented 
as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students 
regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in 
one class]).  

a.  Freestanding ENL program. 

NYSESLAT indicates that the student is Advanced and requiring minutes of services a week in English and or another 
content area by a K-12 certified teacher in ESOL.  However, we do not have the personnel in the building to provide 
such services.  Nonetheless, we are seeking to collaborate and partner with schools in the community to meet the ELL 
population needs.  Furthemore, we have an extensive academic intervention service program (AIS) that offers the 
student tutorial service in all core classes during the academic week, as well as, on Saturdays.    

b.  TBE program.  If applicable.   

N/A 

c.  DL program.  If applicable.    

N/A 

 

2.  How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each 

program model? 

a.  How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 

below)? 

              NYSESLAT indicates that the student is Advanced and requiring minutes of services a week in English and or another 
content area by a K-12 certified teacher in ESOL.  However, we do not have the personnel in the building to provide such 
services.  Nonetheless, we are seeking to collaborate and partner with schools in the community to meet the ELL population 
needs.  Furthemore, we have an extensive academic intervention service program (AIS) that offers the student tutorial service 
in all core classes during the academic week, as well as, on Saturdays.    
 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          65 

 

3.  Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and 

methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core 
Learning Standards.  
      The mode of instruction is in English for all content areas. 
 

4.  How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? 

      N/A 
 

5.  How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? 

SIFE   

a. 
b.  Newcomer  
c.  Developing   
d. 
e. 

Long Term 
Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status  

Based on the ELL levels, teachers provide multiple entry points into the lessons including but not limited to; graphic organizers, 
cloze activities, call and response, and various annotation techniques. 
 

6.  What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic 

content areas and accelerate English language development?  
The various instructional strategies and grade-level materials that teachers will use are but not limited to undelining for 
understanding, annotation, Depth of Knowledge question techniques, graphic organizers, and cornell notes  
 

7.  How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and 

attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? 
Bedford Academy uses small-group instruction to provide and enable students with ELL-SWD to achieve their IEP goals and 
attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment with an ICT teacher.  We also employ a push-in model and 
our after-school tutorial service. 
 

8.  Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups 

targeted).  List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which 
they are offered. 
After- school tutoring and Saturday academy 
 

9.  Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year?    

Partnering with a loacal school to create an ELL academy that meets monthly to support student progress.           
 

10.  If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? 

N/A 
 

11.  How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs?  Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in 

your building. 
All ELL's are encouraged to support after-school programs.           
 

12.  What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language 

materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. 
All students have access to technology so as to enhance overall learning. 
 

13.  How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? 

Bedford Academy ensures that home language support via notifaction letters with support from the ELL coordinator, parent 
coordiantor, attendance coordinator and testing coordiantor. 
 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          66 

 

 

14.  Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels.  

Bedford Academy ensures that all required services/resource support and correspond to ELL's ages and grade levels through 
the guidance counselor based on the NYSESLAT results and CCLS. 
 

15.  If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the 

ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met?   
All students have access to technology so as to enhance overall learning. 
 

16.  Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for 

new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, 
parent coordinator).  
Not applicable, we don’t have any newly enrolled ELL's. 
 

17.  What language electives are offered to ELLs?  

We do not have any language electives being offered at this time. 
 

18.  For schools with dual language programs: 

a.  What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day 

(percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. 
In which language(s) is each core content area taught? 

b. 
c.  How is each language separated for instruction? 
d. 

Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same 
time (simultaneous)? 

N/A 
 

Professional Development and Support for School Staff 

1.  Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic 

staff.)  What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs 
as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? 
We will seek support from the BNFSC and whenever possible send the appropriate personnel to scheduled professional 
develop. 
Teachers implement the CCLS according to the core subject area and will be encouraged to seek additional support from the 
BNFSC based on the scheduled professional development workshops. 
 

2.  Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all 
teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include 
how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance).  Refer to ELL Policy and Reference 
Guide, Professional Development section. 
 The time is given to staff to discuss best practices by grade and by content during scheduled professional development.  The 
staff uses this as a resource to develop their lesson plans.  
The staff uses 25% of their scheduled PD to address the needs of diverse learners. 
 
 

 

Parental Involvement 

1.  How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language 
development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? 
Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent 
orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences?  

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          67 

 

 

 

Bedford Academy HS holds grade meeting at the beginning of each semester to inform and disccuss student perofmance and 
goals to meet annual yearly progress in relations to core curriculum instruction. In addition, teachers conduct parent outreach 
on Tuesdays from 2:20 to 3:20, informing parents of student prograss and strategies to help assist academic improvement. 

2.  Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. 

All parents are encouraged to get involved in school activities included but not limited grade meetings, SLT meetings, 
celebratory functions of students achievements, parent workshops on CCLS and athletic events. 
 

Additional Information 

Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for 
ELLs.  You may attach/submit charts.   This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted.   
Paste response here:    
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          68 

Part V: ELL Identification Attestation 

Principal Certification 

2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 
6. 

7. 

8. 

9. 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL 
Policy and Reference Guide, I, Adofo Muhammad, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are 
adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 
 
1. 

The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for 
students entering with IEPs). 
Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined 
a. 

If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status 
relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level.  

The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue.   
a.  The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services 
are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality 
translation service.   

Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined.   
a. 

If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility 
to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. 

Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible.   
Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language.  
a.  Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. 
If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish 
LAB.  
Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources 
available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-
education-sife.  
If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting.  
a.  Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent 

video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask 
questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided 
throughout the meeting. 

10.  ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected.  

a. 

b. 

If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program 
in accordance with DOE transfer policies. 
If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent 
choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice.   

11.  Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process).  
12.  If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose 

ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 
 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          69 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

Part VI: LAP Assurances 

School Name:   Bedford Academy HS                                                                              School DBN: 13K595 
Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate.  Names listed in Part A, should align with this 
section.  

Name (PRINT) 

Title 

Signature 

Date (mm/dd/yy) 

Adofo A. Muhammad 

Principal 

           

Assistant Principal 

Ms. Tate-McMullen 

Parent Coordinator 

N/A 

ENL/Bilingual Teacher 

Ms. Hernandez 

Parent 

Ms. A. Encarnacion 

Teacher/Subject Area 

           

           

           

Teacher/Subject Area 

Coach 

Coach 

Mr. S. Burrell 

School Counselor 

Ms. K. Watts 

Ms. Ulubabova 

Ms. Torres 

Ms. Holmes 

           

Superintendent 
 
Field Support Center Staff 
Member 
       Brooklyn North 

Other            

Other            

Other            

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

11/12/15 

11/12/15 

11/12/15 

11/12/15 

11/12/15 

11/12/15 

11/12/15 

11/12/15 

11/12/15 

11/12/15 

11/12/15 

11/12/15 

11/12/15 

11/12/15 

           

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          70 

 

 
 

2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS 

Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools 

 

DBN: 

13  
 

School 
Name: 

K   

Superintendent: 

Karen Watts  
 

 
The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. 
If there is more than one LAC, list all. 
 

First Name  

Last Name  

Title  

Has the LAC attended a 

2018-19 training 

The LAC was involved in 
the development of this 

conducted by the Field 

plan? Yes/No  

 

 

Language Access 

Coordinator? Yes/No  

 

(*Primary) 

 

   

 
* The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs 
on translation,  
interpretation, compliance and budget.  
 

School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful 
opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's 
Regulation A-663).  
 
By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and 
interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). 
 
Part A:  Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 
 
1.  Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written 

and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from: 

  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS) 
  Automate The System (ATS) reports 
  Student Emergency Contact cards 
  Surveys conducted by your school. 

 

All parents/guardians of newly enrolled students fill out a Home Language Survey when enrolling their child. This 
form is maintained as part of the student’s record. If the parent/guardian indicates on the HLIS that they would 
like to receive information from the school in their home language, forms being sent home are translated either in 
written form or orally to the parent/guardian. Information from teachers is translated to parents by staff 
members who speak the home language. There are currently 1 ELL at Bedford Academy High School. There are no 
parent requests in other than English Language, however we will reach out to the parents once again so as to 
confirm. The DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit will be utilized if a parent/guardian should request these 
services. Parent surveys are distributed in Bengali, and in Spanish as well as English as these are the identified 
home language of the 1 student on record. The ATS Report of Preferred Languages will be updated regularly in 
order to maintain accurate information on parent language choices. Parent Blue Cards are also updated regularly 
to keep parent language choices current. Parent surveys are given out by the parent coordinator in order to 
maintain accurate data on parent language choices. Teachers also send home surveys by backpack or during 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          71 

 

parent conferences in order to collect parent data by class/grade. A report is generated using a variety of data 
sets in order to regularly update the languages that parents speak by class and/or grade.  
 

 
 
2.  List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, 

which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language 
Report (RCPL) ATS report. 
 

Written Preferred  

Percent Written  

 

 

Oral Preferred  

Percent Oral  

 

 

Language  

One hundred percent 
(100%) of the school’s 
population reports 
English as the primary 
language.The school’s 
demographic is made 
available on the school’s 
official DOE website and 
is periodically reported in 
our school’s newsletter.  

   

 

3.  From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at 

least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, 
French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. 
 

 

 
 
Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 
 
1.  List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be 

distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents.  
 

Document Name  

Month/Frequency Distributed to 

Families  

 

Documents which are distributed to 
parents/guardians but do not require 
translations are: annual handbooks, 
parent-teacher conference 
announcements, NYS testing dates. 
Testing dates and calendars are 
provided as soon as they become 
available in order to allow 
parent/guardians to prepare themselves 
as well as their children for upcoming 
events.  

How do you plan to translate? 
Include procedures to ensure 
timely provision of translated 

documents to parents.  

 

  
2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          72 

 
 

 

2.  List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as 

parent-teacher  
conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings.  
   

Meeting Name  

Month/Frequency of Meetings  

How does your school plan to provide 

interpretation service(s)?  

 

 

Bedford Academy HS holds 4 parent 
conferences throughout the school 
year. The first, in September, 
introduces parents to their children's 
new grade and provides curriculum 
information. The next three, held in 
November, March and June are 
focused on student progress and 
grades. If necessary, we also utilize 
the over the phone translation 
services 718-752-7373 to speak with 
parentss. In addition, to these 
meetings, a designated one to one 
parent conference will take place 
annually in order to provide updates 
on student progress as mandated by 
CR Part 154.  

   

 

3.  Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of 

a school emergency.  
 

 
 

 
 
Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure

 
Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and 
what resources are available to meet compliance.  
 

 

 

 
 
Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services 
 
Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive 
information. Include any: 

  Translated signage 
  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          73 

 

 

  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) 

Bedford Academy has a multilingual welcome poster hanging in the main entrance to the school building so that 
everyone that enters the building is aware of language assistance services. Available Languages sheet is kept at the 
security office as well as the main office. Information for parents on the N.Y.C.D.O. E.'s translation and interpretation 
services are available in 10 languages, and is kept at the security desk and main office. At Bedford Academy HS the 
school staff are aware of language assistance services provided by the school by using data (ATS Reports, Blue Cards 
and Surveys), updated roster of bilingual staff and The Translation and Interpretation Unit Services.  
 

 
 
Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services 
Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the 
language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services?   
 

Parent surveys are distributed at the beginning of the year which gather feedback from parents on the quality and 
availability of service. We can obtain information to inform our practices in order to improve the quality and 
availability of services we provide to parents and students.  
 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          74 

