 
 

 

 
 

 

 

 
 

 
 
 

2018-19 

RISE SCHOOL 

COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN 

(R-CEP) 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 

DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 

19K659 

School Name: 

CYPRESS HILLS COLLEGIATE PREPARATORY SCHOOL 

Principal: 

AMY YAGER 

 
 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                         

 

 

 1 

 
 

Rise School Comprehensive Educational Plan (R-CEP) Outline  

 
 
Section 1: School Information Page 
 
 
Section 2: Executive Summary and Organizing Principles 
 
 
Section 3: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page 
 
 
Section 4: Rise School Narrative 
 
 
Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  

  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction 
  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment 
  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers 
  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership 
  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties  

 
 
Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) 
 
 
Section 7: Community School Partnerships 
 
 
Section 8: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) 
 
 
Section 9: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH)  
 
 
Section 10: Title I Program Information  
 
 
Section 11: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)  
 

 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          2 

 

 

Section 1: School Information Page 

School Information 

 
School Name: 

BEDS Code: 

Grades Served: 

School Address:  

 
CYPRESS HILLS COLLEGIATE PREP 

 
331900011659 

 
9-12 

 
999 JAMAICA AVENUE  

BROOKLYN, NY 11208 

 
7186471672 

Phone Number: 

 

School Number (DBN): 

 

19K659 

7186476719 

Fax: 

 

AMY YAGER 

AYAGER@SCHOOLS.NYC.GOV  

School Contact Person:  
 
Community School CBO: 

 

Principal: 

Community School Director: 

UFT Chapter Leader: 

Parents’ Association President: 

SLT Chairperson: 

Title I Parent Representative (or 
Parent Advisory Council 
Chairperson): 

Student Representative(s): 

 

Email Address: 

 

Barbara Moronta 

 
AMY YAGER 

 

 
Jessica Anaya-Lopez 

 
Mercedes Duran 

 
AMY YAGER 

 

Mercedes Duran 

 
YOUSSEF, FATIMA 

 
CARRASQUILLO, JAYDAH 

 

 

District Information 

 

13,14,15,1
6,19,23&3
2 

Janice Ross 

Geographical District: 

 

Superintendent: 
1396 Broadway 

 

Superintendent’s Office Address: 

Brooklyn, New York 11221 

 
jross11@schools.nyc.gov 

Superintendent’s Email Address: 

 

7184554635 

Phone Number: 

 

7184554684 

Fax: 

 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          3 

 

 
 

Brooklyn North 

 

FSC: 
Executive Director’s Office 
Address: 

 

Field Support Center (FSC)  

 

Bernadette Fitzgerald 

Executive 
Director: 
131 Livingston Street, Rm 501 Brooklyn, NY 11201 

 

 
Bfitzge2@schools.nyc.gov 

Executive Director’s Email Address: 
718-935-3954 

 

Phone Number: 

 

 

718-935-4314 

Fax: 

 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          4 

 

Section 2: Executive Summary and Organizing Principles 

 

The Objective 
To guide, support and accelerate the early progress demonstrated by the schools graduating out of the Renewal 
program, as Rising Schools of Excellence (Rise), with a compelling theory of action, clear strategy for sustainment, 
targeted individualized supports, continued accountability, gradual release of responsibility, such that they 
independently accelerate their growth trajectory. 
 
Background 
Rise Schools have demonstrated: 

● 

● 

they have the will and conditions in place to accelerate student growth and meet school improvement 
benchmarks. 
they have the capacity to lead/implement a school improvement strategy. 

Rise Schools have seen some gains1 across multiple measures including graduation rates, college readiness, state 
test scores and attendance. As a result, these schools will fully transition out of the Renewal Schools program at 
the end of the 2017-2018 SY and continue under the guidance of the Office of Field Support, in partnership with 
the Office of School Support and Supervision. 
 
1All Rise Schools met at least 67% of their benchmarks, are not on the State’s Priority list, and have demonstrated a 
sustainable school improvement structure that will allow them to build on their progress. 
 
Six Rise Keys for Continued Improvement  
 

 

1.  Strengthen the Instructional Core  
2.  Strengthen Instructional Leadership Capacity  
3. 
4.  Apply a tiered approach to student intervention 
5.  Promote a positive, inclusive school environment for students, staff, parents and 

Improve Data Driven Practices 

community partners 
Increase monitoring and accountability 

6. 

 
Theory of Action 
If the NYC Department of Education provides customized supports to Rise schools and principals designed around the 
“Six Rise School Keys for continued improvement” then, Rise principals and their teams will have the tools and resources 
to accelerate outcomes for ALL students and increase students’ access to an excellent and equitable education. 
 
Structure of the Rise School Comprehensive Educational Plan (R-CEP) 

The Rise School Comprehensive Educational Plan (R-CEP) will serve as the organizing and overarching document for each 
Rise school and will be directly aligned and developed around the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, New 
York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, and Strong Schools, Strong 
Communities, including the following: 

●  Rise Benchmarks: please refer to the 2018-19 Rise benchmarks provided to your school. 
●  Establishing an overarching summative vision aligned with elements of the Framework for Great Schools and 
documenting key areas of celebration and Rise through analysis of assessments and by envisioning what the 
desired outcome for each school will be at the end of the School Rise process.  

●  Setting mid-year point benchmarks that create the path for improvement by focusing on desired outcomes and 
goals. In this way, the plan will be mapped to the overarching summative vision. In addition to the five discrete 
goals formed around the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, each school will create an action plan. 
●  Transformation into a community school in order to increase student and family access to physical and mental 

health services and other social-emotional supports made available in or near the school. 

●  Expanded learning opportunities for all students, including additional instruction provided during afterschool 

and/or summer programming provided in collaboration with community partners. 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          5 

 

 

● 

Intensive professional development for all staff to ensure effective implementation of curriculum and 
instruction aligned to the Next Generation Learning Standards (NGLS) and to support staff in effectively 
responding to the differentiated academic and social-emotional needs of all students. 

●  Additional, focused strategies to increase parent and family engagement. 

Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools 

The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect 
the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms 
where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity 
and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and 
classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more 
attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and 
Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our 
families and students. 

Information on the Framework for Great Schools and the DTSDE 

Strong Schools, Strong Communities  

The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, 
educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school 
prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult.  

The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers 
and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools 
centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school 
leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. 
Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to 
Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students.   

The Framework for Great Schools and the R-CEP Development 

The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and 
external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase 
learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently 
ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Rise School Comprehensive 
Educational Plan (R-CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for 
continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review 
and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities 
and strategies that improve outcomes for students. 
 

Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase 
student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework 
for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members 
concrete ways to improve. 

In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in 
consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to 
participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a 
comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with 
the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all 
the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements 
work together to support student achievement. 
 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          6 

 

 

The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools  

Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards 
are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical 
thinking skills. 
Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, 
and challenged by their teachers and peers. 
Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. 
They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous 
improvement. 
Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, 
developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. 
Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by 
welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. 
Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school 
and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value 
each other. 

 
Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools 

 

In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in 
improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for 
School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the American Institute of Research (AIR) Needs Assessment, the 
NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. 
 
NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets 

To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the 
current tools – they call it a Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple 
instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent 
statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure 
how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district 
will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement.  All Priority and Focus Schools and Focus 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          7 

 
Districts must use the new tool; and districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and 
Comprehensive Education Plans also will use the tool.  
 
The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an 
effective school and school district across the following six tenets: 

  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity 
  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions 
  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support 
  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions 
  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and 
  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement 

 

 

NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) 

The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by 
coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality 
Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 
2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below:  
I.  Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) 
II.  School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4)  
III.  Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and 
Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) 

 
Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 

Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, 
professional development, and parent and family engagement. 
 
To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in 
improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will 
serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the 
administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish: 
 

a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          8 

a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) 

 
 
 
It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School 
Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the 
joint development of the R-CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 
1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% 
budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent 
and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the R-CEP. For additional guidance 
on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. 
 

Next Steps for R-CEP Development 

School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  

  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists in every Rise school and 

meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655. 

  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the American Institute of Research (AIR) needs 

assessment, the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative 
data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year. 

  Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Rise Key and the corresponding statement of 

Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an 
Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select 
their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major 
findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other 
qualitative and quantitative data.   

  Step 4: Discuss and respond to the guiding questions under each Framework element. 

  Step 5: Revisit your school’s current goals, and strategically create new goals informed by the needs 

assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, 
Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor 
progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you have identified, and will let your school 
community know when you have reached your goal. 

  Step 6: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action 
plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement. 

  Step 7: Update your school’s AIS section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement 

Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). 

  Step 8: Complete the Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and the Community School sections. 

  Step 9: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall 

cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether strategies and activities outlined in the action 
plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. 

 
Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust practices along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful 
implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to 
accomplishing desired results. 

Rise Program Priorities 
 
Our Rise Theory of Action (page 4) is drawn from research1 on turnaround schools, the DOE Framework for Great 
Schools, DTSDE Tenets, and the Quality Review, which suggest that these key priorities have the greatest impact on 
student achievement. 
 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          9 

 

 

RISE Keys 

Priorities 

 

1. Strengthen 

the Instructional 

Core 

 

2. Strengthen 
Instructional 
Leadership 
Capacity 

3. Improve Data 
Driven Practices 

 

4. Apply a tiered 

approach to 

school support 
and intervention 

 

5. Promote a 

positive, 

inclusive school 
environment for 
students, staff, 

parents and 
community 

partners 

6. Increase 

monitoring and 
accountability 

  A clear focus aligned to students’ instructional needs, including college and career 

readiness 

  Access to common, standards-based curricula for all students, including ELLs and SWDs 
  Explicit and intentional embedding of culturally responsive Instruction in all content areas 
  Formative and summative assessments for all students in all grades that are aligned to 

curricula and produce clear evidence of learning 

  Tiered approach to teacher professional learning opportunities.  
  Partnership with families to increase engagement in students’ academic success 

 

Implementation of a coherent vision for school improvement - a vision for leading 
learning, leading people, leading schools and leading change 

  Development of a system to support distributive leadership and build the capacity 

and sustainability of teacher leaders through continuous improvement 

  Developing leadership competencies, specific to turnaround efforts, including 

leveraging multiple stakeholders, a commitment to student learning and a sustained 
pursuit of measurable progress. 
Strategic allocation of resources to support instructional and professional learning 
plans and family engagement in leadership opportunities 

Integrative use of formative and summative assessment tools and practices to 
target resources and support throughout the year to achieve academic priorities 

 

 

  Ongoing analyses of school-wide and student-level data and adjustments to 

curricular resources and instructional moves 

  Prioritization of the use of standards and data to inform teaching and learning 

 

 

 

Implementation of a tiered intervention system that engages teacher teams in frequent 
cycles of progress monitoring and adjustments to address diverse student needs 
School establishes coherent system, adopted by all to ensure that interventions are 
effective, differentiated and timely 
Increased use of teacher teams’ data-driven practices to accelerate student 
achievement 

  Clear strategy that establishes social norms within the school community and 

promotes a culture for learning with clear and high expectations for all students, in 
partnership with CBOs. 

  The sustainability of an environment where students feel safe, connected and engaged 

through practices that are culturally relevant and build their scholarly identity 

  The development of a whole school approach, in partnership with families, with 

 

 

specific attention to social, physical and behavioral environments 
Social emotional learning practices embedded in teaching and learning as aligned to 
the Collaborative for Academic, Social and Emotional learning (CASEL) competencies 
and supported by CBOs. 

School leaders implement effective monitoring systems to ensure that instructional 
practices and interventions are monitored closely at the classroom, team, and school 
wide level 

  Establish effective teacher team practices that ensure teachers are accountable for 

data findings and set timely and appropriate interventions 

  Data analysis results in adjustments to the programs and priorities to better service 

 
 

students 
Foster positive systems for accountability driven by reflection and action planning 
Support from district leaders to focus efforts toward results and problem solving 
actions that lead to turnaround success. 

1.  Darden/Curry PLE – Turnaround Leadership Competencies and Turnaround Action Shown to Influence Student Achievement 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          10 

 

Achievement Network – SY 18-19 Foundations Rubric 
COSEBOC Standards and Promising Practices for Schools Educating Boys of Color 
Harvard Graduate School of Education and Harvard Business School: Certificate in School Management and Leadership 
Learner-Centered Initiatives Multidimensional Principal Performance Rubric 

Monitoring and Accountability 

●  Rise schools will be monitored for implementation of the Rise Comprehensive Educational Plan (R+CEP) by 

Superintendents and Office of Field Support. 

●  Rise schools will be held accountable for making progress according to annual targets set by the 

Department of Education, as evidenced by their attainment of named benchmark scores for each 
annualized key metric. Schools not achieving annual targets by June 2019 are subject to additional 
oversight and consequences, to be determined at a later date. 

●  OFS will bring increased oversight and accountability by monitoring FSC supports to schools and ensure 
that these are aligned with the school’s instructional focus, student and teacher needs, and moving the 
school toward achieving interim goals. 

●  OSSS will monitor DSR oversight of all supports to Rise Schools. 

 

 

 

 
 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          11 

 

  

Section 3: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page 

Directions: All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this 
Rise School Comprehensive Educational Plan (R-CEP). SLT members’ signatures indicates that they have been 
consulted with and given the opportunity to provide feedback on the plan and the plan’s alignment with the school-
based budget to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic 
Intervention Services (AIS), Expanded Learning Time, Community School initiative, Parent and Family Engagement 
Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a 
minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the 
New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. 
 
On the chart below: 

1.  List the names of each SLT member in the second column.  
2. 
3. 

In the first column, indicate using an “X” if the person is an SLT member. 
In the third column, record the position and constituent group represented such as staff, parent, student, 
Community Based Organization (CBO), or other contributor. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an 
asterisk*.   

4.  SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does 

not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be 
maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates 
participation in the development of the R-CEP, not approval. 

5.  The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the 

principal’s office and be made available upon written request. 

Signature 
(Blue Ink) 

 

Check 
if SLT 

x 

 
x 

 
x 

 
 

 

x 

 
x 

 

x 

 

Name 

Position and Constituent Group 

Amy Yager 

 
Jessica Anaya-Lopez 

 
Mercedes Duran 

 
 

Mercedes Duran 

 

Barbara Moronta 

 
CARRASQUILLO, JAYDAH 

 

YOUSSEF, FATIMA 

 

Represented 

*Principal or Designee 

*UFT Chapter Leader or Designee 

*PA/PTA President or Designated 
Co-President 

DC 37 Representative (staff), if 
applicable 

Title I Parent Representative or 
Parent Advisory Council 
Chairperson 

Community School Director (staff) 

Student Representative  
(optional for elementary and 
middle schools; a minimum of two 
members required for high 
schools) 

Student Representative  
(optional for elementary and 
middle schools; a minimum of two 
members required for high 
schools) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          12 

Signature 
(Blue Ink) 

 

Check 
if SLT 

x 

 
 

x 

 
x 

 
x 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Name 

Position and Constituent Group 

Lauren Iocco  

 
Barbara Moronta 

 
Sonia Hernandez 

 
Janet Valentin 

 
Emily Orbon 

 
Elva Cankat 

 
Danielle Naughton 

 
Jessica Bierd 

 
 

Lisa LoFaso 

 

 
Elizabeth Guy 

 
n/a 

 
n/a 

 

Represented 

CSA Representative 

 
CBORepresentative 

 
Parent 

 
Parent 

 
UFT Representative 

 
UFTRepresentative 

 
CSARepresentative 

 
UFTRepresentative 

 

CBORepresentative 

 

Parent Coordinator 

 
n/a 

 
n/a 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          13 

 

Section 4: Rise School Narrative 

 

In a brief narrative, describe the current state of the Rise school addressing the following and please use existing data, 
where applicable: 

1.  Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, 

including your school’s mission statement and a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or 
special initiatives being implemented.  
Identify any special student populations that the school has and what their specific needs are. 

2. 
3.  Describe your school’s approach to family engagement and progress made with establishing families as 

partners in furthering student achievement  

4.  Describe how your school is leveraging community school partnerships to support progress in elements of the 

Framework for Great Schools and your Rise Benchmarks and indicate where this has been a challenge. 

5.  Summarize the Expanded Learning Time (ELT) opportunities that have been offered to your students this year. 
Cypress Hills Collegiate Preparatory High School’s mission is to further develop and strengthen our students’ academic 
and social-emotional skills needed to be both college and career ready. Through a rigorous and interculturally 
relevant curriculum, our students will develop into self-motivated, inquisitive, knowledgeable and empathetic 
individuals who will contribute to a peaceful, civic-minded world.  

CHCP’s vision is when educators, parents and community groups work collaboratively to support learning, students 
tend to be engaged, stay in school longer, and enjoy their school experience. CHCP provides a welcoming 
environment for all members of our learning community, including families and visitors, by ensuring that everyone 
is treated respectfully and that all voices are heard. Families at CHCP will have multiple avenues to engage with the 
greater community to address challenges, support student development, and celebrate learning and student 
growth. It is a small learning community where students are known as individuals and receive a personalized 
education based on inquiry, problem solving and reflection where students are the center of learning and are 
cognitively engaged in real world tasks. All students receive the knowledge, skills, and habits of mind to succeed in 
a challenging college program and be successful in the 21st century. Students will be active members in the 
community creating a positive impact for future generations. 

Cypress Hills is located in the East New York section of Brooklyn, New York, and is surrounded by the Cypress Hills 
Cemetery and multiple housing projects. CHCP students live in the surrounding neighborhood and the school was 
created by community members who desired a comprehensive high school for their children. Students achieve self-
determination through the school’s youth leadership programs. The school was created on the foundations of 
service learning, writing, and college connections. Cypress Hills Local Development Corporation helped found the 
school and continues to have a partnership with it. In addition, we have several partnerships (e.g. The Northwell 
Health Center and Partnership with Children) that support student achievement and learning. Within the school 
there has been a Student Success Center (SSC) established which supports the students and parents with the 
college and career exploration process. CHCP is a community built on high expectations for instruction and is well-
structured and adaptive to meet the social and emotional needs of students. Student voice, rigorous instruction, 
and collaboration with all stakeholders will create a safe nurturing environment that fosters students’ civic and 
academic excellence.  

To that extent, the following will be an integral part of the development of our learning community: 

● Instructional Focus 

● Area of Celebration 

● Area of Focus 

● Community Based Organizations 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          14 

 

● Expanded Learning Time Opportunities  

Instructional Focus: 

If teachers are continuously adjusting and differentiating Regents-aligned tasks by balancing assessments and 
providing actionable feedback, then students will be able to track their own successes and educational gaps, thus 
improving efficacy and literacy. 

Demographics: 

CHCP contains a very diverse population of learners that include Students with Disabilities (20%), English Language 
Learners (16%), students who are overage and under credited (4%), and Students with Interrupted Formal 
Education (8%). We hold high expectations for all students and believe students learn best with a personalized 
educational plan that is scaffolded to meet their needs while still maintaining rigorous instruction and highly 
cognitive-demanding tasks.  

Community Based Organizations (Partnerships): 

● Future of Tomorrow (FOT): FOT is composed of a dedicated group of students at the Franklin K. Lane Campus who 
work together to use their voice, skill, and power to make change in the education system. Members of FOT have 
won victories on the campus such as improving the cafeteria, establishing the Student Success Center (SSC), and 
reopening the library. Members meet weekly for fun interactive workshops to improve their skills and discuss 
topics of their choice.  

● Air Force Junior Reserve Officers' Training Corps (AFJROTC): The mission of the AFJROTC program is to develop 
citizens of character dedicated to serving their nation and community. The goals of the program are to promote 
values of citizenship, service to the United States, development of a sense of personal responsibility and 
achievement of a sense of accomplishment among high school students. The objectives of AFJROTC are to educate 
and train high school cadets in citizenship; promote community service; instill responsibility, character, and self-
discipline within the cadets; and provide instruction in air and space fundamentals. 

● The Student Success Center (SSC) exists to provide school-level services that are based on best practices and are 
integrated to ensure that students can readily access the range of academic and social-emotional supports that 
they need to be successful in high school. The SSC’s additional programs like the Early Awareness College Program, 
individualized college counseling, and the college persistence program for alumni help to build a sense of 
community and support for students and families that are navigating education beyond high school. 

● The Northwell Health Center works on improving the health of the communities it serves and is committed to 
providing the highest-quality clinical care; educating current and future generations of health care professionals; 
searching for new advances in medicine through the conduct of biomedical research; promoting health education; 
and caring for the entire community, regardless of individuals' ability to pay. They strive to be a national health 
care leader and are committed to excellence, compassion and improvement of the health of the community. 

  Partnership with Children: Is our new mental health provider , they will support the CHCP community by 

strengthening our students social, emotional, and cognitive skills through individual/ group counseling, full 
classroom intervention, and parent engagement. In addition to this, the Partnership with Children will work 
with other cbo's on campus to support all of our school-wide events.Partnership with Children: Is our new 
mental health provider , they will support the CHCP community by strengthening our students social, 
emotional, and cognitive skills through individual/ group counseling, full classroom intervention, and 
parent engagement. In addition to this, the Partnership with Children will work with other CBO's on 
campus to support all of our school-wide events. 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          15 

 

 

Expanded Learning Time Opportunities: 

Over the past three school years, there were various ELT opportunities for the students. All students were 
programmed for a 9th period class that happened after the end of the students’ regularly-programmed school day. 
The same class met at least four days a week for 60 minutes a day and the students earned one credit per semester 
for the class. On the fifth day they had an enrichment class provided by the CBO. The classes were created based on 
student voice and need. Students on track to graduate were able to pick their ELT class while other students were 
given a course based on credit gaps. Makeup credit classes and Regents Review classes were also offered after 
school two days a week for two hours and for four hours on Saturday. Students were programmed for this 
according to need. Further academic support was offered to the students through the campus tutoring center (The 
Math, English, Science and History (MESH) Center) where students could go after school to get support in the 
various areas where they were struggling. Student athletes were mandated to attend the MESH center while they 
were in season.  

 

 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          16 

 

 

School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 19K659 

School Configuration (2018-19) 

Grade Configuration 

09,10,11,12 

Total Enrollment (2017-
18) 
English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 

251 

SIG Recipient (Y/N) 

Transitional Bilingual 

N/A 

Dual Language 

N/A 

Self-Contained English as a Second 
Language 

Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) 

# Special Classes (ELA) 
# Special Classes (Math) 

# Visual Arts 
# Foreign Language 

% Title I Population 
% Free Lunch 
% Limited English Proficient 

1 
1 

9 
6 

% American Indian or Alaska Native 
% Hispanic or Latino 
% White 

# SETSS (ELA) 
# SETSS (Math) 
Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) 
# Music 
# Drama 
# CTE 
# Dance 

6 
7 

# Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) 
# Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) 

 
 

School Composition (2017-18) 

82.0%  % Attendance Rate 
81.7%  % Reduced Lunch 
22.3%  % Students with Disabilities 

Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) 

% Black or African American 

1.6% 
61.0%  % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 
3.6% 

% Multi-Racial 

Personnel (2015-16) 

Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) 
% of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate 
% Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 

6.1 
0% 
22% 

# of Assistant Principals (2016-17) 
% Teaching Out of Certification 
Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) 

Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) 

ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 

Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 

N/A 

N/A 

Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 
Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-
17) 

Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) 

ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 
Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 
4 Year Graduation Rate 

Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 

68% 
63% 
68.3% 

4.8% 

Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 
US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 
6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) 
% ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures 
(2015-16) 

Reward 
In Good Standing 
Focus District 

Priority School 

Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) 

No 
Yes 
Yes 

Recognition 
Local Assistance Plan 
Focus School Identified by a Focus District 

No 

Focus Subgroups 

N/A 

Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) 

Elementary/Middle School 

Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) 

American Indian or Alaska Native 
Hispanic or Latino 
White 
Students with Disabilities 
Economically Disadvantaged 

American Indian or Alaska Native 
Hispanic or Latino 
White 
Students with Disabilities 
Economically Disadvantaged 

American Indian or Alaska Native 
Hispanic or Latino 
White 
Students with Disabilities 
Economically Disadvantaged 

American Indian or Alaska Native 
Hispanic or Latino 
White 
Students with Disabilities 
Economically Disadvantaged 

American Indian or Alaska Native 
Hispanic or Latino 
White 
Students with Disabilities 
Economically Disadvantaged 

American Indian or Alaska Native 
Hispanic or Latino 
White 
Students with Disabilities 
Economically Disadvantaged 

N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 

Black or African American 
Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander 
Multi-Racial 
Limited English Proficient 
ALL STUDENTS 

Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) 
Black or African American 
Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander 
Multi-Racial 
Limited English Proficient 
ALL STUDENTS 

N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 

Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) 

N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
High School 

Black or African American 
Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander 
Multi-Racial 
Limited English Proficient 
ALL STUDENTS 

Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) 

N/A 
NO 
N/A 
N/A 
NO 

Black or African American 
Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander 
Multi-Racial 
Limited English Proficient 
ALL STUDENTS 

Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) 
Black or African American 
Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander 
Multi-Racial 
Limited English Proficient 
ALL STUDENTS 

N/A 
NO 
N/A 
N/A 
NO 

Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) 
Black or African American 
Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander 
Multi-Racial 
Limited English Proficient 
ALL STUDENTS 

N/A 
YES 
N/A 
N/A 
YES 

Yes 

N/A 

77 
76 

 
 

86.4% 
2.8% 
15.1% 

20.3% 
13.1% 
2.0% 

4 
4% 
10.5 

N/A 

N/A 

65% 
72% 
66.7% 

7% 

N/A 
No 
No 

N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 

N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 

N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 

N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
NO 

N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
NO 

N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
YES 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          17 

 
 
 

 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          18 

 

Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  

 

Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, 
and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious 
intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) 
 
Part 1 – Needs Assessment   

Part 1a.  Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice 
Tenet 3 Statement of Practice  
Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one.  Place an “X” in the 
appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 
3.2 

The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of 
rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning 
Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. (aligned to 
Rise Keys 2 and 6) 
Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction 
(DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and 
address student achievement needs. (aligned to Rise Key 3) 
The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner 
within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the 
arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. (aligned to Rise Keys 1 and 4) 
Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative 
assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student 
reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. (aligned to Rise Key 1) 

3.3 

3.4 

3.5 

SOP(s) 

Addressed 

x 

 

 

 

 

Part 1b.  Needs/Areas of Focus: 

1.  Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs 

selected above. 

2.  Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs 

selected above. 
Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 

3. 
4.  What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, 

Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? 

1.) School's Strengths 

  Department-wide use of Data Wise to analyze needs of students and develop action plans to address these 

needs in the classroom 

  Cycles of assessment with time for teachers to analyze summative assessment data and adjust curriculum 
  Creating common planning time for teachers to work together towards common goals 

2.) School's needs 

  Uniform datafolios across departments to improve student tracking of and ownership of learning 
  Creating regents aligned tasks with removal of scaffolds and graded aligned to the EOY assessments 
  Working on scaffolding and differentiation creating access for all and gradual removal of scaffolds 

3.) Priority needs to be addressed: 

  Rigorous instruction aligned to the standards meeting the needs of all students leading to an increased Regents 

completion rate 

  Data driven unit plans with constant cycles of feedback to target improvement in all subject areas especially 

math by year 2 passing rate 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          19 

 

  Targeted student and teacher tracking of student performance leading to increased student ownership and 

 
 

efficacy 
Students creating meaningful work products across all classrooms (1.2 from QR) 
Introduction and understanding of the changes to the standards from CCLS to Next Generation to ensure 
standard aligned curriculum  

4.) Data trends and sources analyzed 

  Cabinet level walk-troughs to gather data on student data tracking and reflection revealed a range of how 

teachers organized this in the classroom. 

  Rolling Agendas from department meetings and teachers' individual data trackers and summaries  
 

Framework Element scores and survey element scores over the past three years in rigorous instruction have 
seen an upwards trend. Rigorous instruction went from a 3.51 to a 3.57 to a 3.61 respectfully on the Framework 
element score and from a 2.95 to a 3.76 to a 3.93 respectfully on the Survey Element Score in the school quality 
guide from 2015/16 to 2017/2018.  

  The Quality Review from 2016-2017 had received all proficient ratings in the 1.1, 1.2 and 2.2 with area 1.2 

(teacher pedagogy and meeting all needs and creating meaningful work products) being an area focus.  

  College Readiness scores and Regents Completion rate over the past three years vs. target from 2014-2015, 
2016-2017 and 2016-2017. 9.6%(11%) ,11% (11.8%) , and 21%(13.8%) respectively for College Readiness and 
31.4% (38.1 %) , 36.7% (40%), 46.6% (43.2%) for Regents Completion rate. We did not meet the target for CCR 
or Regents completion rates in 2014-2015 and 2015-2016. We did meet it in 2016-2017 and want to continue 
with this trend.  

  Pass math by year 2- Actual vs. Target. Target is in parentheses. The data is from the past three school years; 

2014-2015, 2016-2017 and 2017-2018: 56% , 51% (57%), 53%(56%). We did not meet the target in the past two 
school years and want to meet it in 2017-2018 and continue to improve this number.  

 

 
Part 2 – Summative Vision for Rigorous Instruction 

What is your school’s instructional focus? What is your vision for promoting the instructional focus consistently across 
classrooms?   
Our Instructional Focus for the school year is: If teachers are continuously adjusting and differentiating Regents-aligned 
task by balancing assessment and proving actionable feedback, then students will be able to track their own successes 
and educational gaps, thus improving efficacy and literacy.  

Our vision for promoting the instructional focus consistently across classroom involves all staff using the same language 
and routines across classrooms. It also involves using the same elements of lesson plan design with all PDs tied into the 
IF. If the practices and routines are consistent across classroom, this will allow the students to know the expectations in 
all classroom and have the expectations constantly reinforced as they go from class to class. Some elements of the 
lesson plan and classroom routines that all teachers will do consistently are the following: 

  Write the Instructional Objective using the same language focusing on what students will learn and how 

students will learn the activity. The IO is written in the following format: Student will learn...by... 

  Teachers using a Framing of the Day to introduce the outline of the lesson to the students so they know what 

they are responsible for understanding and how they will gain that understanding (efficacy). The framing of the 
day involves the following elements: 

1.  What are we learning? (The FQ and the SWL statement of the IO) 
2.  How are we learning this? (The by statement of the IO) 
3.  Where is this leading and why are we doing this?- This could include the use of data to support why the 

students are learning this topic and will show them how it connects to future lessons 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          20 

 

4.  How are we being assessed? Students will understand what is being looked for during the lesson and feedback 

will be aligned to this during the lesson.  

  Use of verbal and written feedback that is specific, actionable, timely and aligned to the given assessment 

criteria.  

  Use of data from both formative and summative assessment to drive instruction. Teachers will use data from do 
nows, exit tickets and daily observations to drive their day to day instruction. Teachers will work in departments 
to analyze data from baseline exams, unit exams, midterms, and finals to spiral in concepts that need 
reinforcement and need to be scaffolded. 

  Datafolios used across all classroom-Teachers will work with their departments to create datafolios. Students 

will use these datafolios to track their progress on specific standards and concepts within each content. 
Students will then know their areas of growth and areas of focus and teachers will be able to use this data to 
provide the students with strategies to improve their understanding of the content. The content of the datafolio 
will be the same within each department and similar across the different content areas. All datafolios look to 
increase student efficacy and allow students to speak to their successes and gaps. Teacher feedback on these 
will help students make the necessary improvements.  

  Revision/edit days- All teachers will work on building in revision/edit days into their pacing calendars to allow 

students to use the targeted feedback and strategies they have been provided with to improve their work or to 
use on the next assignment they are given.  
  Common Language Protocols and Routines 
  Teachers will use both CCLS and NYS content standard based curriculum for all students. They will use data to 

help create scaffolds within the lesson to assure all students can be proficient in the standards and gain the 
necessary content information. A plan for the gradual removal of scaffolds will also be in place.  

  Regents aligned tasks- Teachers will use Regents aligned tasks within their lesson and will track the progress of 

these regents aligned tasks in their departments. They will also bring these tasks and the student work 
associated with the tasks to department meetings so the tasks and work can be analyzed and adjusted. All unit 
exams will be aligned to the Regents.  

  Homework- A consistent homework policy will be created and implemented within the grades to help reinforce 

literacy in the subject area and increase student efficacy. Teachers will use common strategies to monitor the 
completion of homework and use the data from the homework to drive instruction.  

Other actions that will be taken to help reinforce the instructional focus consistently across classrooms will occur at the 
cabinet level. The following actions will be done by the cabinet: 

  Aligning all feedback to the IF and writing feedback in the same format using the 4 sentence feedback model 

and common language of deltas and pluses. All feedback will have the IF written into it and will cite specific 
evidence for how the pluses were aligned to the IF and how the deltas with next steps will help ensure the IF is 
being met.  

  Creation of Professional development will be data based on the needs of the staff and aligned to meeting the 

expectations outlined in the IF 

  Walkthroughs- after PDs are executed walkthroughs with checklists aligned to the PDs and IFs will be used to 

look for implementation of the learning and will be used to offer actionable, specific feedback to help the 
teachers improve their practice and ensure they are meeting the IF in their classroom.  

  Revamped grading policy- The grading policy will be reviewed as a cabinet and will go through an appropriate 
protocol to see how it is supporting the IF and where adjustments need to be made. it will be presented to the 
staff for feedback and then finalized. It will be used consistently by the whole school.  

  Unit plan and pacing calendar feedback- A checklist for expectations of what should be included in the unit plan 

will be developed by the cabinet and provided to the teachers. This checklist will include all the elements from 
the IF. Teachers will receive the feedback so they can adjust their work to ensure it is aligned with the IF.  

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          21 

 

Role of CBO: To ccoordinate after school tutoring, Saturday school, SAT tutoring, conduct outreach for failing students, 
hire four teacher assistants (T.A's) to support in the classroom, and advertisements around the school for academic 
opportunities along with rewarding/ celebrating students who are doing well with trip incentives.  

 

 

How will you implement a standards-aligned curricula that meets the needs of your diverse learners, including ELLs 
and SWDs? 
In order to ensure a standards-aligned curricula is being implemented and meeting the needs of our diverse population 
including ELLs and SWDs our school will use and modify specific curriculums that are known to be aligned to the 
standards as a starting point. ELA will use the EngageNY and parts of the New Visions curriculum, Social Studies will be 
using the New Visions curriculum and the Debating US History curriculum, Math will be using the EngageNY curriculum, 
emathinstruction and deltamath, science will be using the New Visions curriculum and ENL will be using the NYC 
provided curriculum.  

To ensure that a standards aligned curriculum is being implemented lesson plans and unit plans are looked at and 
feedback is provided in relation to the standards. One of the look fors that occurs during observations is that the lesson 
is fully aligned and the unit supports the appropriate standards. This means that the correct standards are being 
addressed and the EQ, FQ, IO and activities all are supporting the understanding of the given standard. Feedback is 
given around this concept.  

Teachers also use data to help make sure they are implementing the needs of their diverse learners. To help with the 
pacing of their units and lessons teachers exam the frequency and weight of the content specific standards and their 
appearance on the EOY exams. This helps them to design their pacing calendars and unit plans to know what standards 
to spend a longer time on and create a deeper understanding around. In order to meet the needs ot the ELLs and SWDs 
in the classroom various forms of data are looked at and used to modify the curriculum and drive the instruction. 
Previous item analysis and baseline data of various groups of students are used at the end of the 2017-2018 school year 
and beginning of the 2018-2019 school year to help look at areas in the curriculum that will need to be scaffolded. IEPs 
and NYSELAT scores are used to help accommodate the needs to the students in the class. This data is used to help 
make groups to support all learners, and to design lessons and units that will address the needs of all students in the 
classroom. Common areas of struggle across subgroups are also identified to target areas of needs in the discipline. 
Data is also used to support the advanced learners to ensure they are being challenged in the class and are cognitively 
engaged throughout the lesson. The staff received various trainings on access for all and differentiation during the 
2017-2018 Monday PD series to help them differentiate their curriculum to meet their needs. Teachers also receive TAs 
in their classroom that speak the languages of the students represented in the class to help those students with the 
learning. ICT teachers and ENL teachers are strategically programmed to support the needs of these students in the 
classroom. The paraprofessional also assist with co-teaching and supporting the students in the classroom by working 
with small groups of students who have similar needs.  
 

 

What is your vision for ensuring that all student have access to rigorous coursework that moves them towards career 
and college readiness? How will you support the personal and academic skills, habits, and behaviors needed for 
students to be career and college ready? 
In order to make sure our students are prepared for the world once they leave Cypress Hills Collegiate Preparatory High 
School we must ensure that the coursework is rigorous enough to have them career and college ready. To do so we 
must make sure the courses are aligned with the standards and meeting the rigor demanded by these standards. 
Teachers will work within their department teams to align the work and the rubrics to the standards to ensure students 
are getting assignments that meet the rigorous requirements of the standard and are receiving feedback aligned to 
those standards so they can make improvements. We will offer the following classes that end in a Regents exam. 
Teachers will also work with their departments and in PDs to ensure that the 21st century skills are being spiraled into 
their curriculum. All students in the class are expected to take the Regents as long as they meet the seat time 
requirements (lab hours): 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          22 

 

  All Maths- Algebra, Geometry, Algebra II 
  ELA 
 
 
 

Social Studies- Global and US History 
Science- Living Environment, Earth Science and Chemistry 
LOTE-Spanish and other Languages requested by students 

Additional classes that will help move students towards career and college readiness: 

  AP Human Geography- This class will be offered in 9th grade to help students learn the necessary skills and work 

habits they need to be successful in high school while blending the 9th grade curricula 

  Calculus- This class will help students learn how to think logically and abstractly to use enduring understandings 

to solve problems 

  AP Environmental Science- This class will combine the knowledge of the previous sciences students have used 

and allow them to apply it to the world they live in 

  AP English Language and AP English Literature- These AP English classes will have students apply the skills they 

learned in their previous English classes to help them master the English Language and get a deeper 
understanding of literature 

  AP Spanish Language and Composition- This class will challenge students to apply the fundamentals of the 

Spanish Language to real world tasks and hone their ability to commute in a language other than English 

  AP US History- This class will cause students to take a deeper dive into US History looking at how different 

 

 

events in history had a large impact on the current country today 
Financial Literacy- This class will help prepare students for the financial expectations they will face in the world 
once they graduate high school 
IB classes- In the 2019-2020 school year IB classes will be integrated into the curriculum as two year classes that 
will hone students' 21st century skills asking them to think critically, demanding higher level thinking.  

Beside scaffolding the work within the classroom to help the students reach proficiency on the standards, additional 
classes will be offered to help the students who need the extra support. Some of the additional classes that will take 
place to help the students with these skills, habits and behaviors are: 

  CUNY LINCT ELA- This class will help seniors who have not yet achieve college and career readiness on ELA. 

Students will also be working on preparing for the CUNY placement exam in this class.  

  Review Classes- These classes will be driven by data to support the students in areas that they still need in order 

to be considered proficient in the standards in a given subject area.  

  Research Skills class- This will be offered to 9th graders to help them learn the skills necessary in order to write 

a successful research paper 

  College Bridge- In the fall the seniors will take a college bridge class to help prepare them for college and the 

junior will take this course in the spring . 

  Additional ELT and AIS classes will be created and added into the program based on the data 

The New Visions student sorter will be used to help determine the need for additional classes to support the students. 
Overall item analysis will also be used to target large areas of needs for all while individual item analysis will be used 
within the classroom to target specific areas of need for individual students.  

While offering all of these courses with the rigorous demands we must make sure to support both their personal and 
academic skills, habits and behaviors to help them be college and career ready. While the above classes already explain 
some ways that will ensure these skills and habits are supported, these are the additional ways we plan on supporting 
them to be college and career ready: 

  AP support- Pep Rally, AP Summer Enrichment, AP bootcamp, Saturday Study Sessions 
  Castle Learning- Online program to help students prepare for Regents exams 
 

Saturday School- Smaller group instruction to help students struggling in a particular subject area or to help 
them prepare for exams (Regents, AP) 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          23 

  Peer leaders- Will support Freshmen with the social, emotional and academic habits they need to develop in 

order to be successful in high school 

  Cohort luncheons with mentors- One on One mentoring for "on the cusp" seniors and juniors 
 
  Town halls- Will occur once a month and address the social and academic behaviors to help students be 

Student Support Center- The SSC will hold workshops and in class tutorials 

successful with the rigorous demands of their classes 

 

 

 

How do you envision embedding the elements of culturally responsive instruction and how will you know that 
implementation is successful? 
The element of culturally responsive instruction according to the ASCD include relationships, curriculum and delivery. In 
order to be culturally responsive to relationships we as educators must understand how our students learn, learn about 
their individual cultures and develop connections with the students. Culturally responsive curriculum involves teaching 
in a way that is relatable and accessible to all students in a student centered manner. Culturally responsive delivery 
requires creating a dialogue where all students are involved and receiving frequent feedback along with being asked 
questions to further their learning.  

The elements of culturally responsive education will be embedded into the instruction in the following way: 

  Monthly reading circles will be established on relevant topics and culturally relevant topics  
  Teachers will examine curriculum through tuning protocols and find ways to embed relatable content into their 

curriculum rewriting problems/tasks.  

  ENL teachers will share the languages spoken by the students and the areas that the students come from so 

teachers can incorporate relevant materials into their curriculum 

  Cultural days 
  Celebrations will take into consideration the different cultures and respond with a culturally appropriate menu 

so all students can participate 

 

 

What is your vision for the use of a comprehensive assessment strategy (diagnostic, formative, benchmark, and 
summative) to drive curricular, instructional, and organizational decisions that impact student outcomes? 
All of our decisions are based on data. Our comprehensive assessment strategy provides us with much of the data that 
we used to drive curricular, instruction and organizational decision that ultimately impact student outcomes. At the 
beginning of the year we create a clear assessment calendar that outlines the use of baselines, midterms, and finals, all 
with deadlines for item analysis and implementation of lessons based on that data analysis at both the department level 
and the individual level. All teachers receive a data overview as a department and go through a data protocol to help 
them know areas they need to focus on for the upcoming school year. They also receive the item skills analysis of the 
Regents from June 2018 for their students. After teachers give the baseline exam, they do an individual data analysis 
and then a department data analysis. They use this to spiral in topics to their instruction and describe next steps they 
are going to take. Dates are on the calendar for teachers to provide evidence of this implementation and to reflect on 
the results. The same process occurs after the midterms and mock Regents. Teachers also use the Data Wise process 
within their departments. The whole school has the same area of focus and each department uses the Data Wise 
process to develop a Learning Centered Problem and a Problem of Practice. Formative assessment are implemented 
and tracked based on a select group of inquiry students who represent the different subgroups of the school 

Teachers also create and submit an individual assessment calendar. At the end of every unit teachers are expected to 
perform a data analysis and use that data to drive future instruction. Students track their progress from unit to unit 
using the datafolios. Teachers will analyze the patterns and trends they notice and adjust their curriculum accordingly.  
 

 

How do you envision differentiating teacher professional learning opportunities to support instructional foci, meet 
students’ unique needs and advance culturally responsive education in your school? 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          24 

 

Professional development will be based on need and data. The school will use the TEQ PD series to assign various PD to 
teachers based on individual data such as observation results, walk through data, and cabinet inquiry. PD will also be 
given within departments based on department data and students needs. A series of PDs will be given that target the 
instructional focus on Monday afternoons. If there are different levels of learners for the particular topic within the 
Monday PD, the groups will be split accordingly and the PD will be presented to the groups at different levels. For 
example, our data from Danielson 3D will be used to determine which teachers are ready to have PD to help them move 
onto student centered feedback practices which is part of our instructional focus versus which teachers need to work on 
general feedback practices.  

In order to advance culturally responsive education professional development will take place both in department 
meetings and whole staff PDs.  

 
 

 
Part 3 – Annual Goal 

Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this 
element of the Framework for Great Schools – Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be consistent with the 
expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – 
Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact 
meeting at least one of your Rise Benchmarks. 
By June 2019, all teachers will develop rigorous common core aligned content resulting in an increase in the school's 
College Readiness Index from 44% to 48%, which is 20.8 percentage points higher than the RISE benchmark. 

 

 

Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Rigorous Instruction Annual Goal:   Which school 
benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Rigorous Instruction Annual Goal? 

College Readiness Index 

College and Career Preparatory Course Index  

Regents Completion Rate 

N/A 

  

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          25 

 
Part 4 – Action Plan 

Key Initiatives: 
Concisely indicate the 
key initiatives (up to 
five) that your school 
will implement to 
achieve the identified 
goal for this 
Framework for Great 
Schools element. 

Target 
Group(s) 
Who will be 
targeted? 

Which 
Benchmark(s) 
indicated above 
does this 
initiative target? 

Time line 
What is the 
start and end 
date? 

Start date is 
July 1, 2018 
with the 
incoming 
freshmen and 
is ongoing 

College and Career 
Readiness Classes 

All Students 
starting in 9th 
grade 

College and 
Readiness Index 

ELA 75+ and Math 
(Algebra/Geometry) 
70+ Math (Algebra II) 
65+ Regents, plus math 
coursework.  

4 years of math and 
science 

 

ELA teachers will 
vertically plan their 
questions and tasks to 
build knowledge by 
guiding students to dive 
deeper into the texts 
and graphics (Core 
Action 2. D). Students 
will do the majority of 
the work: 
Speaking/listening, 
reading, and or writing 
from teacher posed 
questions and tasks 
that provide students 
with the opportunity to 
productively struggle 
and persevere through 
the difficulty (Core 
Action 3.A & B).  

 

Math lessons 
intentionally target 
mathematical rigor of 
conceptual 

Key Personnel 
Who is responsible 
for implementing and 
overseeing the 
activity/strategy? 
(include school, 
educational 
consultants and/or 
CBO staff) 

How will you 
assess the interim 
progress of the 
initiative?(ex. 
decrease in 
serious incidents, 
increase in 
students 
participating Big 
Sibs program) 

 

 

Guidance- Use the 
New Visions sorter to 
see which students 
have not achieved 
college and career 
readiness and 
program them 
accordingly over the 
summer and for the 
school year 

 

Numbers for each 
cohort for college 
and career 
readiness will be 
calculated as of 
June 2018 based 
on Regents results 
by cohort. 
Numbers will be 
compared again in 
January after 
Regents results.  

 

 

 

 

Math and ELA 
teachers- Must be 
made aware of 
students who still 
need college and 
career readiness and 
be strategically 
assigned to teach 
those classes. This will 
be reviewed during 
department meetings.  

 

LINCT class- A senior 
ELA class based on the 
CUNY curriculum will 
be used to target 
seniors who have not 
yet achieved College 
and Career readiness. 
They will all take the 
ELA regents in January 
and the CUNY 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          26 

 

understanding, 
procedural skills and 
fluency, and application 
(Core Action 1. C). 

 

Rigorous Courses 

 

IB Preparation 

 

Advanced Placement 
(AP) Courses 

 

Students in 
advanced 
courses 

College and 
Career 
Preparatory 
Course Index 

June 2018-June 
2019 

placement test 
together.  

 

CBO- Host cohort 
luncheons for seniors 
and their mentors to 
check on the progress 
of achieving college 
and career readiness. 
They will also host 
town halls to help 
inform students of the 
importance of college 
an career readiness.  

Guidance- Will use 
the survey results 
from the students, 
teachers' 
recommendations 
and data to program 
the students for the 
appropriate classes 

 

Administration- 

 

IB teachers- 

 

 

AP teachers- Will 
attend training over 
the summer and 
during the year to 
prepare their classes 

 

Programmer- Ensure 
that the program 
allows for pre-AP/IB 
classes and AP classes 
to be offered. 

 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          27 

 

CBO- Will help cover 
the cost of AP 
celebration and Ap 
Bootcamp 

 

 

 

 

* This belongs in last 
column but I can't 
type in there- 

 

 

Formative and Mock 
Exam results will be 
used to track the 
progress of the AP 
students and see how 
close they are to 
getting a 3 

 

IB review will occur in 
the fall to see if the 
school will be ready to 
start the IB program 
in September of 2019 

Department Data Wise 
Inquiry 

All teachers 

Regents 
Completion Rate 

September 
2018-June 2019 

Administrative 
cabinet team 

 

 

College and 
Career Readiness 
Index 

Department Team 
Leaders 

Data Wise Inquiry 
steps are followed 
and shared as a 
school 

 

Teachers 

 

 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          28 

 

Cohort U and Cohort V 
Mentors 

Off track 
seniors 

Regents 
Completion Rate 

September 
2018-June 2019 

Graduation Rate (local 
diploma +) 

 

 

Graduation rate 
as of September 
will be calculated 
based on Regents 
completed and 
credits earned. It 
will be calculated 
again in January 
after the Regents 
exams and credits 
are earned for the 
first semester.  

 

 

 

Senior Mentors- Any 
member of the school 
staff can be a cohort 
mentor. They will 
check in weekly with 
their senior and make 
sure they are doing 
what they need to do 
in order to achieve 
their goal.  

 

CBO- will host 
workshops and cohort 
lunches for the 
seniors who have 
mentors. 

 

  
 
4b – Parent and Family Engagement 

How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York 
State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible 
for implementation and oversight. 
September 2018- Welcome back school night. This is run by the CBO and the school. During this time parents will be 
introduced to the classes their students are taking and the standards their child is expected to work towards. A data 
unpacking session will be held at this time.  

Parent Teacher Conferences- November and March. These will be run by the school to explain how the student is 
doing in classes and offer various resources for the parent to support their child in their classes.  

SSC Nights- 

IB Information Session- This will be held in the Spring of 2018 after the IB review of the school to inform 
parents/guardians of students who will be in IB classes the following year of the expectations and coursework. This 
will be lead by administration and guidance.  

ENL and Newcomers night- 

Parent News Letter- This will be sent out once a month to inform the families of what is occurring in the school along 
with things they can do at home to help their child with their classes. Each month will highlight a different 
resource/study tip for the families. The parent coordinate will write the news letter and get the information from the 
teachers.  

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          29 

 

Parent/Guardian classes- Monthly parent/guardian classes will be held by the PA to help parents see how they can 
utilize various resources available to them to support their child like pupilpath, Remind, Castle learning, etc. 
 

 
Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment 

Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including 
human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, lead CBO’s community school budget, FSC Supports, 
etc. 
TAs 

CBO- Ap Celebration, Saturday School. After school, cohort luncheons 

ELT teachers 

Ivy Key 

Castle Learning 

AP Training, addition of 2 new AP classes 

IB Training 

Lexia 

Skedula 

TEQ PD and support 

Metamorphosis 

LINCT - ELA 

Debating US History 

CUNY Technology Intern 

 
Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 

X 

Tax Levy 

X 

Title I 
SWP 

 

Title I 
1003(a) 

 

Title III 

 

 

Title I TA 

PTA 

Funded 

 

 

P/F Set-
aside 

SIG 
Grant 

X 

 

21st Century 

 

C4E 

School 

Achievement 

X 

Other 

Funding 

 
Part 6 – Progress Monitoring  

Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement 
planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 
Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and 
Time-bound. 
By February 2019, 40% of seniors will have college readiness scores on their math and ELA Regents to meet the goal 
of 48% by June 2019. 

 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          30 

 

 

Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 
The Regents exams and scores as of January 2019.  

 

Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action 
plan, if applicable. 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          31 

 

Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans 

 
Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and 
school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 
5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) 

Part 1 – Needs Assessment   

Part 1a.  Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice 
Tenet 5 Statement of Practice 
Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one.  Place an “X” in the 
appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 
5.2  The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and 
sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. (aligned to 
Rise Key 4) 

5.3  The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional 

developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning 
experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 
(aligned to Rise Key 4) 

5.4  All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance 

of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and 
fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health 
supports tied to the school’s vision. (aligned to Rise Key 5) 

5.5  The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish 

structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional 
developmental health needs. (aligned to Rise Key 5) 

Part 1b.  Needs/Areas of Focus: 

SOP(s) 

Addressed 

X 

 

 

 

 

1.  Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs 

selected above. 

2.  Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs 

selected above. 
Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 

3. 
4.  What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? 
5.  What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, 

Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? 

1.) School's Strengths 

  Department-wide use of Data Wise to analyze needs of students and develop action plans to address these 

needs in the classroom 

  Cycles of assessment with time for teachers to analyze summative assessment data and adjust curriculum 
  Creating common planning time for teachers to work together towards common goals 

2.) School's needs 

  Uniform datafolios across departments to improve student tracking of and ownership of learning 
  Creating regents aligned tasks with removal of scaffolds and graded aligned to the EOY assessments 
  Working on scaffolding and differentiation creating access for all and gradual removal of scaffolds 

3.) Priority needs to be addressed: 

  Rigorous instruction aligned to the standards meeting the needs of all students leading to an increased Regents 

completion rate 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          32 

 

  Data driven unit plans with constant cycles of feedback to target improvement in all subject areas especially 

math by year 2 passing rate 

  Targeted student and teacher tracking of student performance leading to increased student ownership and 

 
 

efficacy 
Students creating meaningful work products across all classrooms (1.2 from QR) 
Introduction and understanding of the changes to the standards from CCLS to Next Generation to ensure 
standard aligned curriculum  

4.) Data trends and sources analyzed 

  Cabinet level walk-troughs to gather data on student data tracking and reflection revealed a range of how 

teachers organized this in the classroom. 

  Rolling Agendas from department meetings and teachers' individual data trackers and summaries  
 

Framework Element scores and survey element scores over the past three years in rigorous instruction have 
seen an upwards trend. Rigorous instruction went from a 3.51 to a 3.57 to a 3.61 respectfully on the Framework 
element score and from a 2.95 to a 3.76 to a 3.93 respectfully on the Survey Element Score in the school quality 
guide from 2015/16 to 2017/2018.  

  The Quality Review from 2016-2017 had received all proficient ratings in the 1.1, 1.2 and 2.2 with area 1.2 

(teacher pedagogy and meeting all needs and creating meaningful work products) being an area focus.  

 

 
Part 2 – Summative Vision for Supportive Environment 

What is your vision for a supportive school environment? How will you, in partnership with each CBO and families, 
enact your vision? 
Overarching Vision for Supportive Environment at CHCP: 

CHCP is a community school built around the belief that children learn best when they are in a safe and supportive 
environment that takes care of their social, emotional and academic needs. When children feel supported both socially 
and emotionally it allows them to take academic risks and engaged in productive struggle leading to an increased 
understanding of the academic content at hand, student ownership of their learning and most importantly, increased 
student efficacy. Students will be guided by the school's core values; G.R.I.T (Growth, Responsibility, Integrity and 
Thoughtful communication) and will have a voice in the school. Furthermore, students will take the lead in establishing 
the school culture and tone by running town halls, participating and leading PDs, acting as mentors for underclassmen 
and acting as teaching assistants (T.A.s) in the classrooms. The CBO will work with the school on arranging and running 
the town halls where the school's core values will be reinforced to the students. The CBO will also create events and 
trips to celebrate students who have achieved established criteria such as improved attendance, a designated percent 
attendance, academic excellence, etc. The CBO will also hold school-wide events to celebrate the students inviting the 
families to celebrate the successes. Informative nights for parents and guardians will also be sponsored by the CBO to 
help involve families to enact the school's vision.  

Social-Emotional Support 

  The SPARK Program combines substance abuse prevention and intervention with supportive counseling and 

positive peer influence. It is a place where adolescents are empowered to clarify their values and learn problem-
solving strategies in a confidential and voluntary setting. SPARK was initially created in 1971 as a substance 
abuse program. Both group and individual counseling are provided for students dealing with issues such as 
substance abuse, sexuality, gambling, death/bereavement, self-esteem, relationships, truancy/attendance, 
family problems, depression, behavioral issues, and gang involvement. Specific curriculum being used by SPARK 
this year are: Life Skills Transitions, Sport, Refuse Remove Reason, Voices, and Safe Dates.  

  Air Force Junior Reserve Officer Training Corps - The mission of the AFJROTC program is to develop citizens of 

character dedicated to serving their nation and community. The goals of the program are to instill within 
students the values of citizenship, the need for service to the United States, the development of personal 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          33 

 

responsibility, and encourage a sense of accomplishment. Additional AFJROTC objectives are to educate and 
train high school cadets in citizenship; promote community service; instill responsibility, character and self-
discipline; and provide instruction in air and space fundamentals. 

  The goal of the Student Success Center (SSC - CBO-based) is to provide school-level services that are based on 

best practices and are integrated to ensure that students can readily access the range of academic and 
social/emotional supports that they need to be successful in high school. The SSC’s additional programs like the 
Early Awareness College Program, individualized college counseling, and the college persistence program for 
alumni help to build a sense of community and support for students and families that are navigating education 
beyond high school. 

  The Northwell Health-LIJ Health System strives to improve the health of the communities it serves and is 

committed to providing the highest quality clinical care; educating the current and future generations of health 
care professionals; searching for new advances in medicine through the conduct of bio-medical research; 
promoting health education; and caring for the entire community regardless of the ability to pay. They strive to 
be a national health care leader and are committed to excellence, compassion and improving the health of the 
community.  

  Partnership with Children  
  NYC Youth Leadership Council 
  Morningside for Social Justice 
  Operation Respect 
  Peer Leaders 
  Real Men Curriculum 
  Alive at 25 

Physical and mental health supports 

Attendance Interventions 

In order for the students to achieve optimal success; their attendance needs to be at least 90%, and overall attendance 
needs to increase. This will improve by initially ensuring that we have a working contact number, appropriate address 
and an email address for every single student's parents/guardians; the CBO will be the primary means of acquiring this 
information when phone numbers and/or addresses from the ATS database are no longer in use or outdated. If the 
teacher cannot get in contact with the family, the CBO will work on establishing contact. Furthermore, the CBO, in 
conjunction with the attendance team and mental health provider, will work on ensuring that students who are LTAs are 
located and provided with schools that meet their individual needs. The CBO will identify students from every cohort 
and look at the services being provided to each one. Once this occurs, this will allow the CBO to see what services the 
student needs and is not getting to help support his/her success.  

The attendance data will be made known to all constituents by the attendance team. It will be consistently posted 
throughout the school, placed on teacher-team agendas and shared weekly in the announcements. Student attendance 
tracking posters will be updated monthly so that students can see their growth (or decline). Town halls will occur every 
month where attendance data will be shared and celebrated with the students. Daily morning announcements will 
share any attendance related incentives and or trips as well as "special events," (to maintain attendance on notoriously 
low attendance days). Grade retreats will be planned for students to make connections with their peers and the faculty 
at the start of the year. Incentive trips for reaching attendance goals will occur each semester and provide students with 
the opportunity to choose what trip they want to attend. Any class trip rosters must be submitted to the attendance 
team; students without a 90% attendance rate will not be eligible to go; however, if he or she shows attendance 
improvement over a period of time, they will be recognized for their achievement and considered for the next trip. An 
end-of-year Six Flags Great Adventure trip will be planned for students who achieve a 90%-or-above attendance rate for 
the entire year.  

Furthermore, the attendance team will work on tracking data in short cycles leading to early interventions before 
students disconnect from school by closely measuring and looking for trends in attendance data. Students who were in 
the 70-92% range in the 2017-2018 school year will have an individualized attendance plan created prior to the 2018-

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          34 

 

2019 school year to increase their attendance. Students who show a decline from one month to the next will be 
targeted for interventions as well. The attendance team will strategically hold special school-wide events on days that 
previous year's data shows low student turnout. Student's Pupil Path accounts will be utilized to send mass e-mail 
reminders for attendance incentives, trips and school-wide mock exams. Once students return after extended absences, 
teachers will be alerted to welcome students into class, give them individualized support and a manageable amount of 
work to make-up. Faculty will volunteer to be attendance mentors to support the students in coming to school everyday 
and ensure that they are academically on-track. All students will receive an automated wake-up phone call, a call to 
their parents if they aren't in school by 10:30 am and a call home at 7:00 pm if they didn't come to school. A tiered 
approach will be used to target students through the year and provide them with interventions and services to assist 
them in improving their attendance.  

Positive Behavioral Intervention Support (PBIS) 

The social-emotional framework the school will adopt is PBIS. This will be supported through the core values of G.R.I.T., 
Peer Group Leaders (PGL) and General Student Organization (GSO). Rubrics regarding appropriate examples of the core 
values will be posted in different spaces of the school and will be the first topic for September Town Hall, along with the 
Student Handbook. The rubrics will be referenced during class when students are exemplifying G.R.I.T. or not practicing 
the core values. Social-emotional skills will be promoted through specific lessons in class and reinforced with incentive 
trips for students following those values. Based on the given data, adjustments to lessons, PDs and curricula will be 
made. All staff will receive professional development around the social-emotional framework and support through the 
mental health provider, guidance, and the restorative justice committee.  

Besides using the G.R.I.T. framework to cover the social-emotional skills and needs of the students, the school will be 
proactive by using a large amount of non-mandated counseling. The mental health provider, Partnership with Children, 
will provide the following types of counseling to students: a.) Small group non-mandated; b.) Whole group non-
mandated; c.) Individual non-mandated. We will also use restorative justice practices along with student-led peer 
mediation. Students will be trained in peer mediation and will utilize those skills to help de-escalate conflicts among 
peers. CHCP will also utilize the school environment survey to measure social-emotional development and to meet the 
needs of students. 

Student Voice and Leadership (include peer group leaders, involvement in PD, cabinet, and leading PD, circles) 

 

Student voice and leadership will be supported in various ways. Students were given two surveys to support 
their academic preferences and wants. They were asked to fill out a google form based on the classes they want 
to take and would like to be offered next year. Students also were given a technology survey to see the way 
students prefer to use technology in the classroom. This will help drive the use of technology in the classroom. 
Students also will be able to participate in an after-school leadership group facilitated by F.O.T. and the Student 
Engagement Specialist. In this group, students can start initiatives, plan the town halls, be trained in facilitating 
restorative circles and facilitate restorative circles in town hall.  

  Peer leaders is an evidence-based peer-to-peer mentoring program that empowers older students to serve as 
school leaders as well as mentors for younger students. Peer Leaders includes a credit-bearing peer leadership 
course for selected 11th grade and 12th grade students who are trained to conduct weekly circles with the 
Freshmen to provide them with the social and emotional support necessary to be successful in high school. The 
peer leaders have an assigned group of freshmen (6-8 students each) they mentor throughout the year. They 
also continue to mentor the freshmen they had from the previous year. The peer leaders also lead a series of 
professional development for the teachers around student ownership.  
Students will participate side by side with the teachers during in school professional developments, grade team 
and department team meetings, cabinet meetings and SLTs. This will allow the student perspective to be 
considered when designing student learning activities.  

 

  Another way that student voice will be heard is through the use of town halls. The town halls will be student-run 

 

and allow students to voice issues and respond to issues along with solutions.  
Student Voice Collaborative is a group of students that engages other students in school improvement. It 
involves developing student leadership, building a meaningful youth/adult planning structure, and sustaining 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          35 

ongoing inquiry, action and organization. The bulk of the work happens in the building, requires a high level of 
school commitment and offers a high level of support. The Brooklyn North Field Support Center will conduct 
monthly visits and provide coaching for students and staff. 

  The classrooms will be student-centered. Student collaboration will lead to independent thinking and Socratic-
style learning where students will feel comfortable stating their opinions and supporting them with evidence.  

 

 

 

Describe your plan to implement a culture of trust and high expectations for teachers, students, families and 
community partners. 
Coherence, transparency and individualization all lead to a culture of trust. Teachers will have the opportunity to 
participate in various common planning/academic teams both before and after-school to cultivate relationships and 
improve practice. Teachers will be recognized for their hard work and celebrated for the extra things that they do. One 
teacher will be selected as a Peer Collaborative Teacher to support the new teachers and be a model for other teachers. 
All school-based decisions will align to the instructional focus and the school's goals. Communication will be strengthen 
to hear all voices and empower the families to be more involved in academics. Relationship building and a holistic 
wellness approach will be adopted through the use of mindfulness practices.  

 

 
 

Who are your CBO partners? How will each CBO sustain and support the social-emotional and academic growth of 
your students? 

Attendance improvement, link to community resources, student and family engagement, 
social/emotional counseling  

CBO Focus 

Attendance Improvement, social/emotional counseling 

CBO Partner 

Cypress Hills Local 
Development 
Corporation 

Partnership with 
Children 

  

 

How will you, in partnership with your CBO, create a supportive and engaging environment for your students’ 
families? 
The CBO and the school will work closely together to create structures and events that lead to an environment where all 
students and families feel engaged and supported.  The CBO has already began to meet with the administrative team at 
the end of the 2017-2018 school year to align the budget to the school's needs for the 2018-2019 school year and 
develop a calendar of events, including town halls and Cohort T mentor luncheons. The CBO will continue to meet with 
the staff and administration throughout the year to plan, develop and implement events and strategies that will create 
a supportive environment for the students' and families. Some of the events the CBO will manage are listed below: 

The CBO will: 

  Coordinate and run monthly town halls utilizing the Restorative Circles model. 
  Convene quarterly lunches for all staff providing counseling to CHCP students to ensure students are connected 

to the right interventions and to share best practices as well as serve as a space for collaboration.  

  Hold monthly Cohort T lunches to monitor and track seniors towards reaching their graduation requirements 
  Ensure that all CBO staff members, including the CS Director, will have a caseload of 8-10 students to support 

their personal and academic goals through weekly check-ins and attendance monitoring.  

  Ensure students receive attendance profiles regularly at town halls to create visible and accountable attendance 

monitoring systems.  

  Host various events for families such as community school nights, awards ceremonies, etc. to engage families 

and students 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          36 

  Continue to monitor attendance percentages and share data with the school community by updating 

attendance boards by the 28th of each month.  

  Plan and support attendance incentive trips for students who reach their attendance goals as the budget allows. 
  Plan and support student retreats by grade to build trusting relationships among students and with teachers.  
  Provide opportunities for staff and student development, including connection to training opportunities and 

resource sharing from community partners. 

  Create a safe space where staff and students feel welcomed and feel comfortable sharing their feedback. 
  Have an open door policy. 
  Provide career counseling and development through a spring SYEP enrollment push and resume workshops.  
 

Support and help to facilitate the operation of the General Student Organization (G.S.O) 

 

 

 

What essential questions, or key themes, will be explored by all staff and students that acknowledge and celebrate the 
culture and heritage of the student body? 
CHCP will have a calendar filled with events that provide the student body and their families with multiple ways to be 
engaged. Some of the themes for the school year are: being physically fit, healthy eating, career exploration, respect for 
all, immigration, Black history, Hispanic history, mental health awareness, and health care. Talent shows are an 
opportunity for students to perform in a way that expresses their heritage.  

 

 

What evidence will you use to gauge the impact of your plan to create a positive school environment? 
An increase in attendance will demonstrate that students and families feel an increase in support and are mentally able 
to commit to the academic rigor. The school survey will also be a source of feedback.  

 

 
 
Part 3 – Annual Goal 

Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this 
element of the Framework for Great Schools – Supportive Environment. Your goal must be consistent with the 
expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – 
Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact 
meeting at least one of your Rise Benchmarks. 
By June 2019, our school will implement school-wide restorative practices resulting in an increase in our Supportive 
Environment by 0.39 percentage points, from our current 3.73 to 4.51. 

 

 

Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Supportive Environment Annual Goal:    
Which school benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Supportive Environment Annual Goal? 

Framework: Supportive Environment 

Student Attendance 

Regents Completion Rate 

Progress Toward Graduation-Years 2 and 3 

  

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          37 

 
Part 4 – Action Plan 

Key Initiatives: Concisely 
indicate the key 
initiatives (up to five) 
that your school will 
implement to achieve 
the identified goal for 
this Framework for 
Great Schools element. 

Restorative Justice - a 
whole school Restorative 
Practice Project (RPP) 
through Morningside 
Center for Teaching 
Social Responsibility 

 

- Professional 
development 

- Coaching 

- Leadership support 

 

Operation Respect - 
inspiring music, SEL 
curricula, multicultural 
videos and highly-
regarded professional 
training will provide 
teachers and 
paraprofessionals with 
the tools they need to 
help children express 
their feelings 
constructively, resolve 
conflict peacefully, 
celebrate diversity, and 
engage with each other 
in a spirit of caring, 
compassion and 
cooperation. 

 

Target 
Group(s) 
Who will 
be 
targeted? 

Which Benchmark(s) 
indicated above does 
this initiative target? 

Timeline 
What is the 
start and 
end date? 

All 
students 

Framework: 
Supportive 
Environment 

September 
2018 - June 
2020 

 

Student Attendance 

 

Progress Toward 
Graduation - Years 2 
and 3 

Key Personnel 
Who is responsible for 
implementing and 
overseeing the 
activity/strategy? 
(include school, 
educational consultants 
and/or CBO staff) 

Administration 

 

CHLDC 

 

Morningside Center for 
Teaching Social 
Responsibility 

How will you 
assess the 
interim progress 
of the 
initiative?(ex. 
decrease in 
serious 
incidents, 
increase in 
students 
participating Big 
Sibs program) 

Implementation 
of the new 
program 

 

Student interest 

 

Decrease in high 
levels incidents 

Teachers 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Framework: 
Supportive 
Environment 

 

Student Attendance 

September 
2018 - June 
2019 

Administration 

 

 

 

Operation Respect 
personnel  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Less teacher 
removals 

 

increase in 
attendance for 
teachers and 
students 

 

less teacher to 
dean referrals 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          38 

 

Social/Emotional 
Curriculum 

 

- Alive at 25 

- Real Men Curriculum 

- SAPIS curricula 

- CAPP 

 

 

 

 

Framework: 
Supportive 
Environment 

 

Student Attendance 

 

Progress Toward 
Graduation - Years 2 
and 3 

 

Regents Completion 
Rate 

 

September 
2018 - June 
2019 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Students 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Administration 

 

CBO - CHLDC 

 

SAPIS Counselor 

 

various ways for 
students to 
express 
themselves 

 

Increase in 
attendance in 
classes and in 
groups 

Paraprofessionals 

 

Guidance Counselors  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

RTI Tiered Approach 

All 
Students 

Framework: 
Supportive 
Environment 

September 
2018 - June 
2019 

 

Administration 

 

CBO - CHLDC 

Student Attendance 

 

Increase in 
attendance 

 

Decrease in 
referrals to dean 

 

Paraprofessionals 

 

 

Guidance Counselors  

Decrease in 
teacher 
removals 

Progress Toward 
Graduation - Years 2 
and 3 

 

Regents Completion 
Rate 

  
 
4b – Parent and Family Engagement 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          39 

 

How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to 
support  the  whole  child?  Include  the  timeline  and  identify  key  personnel  and  stakeholders  responsible  for 
implementation and oversight. 
Parent Coordinator and guidance counselors will be the direct lines of communication with families. Monthly 
newsletters will have a section for SEL and students will be celebrated in the issues.  
 

 
Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment 

Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including 
human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, lead CBO’s community school budget, FSC Supports, 
etc. 
Partnership with Children 

GRIT Cart to reward students for living the school's core values 

Resources for the monthly newsletter 

Curriculum 

Paraprofessional per-session 

Operation Respect 

Faculty Retreat 

 

 
Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 

X 

Tax Levy 

X 

Title I 
SWP 

 

Title I 
1003(a) 

 

Title III 

 

 

Title I TA 

 

PTA 

Funded 

X 

P/F Set-
aside 

SIG 
Grant 

X 

 

21st Century 

 

C4E 

School 

Achievement 

X 

Other 

Funding 

 
Part 6 – Progress Monitoring  

Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement 
planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 
Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and 
Time-bound. 
 

By February 2019, we will implement peer mentoring and advisory resulting in our school's attendance rate 
increasing from 86.6% to at least 90%. 

 
Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 
ATS attendance reports 

Peer Mentoring agendas and attendance 

Advisory plan 

 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          40 

 

Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action 
plan, if applicable. 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          41 

 

Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans 

Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success 
and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional 
development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices 
and Decisions) 
 
Part 1 – Needs Assessment   

Part 1a.  Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice 
Tenet 4 Statement of Practice 
Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one.  Place an “X” in the 
appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 
4.2  School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized 

around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. (aligned to 
Rise Key 2) 

4.3  Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards 

(CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. (aligned to Rise 
Key 1) 

x 

4.4  Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning 

environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths 
and needs of all students. (aligned to Rise Key 4) 

4.5  Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by 
using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, 
and progress monitoring). (aligned to Rise Key 3) 

Part 1b.  Needs/Areas of Focus: 

SOP(s) 

Addressed 

 

 

 

 

1.  Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs 

selected above. 

2.  Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs 

selected above. 
Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 

3. 
4.  What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, 

Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? 

The school community has taken on the Data Wise model to help in our gathering and utilization of data. What began 
with the cabinet initiative in the 2016-17 school-year to look at how the school uses data on a macro (school-wide) level 
as well as how in smaller groups (departments) and individually (classrooms). This includes the structure of meetings, 
rotating roles as well as the expectation that teachers will track students and essentially, students will use teacher 
feedback to track their data independently. 

Teachers worked together to follow the Data Wise model to practice and inform instruction, using data to establish a 
learner-centered problem, problem of practice, during the first semester, and creating/executing action plans the 
second semester. In order to edit curricula and day-to-day-lessons, teachers were tracking a small inquiry group 
(representative of their class population) to gather information.  

As we move into the 2018-19 school-year we will continue to use the Data Wise inquiry model to make decisions that 
will inform daily instruction inclusive of units, curriculum maps and assessment pacing calendars . During our weekly 
department meetings, teachers will collaborate and rotate rolls with the expectation of using data from their respective 
classes to contribute to the gathering of data as is the first step in the Data Wise model ("organize for collaborative 
work"). Students will also play a role in gathering data as each teacher will have a space for datafolios that students will 
be responsible for keeping track of their data (in particular, how they can improve, over time, particularly in writing. 
Teachers will uniformly provide timely, detailed feedback, along with the use of CC Regents Rubrics so that students 
know how to proceed with next steps in order to get from one level to the next to show and track their growth. 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          42 

 

  

 

 
Part 2 – Summative Vision for Collaborative Teachers 

What is your vision for collaborative teaching?   

By June 2019, the school will create an environment where both students and teachers take ownership of their learning 
and success. Teachers will exhibit a desire to continually learn and improve by implementing feedback they receive from 
observation and pedagogical strategies they learn during school wide professional development. Teachers will be 
learning from each other and the Peer Collaborative Teachers (PCTs) will lead by example. The PCTs will lead a series of 
Professional Developments (PDs) to address the needs of the staff while teaching everyone how to use pedagogical 
approaches that allow all students to learn. These strategies will be looked for during walk-throughs and observations. 
All teachers will be using the same approaches and working together to address the needs to the students creating a 
school wide vision of how students learn best. Furthermore, teachers will keep a learning journal on Google docs where 
they reflect on the strategy they learned at the end of every PD. Reference to both school-wide goals and individual 
goals will be included in observations and teachers will make connections to these in their PD learning journal. Teachers, 
just like the students, will track goals there and connect PD to their goals. They will show evidence of growth and include 
next steps from observation. 

 

There will be a school-wide area of focus and all departments will use the Data Wise process to develop a learner 
centered problem and problem of practice. Departments will create an action plan with short, medium and long term 
goals with researched strategies to address the problem of practice. The departments will meet two times a week 
during their C-6 common planning time to work on using the Data Wise process to address the educational gaps and 
meet the needs of all learners. Throughout the process the departments will track their data and will share out their 
progress with the other departments during school-wide professional developments. During this time, we will celebrate 
the successes of the departments and school, along with offer support for any struggles that are faced. Part of the 
process will include department inter-visitations to determine what the problem of practice is and then to monitor the 
implementation of the strategies so feedback can be provided. Teachers will also have Critical Friends Groups (CFGs) 
during their C-6 times where they can offer each other feedback on unit plans; teachers will rotate roles for this on a 
voluntary basis. 

Programming will be done strategically to try and maximize the time co-teachers have to plan with each other. PCTs will 
have the same common planning periods so they can participate in cabinet inquiry and plan school wide professional 
development. Departments will have half-day common planning sessions where they analyze data and adjust unit plans. 
All teachers will be provided with laptops and GAFE accounts so they can also work collaboratively online when they do 
not have time to meet with each other.  

As CHCP has an ICT cohort in each grade, the expectations are the same for both the general education teacher as well 
as the special education teacher in the classroom. Strategic planning gives teachers the time to work together to plan 
daily lessons. The special education teacher is a participant in the content team meeting and has a voice in the specific 
strategies that will help all teachers scaffold content information. The ICT teacher works collaboratively to plan lessons 
and is responsible for ensuring students' goals (as indicated on their IEPs) are met.  

 

One of the focuses will be to build on trust and improving communication. The administration will continue develop and 
share (via google docs- through all teacher's google accounts), the calendars for the school-year to help them plan for 
half-days of co-planning as well as any up coming school-wide exams. In this respect, teachers will also have the option 
to voice concerns for potential conflicts in their own plans/calendars and the school-wide calendars can be adjusted as 
necessary for the teacher and their class. One way to better this is to appoint a teacher testing coordinator who will 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          43 

 

eventually have full organizational responsibilities, planning dates and consultation with the other teachers to work out 
schedules that will least hinder classroom schedules, pacing calendars, deadlines and inter-classroom assessment 
calendars. The coordinator will meet with the principal to cement dates and times that best meet the needs of teacher's 
and their classroom's curriculum planning. 

 

 
 

How do you envision enhancing collaboration amongst your Instructional Leadership Team to improve teacher 
practices and student learning? 
The schools instructional cabinet will be comprised of administration, DSR, and lead teachers. During these meetings, 
the Data Wise process will continue to be used to exam identified areas of focus and to create action plans. We will 
create a uniformed way to track data and will ensure the staff is aware of the cabinet's focus each inquiry cycle by 
sharing it during professional development and in department meetings. Professional development will also be created 
based on the data found during cabinet inquiry and the lead teachers in conjunction with the students will design and 
implement professional development. The students will participate in some professional developments to help provide 
teachers with feedback and ideas. During the inquiry cycle a group of teachers will be selected to be observed to gather 
data and provide feedback to on the implementation of strategies to improve the learner centered problem and 
problem of practice. These teachers will receive biweekly feedback on the area of focus from cabinet inquiry. The rest of 
the teachers will receive feedback on the area of focus in their observations and monthly walk-throughs. Students will 
benefit from these practices as they are receiving instruction across the grades using appropriate pedagogical strategies 
to address the educational gaps as determined by inquiry.  

On the 2016-17 Quality Review Report, 87% of teachers answered positively about "Collaborative Teachers." Teachers 
felt optimally regarding their working together however a bit less so in terms of how they were developed and 
evaluated. "89% of teachers say that teachers at this school work together to design instructional programs (City: 86%) 
89% of teachers say that they have opportunities to work productively with colleagues in their school (City: 85%) 89% of 
teachers say that teachers feel responsible that all students learn (City: 87%)" Through transparency and teacher 
embedded school-wide decision making processes, this number should be higher for the coming school-year. 
 

 

How do you envision collaboration within teacher teams to improve teacher practices and student learning? 
Department team leaders will work with each other and their direct supervisor to create a curriculum map responsive 
to data (Regents results, QR feedback, survey feedback) to create a scope and sequence for the department meetings 
that is aligned to the QR indicators and the school's goals in the R+CEP. This will ensure that all department teams are 
on the same page and working on the same initiatives with flexibility to address individual department needs. 
Department teams will also continue the Data Wise process. The teachers will develop a data overview for the school 
and the departments to use to help them drive their work. During this department meeting time teachers will work on 
incorporating the shared upon decisions and studied pedagogical strategies into their lessons and tasks. They will also 
bring evidence of the implementation to future meetings along with data to support the success and struggles of the 
implementation. All this data driven work will have a definitive way to measure student impact and ensure that student 
learning is increased. A large focus of the work will be around subgroups and how scaffolds, multiple entry points 
(MEPs), and access for all can be used to ensure all learners are successful. Departments will make sure that all students 
know and understand the expectations they are being held accountable for in every classroom and be able to speak to 
the expectations that they must achieve. Students will have a toolbox of strategies they can use to help them improve 
their learning. Each department will have their own strategies they share with the students and will ensure this is given 
to the students with the feedback they receive. Departments will schedule built in revision days in their pacing 
calendars in ELA and Social studies so students can use the feedback they received and implement it in their writing. All 
departments will include writing strategies in their rubrics.  

Students will learn specific skills necessary to support them in the individual content areas. Students will also learn how 
to track and monitor their progress and analyze their work using datafolios. Students will learn how to use CC Regents 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          44 

 

 

 

rubrics to assess their work and provide peers with feedback using this process. This will teach students how to work 
both independently and collaboratively and keep track of their progress in specific areas using datafolios.  

Once teachers front load information regarding how to set up classroom datafolios, students will be able to use them to 
track their own progress. Teachers will also create assessment pacing calendars; the assessment pieces can be used but 
are not exclusive for the datafolios. 

The adherence to teacher and school-wide calendars will also help teachers with collaborative, interdisciplinary work 
projects, plan for meaningful trips and provide a stable classroom structure. 
 

How do you envision collaboration across teacher teams to improve data driven teacher practices that result in 
improvement in student achievement? 
 

What data will teachers and the Instructional Leadership Team regularly review to ensure that they are reflecting upon 
needed adjustments to teaching practices and meeting individual student learning needs? 

Data Reviewed 

Advance scores and 
write-ups 

Interim, midterm, 
mock Regents and 
final assessments. End 
of Unit assessments? 

Standard/skill based 
data trackers 

Intent 

To observe trends in teaching practices and ensure targeted next steps are articulated and 
implemented in the classroom leading to an improvement in teacher practices and student 
achievement 

To ensure students are making progress towards the required standards in the classroom. This 
data will be used to drive instruction in the classrooms.  

To help teachers design lessons where instructional gaps exist in order to help students' 
performance improve and to ensure everyone is following the same procedure. This will also 
allow days for revisions to take place for the students and teachers to see if the feedback is 
being implemented from one assessment to the next.  

PD Learning Journals 

The lead teachers and the administrators will be able to read the feedback and reflections in the 
learning journals and adjust the professional development to meet the teachers' needs and the 
students' needs. 

Data Wise action plan 
data 

During department meetings the teachers will review the data they are gathering for their 
problem of practice to help them determine if the strategies are working or if they need to try a 
different approach. This will improve students' learning of the content in the classroom.  

Reading Levels 

NYSELAT levels 

IEPs 

  

 

Teachers will review the students reading levels to ensure the texts are scaffolded in the 
classroom appropriately and the the selected readings are appropriate to the students' reading 
levels.  

Teachers will use these to help them with groupings and appropriate scaffolds in the classroom 
for both reading and writing. These will also be taken into consideration when writing language 
objectives.  

These will be used by the co-teachers to modify the lesson plans to ensure that all students have 
access to the materials.  

Describe the screening process you use to identify students who need extra help? How do you use this process to 
determine which intervention to provide? 
Tiered approach to interventions (former RTI model): All students, prior to assessments and classroom maturity will be 
part of the larger, bottom tier of the triangle; these are all students and as time goes on, students who have individual 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          45 

 

needs will be moved up a tier, the middle tier, where they will receive more scaffolds and tailored instruction (heavier 
scaffolds that will be pulled away over time. Students who are not successful in the middle tier will be at the top tier, 
reserved for students who need heavily scaffolded instruction and multiple academic and/or behavior interventions. 
Students at the top tier may also be referred to guidance counselors as well as counselling in schools.  

 

 
Part 3 – Annual Goal 

Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this 
element of the Framework for Great Schools – Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be consistent with the 
expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – 
Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact 
meeting at least one of your Rise Benchmarks. 
By June 2019, our teacher teams will utilize the Data Wise inquiry approach to support school-wide inquiry resulting in 
the school's Framework Collaborative Teachers increasing by 0.12 points, from our current 4.12 to 4.24. 

 

 

Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Collaborative Teachers Annual Goal:   Which 
school benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Collaborative Teachers Annual Goal? 

Framework: Collaborative Teachers 

Framework: Supportive Environment 

Student Attendance 

Progress Toward Graduation-Years 2 and 3 

  

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          46 

How will you 
assess the 
interim 
progress of 
the 
initiative?(ex. 
decrease in 
serious 
incidents, 
increase in 
students 
participating 
Big Sibs 
program) 

Common 
language 
protocols in 
classrooms 
(by teachers 
and students) 

 

Lower teacher 
absenteeism 

 

More teacher 
collaboration 
and peer 
feedback 

 

 

 
Part 4 – Action Plan 

Key Initiatives: 
Concisely indicate 
the key initiatives 
(up to five) that 
your school will 
implement to 
achieve the 
identified goal for 
this Framework for 
Great Schools 
element. 

Target 
Group(s) 
Who will 
be 
targeted? 

Which 
Benchmark(s) 
indicated above 
does this initiative 
target? 

Timeline 
What is the 
start and 
end date? 

Key Personnel 
Who is responsible for 
implementing and overseeing the 
activity/strategy? (include school, 
educational consultants and/or 
CBO staff) 

Teacher leads/ Administration 

September 
2018-June 
2019 

Inter-visitations - 

All 
teachers 

Collaborative 
Teachers 

 

Supportive 
environment 

Department teams 
will participate in bi-
monthly inter-
visitations. A cycle of 
teachers will be 
rotated through the 
year to be observed 
by their peers. The 
observations will 
allow teachers to 
take low-inference 
notes while focusing 
on a specific strategy 
that was recently 
learned at an in-
house professional 
development. The 
team will provide 
the observed 
teacher with 
feedback using a 
protocol. The 
observed teacher 
will follow up with 
the team by 
presenting them 
with student work 
samples after using 
the feedback from 
the team. Each team 
member will adjust 
their practice 
accordingly after 
learning from the 
improvements that 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          47 

Common 
language 
protocols in 
classrooms 
(by teachers 
and students) 

Lower teacher 
absenteeism 

More teacher 
collaboration 
and peer 
feedback 

 

the observed 
teacher made. 

 

REGENTS ALIGNED 
TASKS 

All 
teachers 

Progress towards 
graduation years 2 
& 3 

September 
2018-June 
2019 

 

Student 
attendance 

Teachers will create 
Regents aligned 
tasks that address 
the skills and 
content required to 
be successful on the 
EOY assessments. 
Teachers will 
continuously update 
their unit plans and 
students will use the 
unit plan checklist to 
monitor their 
learning of the 
material. 

 

Datafolios will be 
kept in the 
classrooms but 
maintained by the 
students to chart 
their growth and be 
able to speak to 
their strengths and 
areas for increased 
concentration.  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Teachers/administration 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

All 
students 

 

 

 

 

 

Collaborative 
Teachers 

All staff 

 

 

 

Transparency of 
Student Data 

Data Wise - The Data 
Wise inquiry 
approach will be 

Teachers/ students 

September 
2018-June 
2019 

Administration/Cabinet/Teachers 

Datafolios 

 

 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          48 

Supportive 
environment 

Teacher's use 
of Data Wise 

 

Rolling 
agendas 

 

used to assess 
student data and 
improve teaching 
and learning. A team 
of leaders attended 
the Harvard 
University Institute 
to facilitate the 
implementation of 
the inquiry process 
in the school. 
Former teachers 
learned the cycle of 
inquiry in SY 16-17. 
New teachers will 
learn the cycle 
through application 
and will participate 
in a book study. 

PD Learning Journals  All 

teachers 

Collaborative 
Teachers 

Teachers 

September 
2018-June 
2019 

 

 

 

Supportive 
Environment 

 

 

 

  
 
4b – Parent and Family Engagement 

How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies 
to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and 
identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 
Families will continue to be engaged on a whole-school scale (PA Meetings) and on an individual basis (IB Family 
Communication). A monthly newsletter will be distributed to incorporate the high expectations we have for students, 
the resources provided to students and families, plus celebrate the good things going on at CHCP. The parent 
coordinator and school counselors will take an active role in family empowerment.  
 

 
Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment 

Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including 
human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, lead CBO’s community school budget, FSC Supports, 
etc. 
Metamorphosis 

AP for All - Elevate Study Skills  

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          49 

 

AP Common Planning Meetings 

IB Common Planning Meetings 

Updated textbooks and curriculum 

ALEKS 

Lexia 

 
Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 

X 

Tax Levy 

X 

Title I 
SWP 

 

Title I 
1003(a) 

 

Title III 

 

 

Title I TA 

 

PTA 

Funded 

X 

P/F Set-
aside 

SIG 
Grant 

X 

 

21st Century 

 

C4E 

School 

Achievement 

X 

Other 

Funding 

 
Part 6 – Progress Monitoring  

Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement 
planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 
Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and 
Time-bound. 
By February 2019, all teachers will participate in professional learning based on leadership observations 
demonstrating 5% growth in 4e (Growing and Developing Professionally) as measured by the Danielson Framework. 

 
Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 
Datafolios in all classrooms, common-language protocols (by teachers and students); positively effect school 
attendance percentage; teacher led meetings with accurate and reliable use of rolling agendas (showing data and ow 
it is used to move daily instruction); overall positive school dynamic. 

 
Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action 
plan, if applicable. 

 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          50 

 

Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans 

 

Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and 
nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional 
support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) 
 
Part 1 – Needs Assessment   

Part 1a.  Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice 
Tenet 2 Statement of Practice 
Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one.  Place an “X” in the 
appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 
2.2  The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, 

Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive 
of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational 
Plan (SCEP). (aligned with Rise Key 2) 
Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital 
resources. (aligned with Rise Key 6) 

2.3 

2.4  The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual 

Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and 
track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. (aligned with Rise Key 
1) 

2.5  Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical 

individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum 
and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student 
social and emotional developmental health). (aligned with Rise Keys 4 and 5) 

x 

Part 1b.  Needs/Areas of Focus: 

SOP(s) 

Addressed 

 

 

 

 

1.  Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs 

selected above. 

2.  Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs 

selected above. 
Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 

3. 
4.  What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, 

Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? 

1.) School's Strengths 

  Department-wide use of Data Wise to analyze needs of students and develop action plans to address these 

needs in the classroom 

  Cycles of assessment with time for teachers to analyze summative assessment data and adjust curriculum 
  Creating common planning time for teachers to work together towards common goals 

2.) School's needs 

  Uniform datafolios across departments to improve student tracking of and ownership of learning 
  Creating regents aligned tasks with removal of scaffolds and graded aligned to the EOY assessments 
  Working on scaffolding and differentiation creating access for all and gradual removal of scaffolds 

3.) Priority needs to be addressed: 

  Rigorous instruction aligned to the standards meeting the needs of all students leading to an increased Regents 

completion rate 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          51 

 

  Data driven unit plans with constant cycles of feedback to target improvement in all subject areas especially 

math by year 2 passing rate 

  Targeted student and teacher tracking of student performance leading to increased student ownership and 

 
 

efficacy 
Students creating meaningful work products across all classrooms (1.2 from QR) 
Introduction and understanding of the changes to the standards from CCLS to Next Generation to ensure 
standard aligned curriculum  

4.) Data trends and sources analyzed 

  Cabinet level walk-troughs to gather data on student data tracking and reflection revealed a range of how 

teachers organized this in the classroom. 

  Rolling Agendas from department meetings and teachers' individual data trackers and summaries  
 

Framework Element scores and survey element scores over the past three years in rigorous instruction have 
seen an upwards trend. Rigorous instruction went from a 3.51 to a 3.57 to a 3.61 respectfully on the Framework 
element score and from a 2.95 to a 3.76 to a 3.93 respectfully on the Survey Element Score in the school quality 
guide from 2015/16 to 2017/2018.  

  The Quality Review from 2016-2017 had received all proficient ratings in the 1.1, 1.2 and 2.2 with area 1.2 

(teacher pedagogy and meeting all needs and creating meaningful work products) being an area focus.  

Notes: Harvard, Yoga meditation, District Partnership (data analysis) , unit trackers/revisions/pacing 
calendars/assessment calendars/assessment trackers/datafolios, CFG, Attendance Classroom Plan - Classroom 
Management Plan, Three times a week department meeting/1 day unit planning/1 day data 

 

 
Part 2 – Summative Vision for Effective School Leadership 

What is your vision for effective school leadership at your school? 

Overarching Vision for Effective School Leadership at CHCP: 

1.  Leadership will encourage and ensure opportunities for open communication and collaboration 
2.  The school community will be engaged in shared-decision making and leadership with mutual accountability 
3.  Leadership will sustain systems that support high expectations for quality instruction 
4.  Distributive leadership will provide leadership opportunities for current teachers  
5.  A cabinet inquiry team will use data to determine a Problem of Practice and design whole-school PD on 

addressing the learner centered problems with strategies and initiatives designed to improve instruction. 

School leaders will be responsible for instructional supervision as well as the continued review of student learning 
reports, assessment data and anecdotal data. Assistant Principals (APs) will be assigned specific content areas to lead; 
however, learning walks and informal observations will be shared in an effort to create equity. The Danielson 
Framework for Teaching will be used to provide teachers with both written and verbal feedback. School leaders will 
create an observation calendar in early September 2018 to space out observations to ensure that all teachers are 
provided with more than enough time to implement feedback in future lessons. In an effort to keep clear lines of 
communication open, reinforce high expectations and chart teacher development, school leaders will be in classrooms 
weekly in an informal capacity. APs will also be assigned specific, non-instructional duties, including but not limited to 
supervision of non-instructional personnel, youth development, discipline, and the like. Expanded Learning Time (ELT), 
including Saturday School and extracurricular activities, will be monitored by APs and the principal. APs will be assigned 
specific professional development sessions to facilitate based on personal interest and school need. The school leaders 
will meet as an executive cabinet regularly. In addition, school leaders will take an active role in facilitating the weekly 
Instructional Cabinet meetings that focus on strengthening the instructional focus.  

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          52 

 

The cabinet inquiry team is a formalized inquiry process where CHCP’s instructional cabinet discuss how to improve 
teacher practice and products. At these meetings, the work of a group of representative teachers is studied in an effort 
to improve teacher practice and products. The inquiry team then reviews feedback given to teachers by the principal, 
APs and coaches, performs learning-walk rounds and utilizes protocols to study teacher development. Together, the 
team creates instructional goals for our target teachers and next steps to move their practice based on data, student 
work samples and the school’s instructional focus.  

 

 

 
 

What are your core belief(s) for school improvement and how they inform your vision for developing instructional 
leadership at your school? 
Perfecting a cabinet inquiry team that is the driving force for professional development, student growth and teacher 
improvement, all based on using the Data Wise process as the driving force for improving instruction. High expectations 
for students by providing them with opportunities to engage in learning that is grounded in a global curriculum that 
provides them with access to develop their depth of knowledge physically, emotionally, ethically and intellectually. 
CHCP has many different forms of instructional leaders. Teachers regularly share their practice during department 
meetings, whole-school PD and in CFGs. Some teachers are leaders in the Advanced Placement classes and others are 
becoming leaders through their involvement in IB. Some teachers are leaders amongst the students and other are more 
behind the scenes writing reports and navigating new instructional strategies. All teachers have the opportunity to be a 
leader in a realm that they are comfortable in and others that show some more leadership qualities are pushed to take 
on more and become an official DOE teacher leader. 
 

What is your vision for developing differentiated leadership throughout your school? How will you utilize teacher 
leaders to build broad capacity within your school?  
CHCP will provide multiple opportunities for teachers to engage in leadership roles, take part in making important 
decisions, and track progress to show impact on student learning. Teachers will have the opportunity to be members of 
various school committees that will be the vehicle for improvement both in and out of the classroom. The committees 
will ensure that teacher, student and CBO voices are heard. Some of the committees will be: AP for All, IB, SIT, 
assessment, attendance, professional development, language proficiency and curriculum. The committees will meet at 
least once a month, will have a team leader and that leader will develop the scope of work with the principal. School-
wide benchmarks aligned to the relevant sections on the R+CEP will be tracked in these committees. Teachers will also 
be encouraged to become teacher mentors to assist in on-boarding new teachers. They will need to complete a series of 
professional learning institutes in order to be an official DOE teacher mentor. The school will hire at least one teacher 
leader. They will be compensated with fewer teaching periods and an increase in salary. Teacher leaders will meet with 
administration weekly to plan agendas for the meetings that they will facilitate and will have a role on the cabinet 
inquiry team.  
 

 
 
 

 

How will the leader foster collaborative school governance processes, and ensure full family participation together 
with other stakeholders? 
Community partners and CBOs will work to achieve the same set of student goals as outlined in the R+CEP so that there 
is transparency and clear benchmarks of what needs to be achieved. School faculty will participate in community events 
and will make direct contacts with individuals in the neighborhood to share school news and promote the school 
through its core values. G.S.O. and S.V.C. will provide students with the tools and avenues to share their ideas on 
improving the school and be empowered to partake in making change. A cross-sectional list of students and their needs 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          53 

 

 

provided by school leadership will be reviewed by the CBOs to make sure that each student is provided with 
personalized support and that there is no overlap. Weekly CBO-Principal meetings will provide the opportunity for this 
work to occur. A database will contain specific interventions aligned to attendance rates and credit accumulation to 
document improvement.  
 

How will you use evidence-based systems to ensure school and teacher leaders are led by a cycle of continuous 
learning and use this to inform their teams’ priorities? 

Evidence-Based System 

Support(s) 

Collaborator(s) 

Data Wise 

Continuous loop of inquiry supported 
by the Data Wise and Meeting Wise 
books 

Harvard 

Teacher Career Pathways 

Weekly mentoring  

Office of Teacher Recruitment & 
Quality 

  

 
Part 3 – Annual Goal 

Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this 
element of the Framework for Great Schools – Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be consistent with the 
expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – 
Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact 
meeting at least one of your Rise Benchmarks. 
By June 2019, the leadership team will provide teachers with ongoing actionable feedback based on teacher feedback to 
students , resulting in the school's Regents Completion Rate increasing 1.5 percentage points, from our current 58.5% to 
60%. 

 

 

Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Effective School Leadership Annual Goal:   Which 
school benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Effective School Leadership Annual Goal? 

Regents Completion Rate 

Progress Toward Graduation - Years 2 and 3 

College Readiness Index 

6 - Year Graduation Rate 

  

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          54 

Target Group(s) 
Who will be 
targeted? 

Timeline 
What is the 
start and end 
date? 

Which 
Benchmark(s) 
indicated 
above does 
this initiative 
target? 

Key Personnel 
Who is responsible for 
implementing and 
overseeing the 
activity/strategy? 
(include school, 
educational 
consultants and/or 
CBO staff) 

How will you 
assess the interim 
progress of the 
initiative?(ex. 
decrease in serious 
incidents, increase 
in students 
participating Big 
Sibs program) 

All teachers 

Regents 
Completion 
Rate 

 

College 
Readiness 
Index 

September - 
June 

Principal 

 

2 APs 

 

1 Teacher Leader 

 

Metamorphosis  

 

 

 

 
Part 4 – Action Plan 

Key Initiatives: 
Concisely indicate 
the key initiatives 
(up to five) that your 
school will 
implement to 
achieve the 
identified goal for 
this Framework for 
Great Schools 
element. 

CYCLES OF 
OBSERVATIONS 

 

Advance - School 
leaders will conduct 
informal and formal 
observations for all 
teachers that adhere 
to the Advance 
regulations. A pacing 
guide for 
observations will be 
distributed to APs 
and will include 
target dates for a 
particular amount of 
observations to be 
completed by. 
Teachers will be 
observationally 
separated amongst 
school leaders so 
that teachers get 
consistent feedback 
from the same 
leader. This leader 
will be their direct 
supervisor. The 
format of the 
feedback provided to 
all teachers will 
follow the four-
sentence feedback 
model, be grounded 
in the instructional 
focus and will include 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          55 

 

a Hochman Writing 
strategy. 

 

Inter-visitations - 

Department teams 
will participate in bi-
monthly inter-
visitations. A cycle of 
teachers will be 
rotated through the 
year to be observed 
by their peers. The 
observations will 
allow teachers to 
take low-inference 
notes while focusing 
on a specific strategy 
that was recently 
learned at an in-
house professional 
development. The 
team will provide the 
observed teacher 
with feedback using 
a protocol. The 
observed teacher will 
follow up with the 
team by presenting 
them with student 
work samples after 
using the feedback 
from the team. Each 
team member will 
adjust their practice 
accordingly after 
learning from the 
improvements that 
the observed teacher 
made. 

 

Walk-throughs - 
School leaders and 
volunteer teachers 
will participate in 
monthly walk-
throughs to gather 
evidence of 
implementation of 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          56 

 

learning from 
professional 
developments. A 
rubric will be used to 
quickly assess the 
implementation. A 
calendar of the walk-
throughs with a 
range of varying 
periods will be 
designed so that the 
same teachers are 
not always visited. 
Teachers who are 
effectively 
implementing the 
learning may be 
asked to share 
student work so that 
the team can assess 
if the transference is 
occurring or present 
at the next PD so 
that teachers can see 
the learning in 
action.  

 

Model Classrooms - 
Teacher leaders will 
have model 
classrooms where 
other teachers will 
have the opportunity 
to witness the 
effective 
implementation of 
strategies that were 
learned during 
professional 
development. These 
classrooms will be 
important for new 
teachers to CHCP. 
They can observe 
what we believe to 
be CHCP's best 
classroom practices 
to ensure 
consistency across all 
rooms. Teacher 
leaders will each 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          57 

 

have an area of focus 
from the 
instructional focus 
that they will be 
"experts" in so that 
there will be no 
overlap in 
facilitating, teaching 
and modeling a 
strategy. The dates 
and period of the 
open model 
classroom will be 
heavily advertised so 
that all teachers feel 
welcome entering 
the space. 

 

Transparency of 
Student Data 

All administrators 
and teachers 

 

Data Wise - The Data 
Wise inquiry 
approach will be 
used to assess 
student data and 
improve teaching 
and learning. A team 
of leaders attended 
the Harvard 
University Institute 
to facilitate the 
implementation of 
the inquiry process in 
the school. Former 
teachers learned the 
cycle of inquiry in SY 
16-17. New teachers 
will learn the cycle 
through application 
and will participate 
in a book study. 

 

CHCP's instructional 
cabinet will engage 
in inquiry around 
effective pedagogical 

September - 
June 

Principal 

Coherence among 
all classes.  

 

2 APs 

 

1 Teacher Leader 

 

Increase in student 
ownership in class 
as evidenced by an 
improvement of 3b 
Advance ratings 

 

Teacher 
collaboration and 
sharing best 
practices when it 
isn't initiated by 
administration 

Regents 
Completion 
Rate 

 

College 
Readiness 
Index 

 

Progress 
Towards 
Graduation - 
Years 2 and 3 

 

6 - Year 
graduation 
rate 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          58 

 

practice to inform 
coaching and 
professional 
development using 
the Data Wise 
inquiry approach. 

 

Programmatic and 
Supportive 
Structures 

All administrators 
and teachers 

Regents 
Completion 
Rate 

September - 
June 

 

College 
Readiness 
Index 

 

Progress 
Towards 
Graduation - 
Years 2 and 3 

 

6 - Year 
graduation 
rate 

 

 

 

Create a mechanism 
for administrators 
and teacher leaders 
to spread across the 
departments through 
the close 
involvement and 
alignment of the 
inquiry work with 
teachers by way of 
the school’s leaders. 

 

Establish a 
systematic platform 
for achieving the 
goals of the R+CEP 
while aligning the 
instructional 
initiatives around a 
school-wide 
instructional focus 

 

Create weekly 
coherence for 
teacher leaders and 
school leaders with 
regards to teacher 
support initiatives 

 

Norm teacher 
observations, 
Advance ratings, 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          59 

Teachers 

 

teacher feedback, 
and how to coach 
teachers to move 
toward success 
 

Surface school-wide 
patterns and trends 
in order to inform 
uniform teacher 
feedback and 
professional 
development across 
the school 

REGENTS ALIGNED 
TASKS 

 

Teachers will create 
Regents aligned tasks 
that address the 
skills and content 
required to be 
successful on the 
EOY assessments. 
Teachers will 
continuously update 
their unit plans and 
students will use the 
unit plan checklist to 
monitor their 
learning of the 
material. Datafolios 
will be kept in the 
classrooms but 
maintained by the 
students to chart 
their growth and be 
able to speak to their 
strengths and areas 
for increased 
concentration.  

Regents 
Completion 
Rate 

 

College 
Readiness 
Index 

 

Progress 
Towards 
Graduation - 
Years 2 and 3 

 

6 - Year 
graduation 
rate 

September - 
June 

Principal 

Datafolios are 
updated regularly 

 

2 APs 

 

1 Teacher Leader 

 

 

Students can speak 
to their needs and 
areas of strength to 
know what 
strategies they 
need to apply to be 
successful 

Metamorphosis 

 

Unit Plan Checklists 
are being used, are 
visible and 
students report 
that they are 
helpful 

  
 
4b – Parent and Family Engagement 

How  will  your  school  engage  parents/families  and  support  their  understanding  of  Effective  School  Leadership  and 
strategies  to  promote  parent  leadership  and  engagement  in  order  to  support  their  children  at  home?  Include  the 
timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 
Families will continue to be engaged on a whole-school scale (PA Meetings) and on an individual basis (IB Family 
Communication). A monthly newsletter will be distributed to incorporate the high expectations we have for students, 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          60 

 

the resources provided to students and families, plus celebrate the good things going on at CHCP. The parent 
coordinator and school counselors will take an active role in family empowerment.  
 

 
Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment 

Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including 
human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, lead CBO’s community school budget, FSC Supports, 
etc. 
Partnering with Metamorphosis through the Community School Grant.  

One Peer Collaborative Teacher that will work closely with AP for All and Teacher Career Pathways. 

Purchase the Data Wise book for a book study with the new teachers, per-session for them. 

IB funding for the leadership roles and resources. 

 

 
Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 

X 

Tax Levy 

X 

Title I 
SWP 

 

Title I 
1003(a) 

 

Title III 

 

 

Title I TA 

 

PTA 

Funded 

X 

P/F Set-
aside 

SIG 
Grant 

X 

 

21st Century 

 

C4E 

School 

Achievement 

X 

Other 

Funding 

 
Part 6 – Progress Monitoring  

Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement 
planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 
Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and 
Time-bound. 
By February 2019, the leadership team will conduct multiple classroom visits providing teachers with ongoing 
actionable feedback based on teacher feedback to students, resulting in the school's Regents Completion Rate 
increasing 0.75 percentage points, from our current 59.25%. 

 
Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 
January Regents 

 

Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action 
plan, if applicable. 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          61 

 

Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans 

 
Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a 
welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. 
(Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) 
 
Part 1 – Needs Assessment   

Part 1a.  Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice 
Tenet 6 Statement of Practice 
Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one.  Place an “X” in the 
appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 
6.2  The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their 

high expectations for student academic achievement. (aligned with Rise Key 2) 

6.3  The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and 
community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to 
augment learning. (aligned with Rise Key 4 and 6) 

6.4  The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and 

provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to 
support student success. (aligned with Rise Key 5) 

6.5  The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school 

community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and 
empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services 
for their children. (aligned with Rise Key 3) 

X 

Part 1b.  Needs/Areas of Focus: 

SOP(s) 

Addressed 

 

 

 

 

1.  Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs 

selected above. 

2.  Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs 

selected above. 
Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 

3. 
4.  What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, 

Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? 

1. Continuing to expend family engagement that creates meaningful opportunities for family input during PTA meetings, 
celebrations, and community events.  

 

2. Continue to promote healthy dialogue and regular communication between families, school staff, and students, and 
other key stakeholders.  

 

3. Support students and their families in understanding student data, expectations, and tools for tracking student 
progress by checking in with parents via phone and in person.  

 

4. Continue to strengthen and develop new partnership community partnerships to maximize engagement and student 
achievement.  

 

 
Part 2 – Summative Vision for Strong Family and Community Ties 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          62 

 

What is your vision for strong family and community ties at your school?  What opportunities exist for the school staff 
to know the students and their families in order to better communicate and partner with families and communities in 
the vision for the school? 
Overarching Vision for Strong Community Ties at Cypress Hills Collegiate Prep  

CHCP is committed to creating strong family and community ties through a genuine partnership grounded in choice, 
voice and collaboration in an effort to increase student achievement. CHCP believes when educators, parents and 
community groups work collaboratively to support learning, students tend to stay engaged, stay in school longer and 
enjoy their school experience. CHCP has developed multiple tools for regular communication with students and families 
to foster high expectations for academic achievement. CHCP provides a welcoming environment for all members of our 
learning community, including families and visitors, by ensuring that everyone is treated respectfully and that all voices 
are heard.  

CHCP’s communication is reciprocal, on-going, and varied. In addition, school leadership has ensured that there is 
regular communication between the school and its students and families and that this communication informs families 
of the high expectations for academic achievement and social-emotional development. In order to enrich the culture of 
the school and advance the civic life of our school building, families at CHCP have multiple avenues to engage with the 
greater community to address challenges, support student development, and celebrate learning and student growth 
and accomplishments. 

CHCP is committed to utilizing the following conduits for building strong family and community relations to support 
student achievement: 

  Communication: Collaborative Learning Environment Technology (i.e. Skedula.), parent engagement block, 
targeted family and community outreach, family newsletters, internal needs assessment (survey), monthly 
progress reports, academic events, community celebrations/gatherings. 

  Collaboration: Family workshops, Family Center, online resources, community building events (Grade Wars, 

Broadway Play, etc.), technology, literacy, college application and financial-aid workshops 

Collaborative Learning Environment Technology: Learning management systems designed to support student learning, 
facilitate communication and collaboration, and improve teacher practice. Teachers, students and families utilize online 
platforms on a daily basis to access course resources, assignments, project plans, a multi-dimensional grade-book, 
online groups, and an extensive library of instructional resources for teachers. A web-based service delivered that is 
accessible 24/7 via any web browser with Internet connection. The platform facilitates the following: 

 

 

Family Engagement Block: Teachers will use 40 minutes to engage in one or more of the following family 
engagement activities: face-to-face meetings, phone calls, written correspondence including email, creating 
newsletters in conjunction with the parent coordinator, creating content for a school or class website or school 
answering machine and/or preparing report cards or progress reports. Teachers can also call their assigned 
students regarding events and/or open-school night.  
Family Outreach: In addition to home visits by the attendance teacher and CBO mental health personnel, CHCP 
will host summer bridge for incoming freshman and Town Halls the first week in September that will delineate 
the expectations for students at CHCP that will include an orientation packet with our student handbook and 
resources for the upcoming school year. In addition, CHCP will host a resource fair for families, financial 
aid/college night. CHCP will utilize the following to communicate with families of its students: phone blasts, 
backpack letters, mailings, and home visits. 

  Community-Building Events: The school community will participate in monthly gatherings to address school 

needs, trends, themes, and issues in the larger context as well as community celebrations and programs. CHCP 
will host a battle of the grades where each grade works together with their teachers and participates in 
community-building activities and relay races. CHCP will host events where all constituents in the community 
are invited (e.g. staff/student basketball game, cultural potluck, talent show, and Leadership Celebration).  

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          63 

 

In addition to the aforementioned, CHCP takes a holistic approach that develops and nurtures genuine engagement with 
families and community stakeholders while providing a network of support structures and services that drive student 
achievement. 

 

Family engagement goes beyond traditionally-active families. School staff utilizes targeted engagement plans to 
connect to those whose children are struggling academically or socially. This includes specific events for families 
including forums on housing and immigration and on-site opportunities such as ID NYC and health fairs.  

  Parents have continuous training opportunities lead by the parent coordinator that include leadership 

development, skill building to advocate for their children’s needs, and tools for supporting, monitoring and 
understanding students’ academic work. 

  Active parent leaders take lead roles in parent engagement to grow the engaged parent base. 
 

Families and community stakeholders have regular opportunities for involvement including volunteering, 
community school and leadership team participation, parent nights, PA membership and annual community 
forums. 

  Teachers are trained on quality and effective parent dialogue and begin each year with a family engagement 
plan. Family engagement plans ensure all students and families have regular and open communication with 
teachers that provide opportunities for positive feedback and collaboration around student development. 

  The school has lead staff that manage a service-integration plan that maximizes partnerships and resources to 

ensure each student is connected to leadership development and/or service opportunities, a key adult 
stakeholder, tailored academic supports, and appropriate mental health services.  

  The school has dedicated staff to connect students and families with local services, including immigrant services, 

housing counseling, employment programs, ESOL classes, child care, after-school programs, access to health 
insurance, financial literacy counseling and education, and nutrition and healthy living programs. The school 
promotes these programs, and when possible, provides these services on-site. 

  Our community school is anchored by our Community School Team that represents a combination of parents, 

students, teachers, school leadership, current and new CBO partners, community stakeholders and school 
support staff including paraprofessionals, schools aid, and school safety. 
School safety and support staff are active members of the Community School Team and participate in annual 
training around restorative practices. 

 

  Parents have dedicated space within the school to get information about support services, community 

resources, and for meetings with teachers and school staff.  

  Parents have opportunities to participate in on-site adult education classes in the evenings including language, 

HSE classes, and CDL classes that include employment support. 

  CBO will provide a resource guide for internal and external resources for families, guides will be given to families 

at all parent events and provided to all faculty. 

  CBO will manage an electronic referral system for CHCP faculty to identify students or families in need of 

support. 

  The CBO in conjunction with our mental health provider, will manage an electronic referral system for CHCP 

faculty to identify students or families in need of support.  

 

 

Within the Community School model, how will families be welcomed into the school and made a part of the school 
community?  What support will administrators, teachers, school staff and school safety officers be given to help create 
a welcoming environment?   Will there be a dedicated space for families in the school? 

  The parent coordinator and CBO staff will establish a welcoming committee which will consist of parent leaders, 
students, and staff who will be responsible for welcoming parents when they enter the building and attend our 
events.  

  The parent coordinator will have an office to meet with families, in addition to our campus welcome center.  
 

School safety will be invited to participate in the Community School Team to connect with CHCP families and to 
take active stakeholder roles within the school community 

  All CHCP staff will have a referral guide developed by the CBO and be trained during a September PD to use a 

web-based referral system to alert CBO staff to connect with students 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          64 

 

School safety will be able to participate in training with F.O.T. on restorative practices and have open dialogue 
with student leaders 

 

 

 

How will the school identify and develop families to take leadership roles in school decision making/school governance 
structures? 
At all family events, family members will complete a survey so school and CBO staff can get feedback about their needs 
and their interest/availability in participating in leadership roles. 

The Parent Coordinator (PC) will follow up with families who attend family events with personal phone calls inviting 
them to participate in the PA . The PC and PA president will host a training for families to conduct family-to-family 
outreach. Before family events, the PC and PA president will convene trained family members to do family-to-family 
outreach for all events. 
 

 

How will the school engage the community and families? How will they ensure that teachers are able to learn from 
families about the children being taught? 
The CBO will: 

  Assist with Coordinating monthly meetings with campus-based CBOs.  
  Connect with community businesses and organizations and city-wide agencies to bring resources to families. 
  Host events for the community including ID NYC and provide resources to the based at the school including 

adult education classes and Summer Youth Employment Programming. 

  Build relationship with local middle schools.  
 

Share a weekly announcements for CHCP staff that includes information on clinics, workshops and events that 
parents are participating in.  

  CBO will push into Staff PD once a month to discuss upcoming events and CS updates.  

 

 

How do families partner with the school and CBO to support student success?  Will there be dedicated space for 
families?   
Family partnerships with 
school: 

Families will serve on the Student Leadership Team. Parent leaders will support with 
the school's educational planning process. 

Family partnerships with CBO: 

Parent leaders will support and plan community events.  

 

Is there dedicated space for 
these partnerships? 

 

 

6th floor office space, Auditorium, Family Welcome Center 

 

What data and student progress feedback loops will be present at the school to ensure that families knowledgeable of 
their children’s scholastic success, in addition to report cards? 
Along with progress and report card reports, students and their families will be given their child's student profile sheet 
from the New Visions data sorter which will give families a snapshot of their child's scholastic and attendance data for 
the school year at least ten times a year . In addition to that students will have the opportunity to track their own 
attendance through our interactive attendance board and regents tracker. Behavior issues are addressed on a one-on-
one basis when the need arises. Kid Talk is the structure used for parents, students and teachers to come together to 
discuss the student's behavior.  

 

 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          65 

 
Part 3 – Annual Goal 

Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this 
element of the Framework for Great Schools – Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be consistent with 
the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – 
Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact 
meeting at least one of your Rise Benchmarks. 
 
By June 2019, our school community will engage all stakeholders in a school-wide mentoring program, resulting in the 
school's attendance rate increasing by 2.3 percentage points, from our current 88.6% to 90.9%. 

 

 

Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Strong Family and Community Ties Annual Goal:   
Which school benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Strong Family and Community Ties Annual 
Goal? 

Student Attendance 

Framework: Collaborative Teachers 

Framework: Supportive Environment 

6-Year Graduation Rate 

  

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          66 

 
Part 4 – Action Plan 

Key Initiatives: 
Concisely indicate 
the key initiatives 
(up to five) that 
your school will 
implement to 
achieve the 
identified goal for 
this Framework for 
Great Schools 
element. 

Communication - 

Skedula, SSC, Early 
Awareness 
programs, 
Persistence 
Programs, Town 
Halls, Cohort T, 
mentoring, data 
share outs, 
community school 
forum, CET, SLT, 
Family Newsletter  

 

attendance  

student engagement 

student leadership 

restorative practices 

attendance 

passing rate  

college readiness 

 

 

 

 

 

Target Group(s) 
Who will be 
targeted? 

Which 
Benchmark(s) 
indicated 
above does 
this initiative 
target? 

Timeline 
What is the start 
and end date? 

Key Personnel 
Who is responsible for 
implementing and 
overseeing the 
activity/strategy? 
(include school, 
educational 
consultants and/or 
CBO staff) 

How will you 
assess the interim 
progress of the 
initiative?(ex. 
decrease in 
serious incidents, 
increase in 
students 
participating Big 
Sibs program) 

1. September 
2018-June 2019 

2. September 
2018- June 2019 

 

 

 

3. January 2019- 
June 2019 

2. CBO CHLDC/SSC 
director 

4. September 
2018-June 2019 

3. CBO CHLDC/ 
Persistence Director 

5. October 2018-
June 2019 

6. October 2018-
June 2018 

7. Community Kick 
off September 
26th, Community 
School Forum May 
9th 2019 

8. New letter will 
be mailed to every 
student/family 
once a month. 

4. CBO CHLDC/ 
Student Engagement 
Activity Specialist 

5. CBO CHLDC and 
school mentors 

6. CBO and guidance 

 

7. CBO/ Community 
School Director 

8. CBO/ Community 
School Director & 
Admin 

9. Parent Coordinator 

 

1. Skedula will 
be available to 
all students 

1. Regents 
completion 
rate 

2. SSC/ Early 
Awareness will 
provide 
students with 
social, 
emotional, and 
college 
readiness skills 
to all students 
from 9th- 12th 
grade. Along 
with providing 
their families 
the support they 
need in applying 
for college and 
financial aid. 

3. College 
Persistence 
program will 
follow students 
post graduation 
and will track 
their academic 
progress 
throughout their 
college journey. 

4. The entire 
school body will 
participate in 
monthly town 
halls 

2. Supportive 
environment 
and strong 
community 
ties. 

3. Supportive 
environment 

4. Supportive 
environment 

5. Regents 
Completion 
rate and 
Strong family 
and 
community 
ties 

6. Supportive 
environment 
and Strong 
family and 
community 
ties 

7. Strong 
Family and 
Community 
Ties. 

8 &9. 
Supportive 
environment 
and strong 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          67 

 

 

community 
ties 

 

5. Cohort U 
mentoring will 
be available to 
Seniors who are 
of concern 
based on 
academics and 
attendance rate 

6. Data share 
outs will given 
to all students 
during town 
halls and 
through our 
monthly 
attendance rate 
bulletin board 
tracker. 

7. Community 
School forum: 
The entire 
school body and 
their family will 
be invited to our 
community 
School kickoff 
event and our 
Community 
forum. 

8. CET/SLT: 
teachers, cbo's, 
school safety, 
students and 
parents will 
targeted to 
attend these 
meetings 

9. Family News 
Letter will be 
shared with 
every student 
and their 
families. 

 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          68 

All students 

Student 
Attendance 

September 2018 - 
June 2019 

Classroom Teachers 

 

Baseline, mid-year 
and final 
assessments 

 

Framework: 
Supportive 
Environment 

Administration 

 

 

CBO - CHLDC 

 

Technology and 
Literacy -TEALs + 
CUNY Technology 
Intern + website, 
Lexia, Regents 
Review, ELT, PS or 
MS Reading 
Partnership, SAT 
Prep, IB, Summer 
Bridge 

MS Recruitment -
student leadership 
programs, 
attendance 
improvement, PS or 
MS Reading 
Partnership, IB, 
basketball 

Increase in reading 
levels 

 

Increased interest 
in computer 
technology 

Increase number 
of students 
applying and 
getting accepted 
to the school 

Less disciplinary 
infractions 

 

Increase in 
attendance 

 

Less crisis 
intervention 

Middle School 
students 

Student 
Attendance 

October 2018 - 
June 2019 

School Counselors 

 

 

Peer Leaders 

Framework: 
Supportive 
Environment 

 

Peer Leaders 

 

CBO - CHLDC 

Administration 

 

CBO - CHLDC 

Mental Health - 

All students 

Student 
Attendance 

September 2018 - 
June 2019 

 

Framework: 
Supportive 
Environment 

  

 
Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment 

Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including 
human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, lead CBO’s community school budget, FSC Supports, 
etc. 
Partnership with Children 

Lexia 

CUNY Technology Intern 

Youth workers and Teaching Assistants 

Regents Prep classes after school and on weekends 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          69 

 

ELT facilitators and programs 

Educational incentive trips 

School swag 

 

 
Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 

X 

Tax Levy 

 

Title I 
1003(a) 

X 

X 

Title I 
SWP 

Title III 

 

 

Title I TA 

PTA 

Funded 

 

 

P/F Set-
aside 

SIG 
Grant 

X 

X 

21st Century 

 

C4E 

School 

Achievement 

X 

Other 

Funding 

 
 
Part 6 – Progress Monitoring  

Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement 
planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 
Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and 
Time-bound. 
By February 2019, the school will implement a peer mentoring program and advisory increasing the school's 
attendance rate from 86.6% to at least 90%. 

 
Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 
ATS attendance reports 

New Visions heat map 

 
Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action 
plan, if applicable. 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          70 

 

Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Program Description 

 

Directions: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) activities are directly aligned to the elements of the Framework for Great 
Schools, Rigorous Instruction, Supportive Environments, and Strong Family and Community Ties. ELT provides enriching 
educational experiences that happen outside of the traditional school day and blend skill acquisition, relationship-
building and fun to foster academic and social-emotional growth. Summer learning, afterschool programming, and 
extended-day ELT models, when well-implemented, play a critical role in supporting students in all grades and ensuring 
that they graduate from high school, college and career ready. SED requires that Priority schools offer a minimum of 200 
additional student contact hours as Expanded Learning Time in addition to the current mandated length of 900 hours of 
instruction per year (25 hours per week) in grades K-6 and 990 hours of instruction per year (27.5 hours per week) in 
grades 7-12. Effective ELT models will blend school staff with community partners, and will provide a balanced 
curriculum that can include ELA, math, STEM, arts, physical activity, and leadership development. Complete the sections 
on this page to demonstrate how the school will meet these requirements. 
 
Part 1 – ELT Program Goal(s) 

Describe the summative goal(s) of the ELT program for the 2018-19 school year. Goals for ELT should aligned to the 
Rise Benchmarks.  How will the school will ensure that all students’ individual needs are served during the Rise ELT 
and how the school’s vision for ELT will impact both academic achievement and social emotional growth? Be sure to 
construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. 
By June 2019, our school's Progress Towards Graduation-Years 2 and 3 will increase by ____%, from our current ___% 
to 63.7%. 

- earn 10+ credits a year 

- 6+ credits in English, Math, Science, Social Studies 

- 1+ credits earned in 3 of the 4 main subjects, electives count 

 

 
Part 2 – ELT Program Type 

Is the ELT program voluntary or compulsory? 

 

Voluntary 

X 

Compulsory 

Rise ELT – Describe what accountability structures the school will employ to ensure participation of all students, 
including special populations, will participate fully in Rise ELT. 
Additional ELT - If there is a voluntary ELT program in addition to the compulsory Rise ELT, indicate how you will 
actively encourage the participation of all students, with the goal of serving at least 50% of students. 
RISE ELT - All students are programmed for 9 periods a day Monday-Friday for the entire school year. On Monday's 
students are enrolled in classes that support relationship building and social-emotional support provided through the 
CBO. On Tuesday through Friday, students are enrolled in 10-week cycle courses that provide them with a mixture of 
academic and skill acquisition classes provided by their subject area teachers.  

 

Additional ELT - Additional PM-ELT is schedule two times per-year depending on student need. Each semester 
students are provided with Regents review, tutoring or core courses on Wednesday, Thursday and Saturday for a total 
of 8 hours a week. Additional summer-ELT provides students with Regents review and core courses also. Students are 
scheduled according to need or desire to take courses earlier than their cohort. Students participate in meetings with 
their counselor, in addition to a letter going home to their parent/guardian. There is follow-up to ensure that students 
are attending. Any student that cannot attend because of other obligations are required to get a letter from their 
parent explaining why they cannot attend. Attendance is taken and snacks are provided.  

 

 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          71 

 
Part 3 – ELT Program Description 

Target Population: The ELT program for a Rise School will be offered to all students in the school. 

Describe how the school will meet the following SED requirements for an ELT program: 
How will the school integrate academics, enrichment, and skill development through hands-on experiences that make 
learning relevant and engaging?   
How will CBO staff and the school’s teachers be integrated to provide a seamless learning day? 

  Offer a range of activities that capture student interest and strengthen student engagement in learning so as 

to promote higher attendance, reduces risk for retention or drop out, and increases the likelihood of 
graduation. 

  Actively address the unique learning needs and interests of all types of students, especially those who may 

benefit from approaches and experiences not offered in the traditional classroom setting. 

  What new content areas and opportunities will be offered to students? How will the school ensure all IEP and 

language mandates are met during ELT? 

  Contain components designed to improve student academic, social, and emotional outcomes, including 

opportunities for enrichment programs such as in music and art. 

  Ensure instruction in any core academic subject offered in the program will be delivered under the 

supervision of a teacher who is NYS certified in that particular content area. 

  How will community educators receive professional development?  Are there plans to provide joint PD to 

school faculty and community partner staff? 

  What content will be led by pedagogical staff and what content will be led by CBO partners? 
  How will the school best utilize CBO partners to impact student achievement? 
  How will effective outreach be conducted to families? 
  How will programming be made easily accessible to students and families in order to encourage 

participation? 

The ELT classes will be designed to be seamlessly incorporated into students’ everyday schedule. The school’s daily 
schedule will begin at 8:00am and students will be in class until 3:20pm. All students will be scheduled for an 
additional hour of classes. Students will be individually scheduled for courses that are specific to their academic needs 
and engage them in topics otherwise not accessible to them during the regular school day. Prior year’s ELT data will 
be used to see what course had the most success in regard to student attendance rate and credit accumulation so 
that these classes can be replicated to assist with providing students with elective credits required for a Regents 
diploma. Students will be surveyed by the CBO in late spring 2018 for their enrichment and Advanced Placement 
course requests. Student requests will be aligned to faculty expertise and CBOs will be in charge of soliciting 
partnerships with organizations that can provide instruction in an area that faculty are not specialized in. Students will 
have the opportunity to take a class that is not offered at our school but is taught at a school on the campus. Teachers 
will partake in summer professional development to be able to teach courses outside of their repertoire. ELT will be 
highlighted in the family monthly newsletter that is created by the Parent Coordinator and mailed home. The chart 
below represents ELT program courses that will be incorporated into the day: 

 

ELT Program/Activity 

Target Population 

Partner  

AIS Courses (SETSS, Lexia 
(reading), _______ etc. ) 

Students identified as 
requiring additional 
support academically  

School faculty 

Eligibility  
- Did not meet college 
readiness scores on a 
previous Regent 

- Less than a 70 course 
grade 

Frequency 

At least four times a 
week for at least 10 
weeks 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          72 

 

- Currently has an IEP 
and/or requires extra 
help. 

- Lexile level below the 
student's grade level 

AM School for HS students 
(JROTC) 

 

Incoming freshman and 
currently enrolled 
students (JROTC) 

United States 
Air Force DOE 
Teachers 

About 20 that are 
interested 

At least three times a 
week 

Title III ENL Support 

ELL Identified students  School faculty 

About 90 registered 
ELLs and ELLs who 
tested out over the 
past two years 

Enrichment (Fitness, 
Swimming, Basketball, 
Community Journalism, Bridge 
to College) 

Students identified as 
requiring additional 
support academically 
and social-emotionally 

School faculty, 
CBO 
contracted 
personnel 

All registered students 

Structured 
throughout the 
school day, after 
school and on 
Saturday for the 
entire school-year 

At least four times a 
week for at least 10-
weeks 

 
PM School for HS students 
(Living Environment, Earth 
Science, Global History, 
American History, English, 
Algebra) 

 
Summer School 2018  

Students who failed one 
or more classes 

School faculty 

All students who failed 
a course 

14 weeks, 2 times a 
week 

(Living Environment, Earth 
Science, Global History, 
American History, English, 
Algebra, Spanish) 

Students not meeting 
promotion criteria for 
credits or want to 
graduate early 

School faculty 

All students who failed 
a course 

Mon-Thursday, July 
9, 2018-August 16, 
2018 

 
Regents Tutoring (ELA, Living 
Environment, Earth Science, 
Algebra, Geometry, Algebra II, 
Global History, American 
History, Spanish) 

 
Saturday Academy (ELA, Living 
Environment, Earth Science, 
Algebra, Geometry, Algebra II, 
Global History, American 
History, Spanish) 

 

Students taking Regents 
for the first time and 
students who failed 
previously 

School faculty 

Scheduled for a 
Regents in January or 
June 

14 weeks, 3 times a 
week 

Students who failed one 
or more classes 

School faculty 

All students who failed 
a course 

14 Saturdays 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          73 

 

Leadership Development 
(Youth Leaders (BSAC, GSO, 
PGL), Attendance Monitors, 
Peer Mentors, FOT, Opening 
Act)  

Target students with an 
attendance rate of 85%-
100%, but all students 
can participate after an 
interview 

School faculty 
and CBO 

Target students with 
an attendance rate of 
85%-100%, but all 
students can 
participate after an 
interview 

At least once a week 

  

 
Part 4 – ELT Program Implementation and Oversight 
Part 4a. Who will implement the ELT program? Who will oversee the program? 
1. 

Indicate the key personnel that will be responsible for implementing and overseeing the ELT program, 
including school-based staff and any high-quality community partners that will be involved. 
If applicable, describe the scope of involvement of all community partners and how the joint ELT program is 
structured. 
How will the school assess the impact of ELT on individual student achievement and social emotional 
development?   

2. 

3. 

A programming committee (administration, guidance, CSD) will be created to ensure that courses offered are 
strategically placed throughout the day, are aligned to student need and offer students the opportunity to excel. 
Target students will be selected that with increased mentoring will succeed and help the school achieve success on 
the benchmarks. These students will be labeled the "RISE students" and their progress will be discussed weekly during 
attendance meetings. Teachers will track their progress on weekly assessments including their attendance. The 
programming committee will use observations, attendance rate, progress report and report card data to evaluate 
programs. The committee will convene six times during the school year to review the data and make necessary 
adjustments to ensure the greatest success for the students. School leaders will oversee the program to guarantee 
that courses are being taught by certified teachers, that students are attending and that teachers are following 
school-level policies and procedures for students to gain credit. School leaders will observe ELT classes at least twice a 
year and provide feedback to the teachers in the form of a "Satisfactory" or "Unsatisfactory" rating. The CBO will 
assist in hiring teaching artists and student teachers to assist in creating engaging courses. Student teachers will 
provide students with additional support in the core classes that have historically low end-of-year assessment passing 
rates. Individual students will be assessed on their credit accumulation, course grade and attendance rate.  

 
Part 4b. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. 
 

ELT Program/Activity 
AIS Courses (SETSS, Lexia (reading), _______ 
etc. ) 
AM School for HS students (JROTC) 

Title III ELL Support 

Enrichment (Fitness, Swimming, Basketball, 
Community Journalism, Bridge to College) 
PM School for HS students (Living 
Environment, Earth Science, Global History, 
American History, English, Algebra) 

 

Summer School 2018  

Timeline 

September – June, Monday – Friday, during the regular school day 

September – June, Monday – Friday, 7:00am – 8:00am 
September – June, Monday – Friday, during the regular school day 
and 2:20pm-3:20pm and on Saturday 

September – June, Monday – Friday, during the regular school day 

September – June, Wednesday & Thursday, 3:20pm – 5:00pm 

July 2018 – August 2018, a six-week program, 

Monday - Thursday from 8am-12pm 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          74 

 

(Living Environment, Earth Science, Global 
History, American History, English, Algebra, 
Spanish) 

 
Regents Tutoring (ELA, Living Environment, 
Earth Science, Algebra, Geometry, Algebra II, 
Global History, American History, Spanish) 

 
Saturday Academy (ELA, Living Environment, 
Earth Science, Algebra, Geometry, Algebra II, 
Global History, American History, Spanish) 

 
Leadership Development (Youth Leaders 
(BSAC, GSO, PGL), Attendance Monitors, Peer 
Mentors, FOT, Opening Act) 
  

 
Part 5 – ELT Budget and Resource Alignment 

December 2018 – January 2019 & April 2019 – June 2019, 
Wednesday & Thursday 3:20pm – 5:00pm & Saturday 9am – 1pm. In 
January 2019 and June 2019, Regents tutoring will be incorporated 
into the day for maximum exposure 

December 2018 – January 2019 & April 2019 – June 2019, Saturday 
9am – 1pm 

September – June, Monday 2:20-3:20pm and/or Wednesday & 
Thursday, 3:20pm – 5:00pm 

 

 

Part 5a. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to 
implement the ELT program. 
Per-session and pro-rata for teachers, guidance, dean, secretary and administrators 

Metro cards (Saturday School) 

CBO funds for teaching artists 

Consumables (Regents review books, workbooks, supplies [science lab, physical education, art}) 

Professional Development 

Reading assessments and programs 

Math assessments and programs 

 
Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support the ELT Program.  
Note: If the program is funded by 21st Century Community Center Learning Funds, it must be offered in conjunction 
with a high quality, high capacity community partner.   

X 

 

21st 

Century 

Title I 
1003(a) 

X 

X 

Tax 
Levy 

X 

Title III 

 

Title I 
SWP 

PTA 

Funded 

 

 

Title I TA 

SIG 
Grant 

 

 

P/F Set-aside 

School 

Achievement 

Funding 

 

 

C4E 

Other 

 
Part 6 – ELT Progress Monitoring  

Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement 
planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 
Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and 
Time-bound. 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          75 

 

 

 

ELT Program/Activity 

Benchmark 

AIS Courses (SETSS, Lexia (reading), ALEKS (math) ) 

AM School for HS students (JROTC) 

Title III ELL Support 

Enrichment (Fitness, Swimming, Basketball, Community 
Journalism, Bridge to College) 

 

PM School for HS students (Living Environment, Earth 
Science, Global History, American History, English, Algebra) 

 

Summer School 2018  

  Progress reports (six times a year) and report 

cards (six times a year), scholarship reports 
Student goals, lexile levels, IEP goals 

 

  Attendance rate of 85% checked when progress 

reports and report cards are distributed 

 

Students attending class will increase at least 1 
level on the NYSESLAT 

  Progress reports (six times a year) and report 

cards (six times a year) 
Lexile-level improvement 

 

  Progress reports (six times a year) and report 

cards (six times a year), scholarship reports 

  Period attendance rate will be compared weekly 

and compared against course codes 

  PM School will have a 70% attendance rate by 

the end of the school year 

  Attendance rate for each period will be checked 

weekly during the 14-week cycle 

(Living Environment, Earth Science, Global History, 
American History, English, Algebra, Spanish) 

80% of students attending summer school will gain the 
maximum amount of credits 

 

 

 

Regents Tutoring (ELA, Living Environment, Earth Science, 
Algebra, Geometry, Algebra II, Global History, American 
History, Spanish) 

 

Saturday Academy (ELA, Living Environment, Earth 
Science, Algebra, Geometry, Algebra II, Global History, 
American History, Spanish) 

 

  70% of students requiring Regents review due to 

previous failure will attend Regents tutoring 
  Review attendance weekly and chart which 

students are attending to make outreach and 
encourage attendance 

  By June 2018, 70% of students who require a 

Regents to graduate will have attended 

  Review attendance weekly and chart which 

students are attending to make outreach and 
encourage attendance 

Leadership Development (Youth Leaders (BSAC, GSO, PGL), 
Attendance Monitors, Peer Mentors, FOT, Opening Act) 

  Attendance rate of 85% checked when progress 

reports and report cards are distributed 

 

 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          76 

 

  

Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 

STARS - Scholarship reports 
STARS - Transcripts 

Student surveys 

 
 
  New Visions Student Sorter - Credit accumulation 
 
  Period attendance rate 
 
 

Lexia Reading Assessments 
Lexile Levels 

 
Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action 
plan, if applicable. 

 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          77 

 

Section 7: Community School Description  

Directions: The Community School strategy is directly aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. Community Schools 
bring schools and community partners together and integrate academics, health, youth development, and family 
engagement to provide students with the tools and opportunities they need to succeed.  The Core Services in 
Community Schools are Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & 
Wellness. 
 
Part 1 – The Community School Program Goal(s) 

How is the Community School strategy integrated into academic instruction at your school, and what impact has it 
had on student academic outcomes? 
The Community School strategy has been integrated into our academic instruction by making sure that students and 
families are knowledgeable of the services and support systems that CHCP has in place around tutoring, mentoring 
programs, expansion of social/mental health services, data sharing, and offerings of extended learning time classes 
that are aligned to the curriculum and schools mission statement. All of which, has had an impact on our graduation, 
regents completion, and attendance rate.  

 
Indicate the summative goal(s) of the Community School program for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct 
the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound.  

  By June 2019, our school's Student Attendance will increase by 2.3% points, from our current 88.6% to 90.9%. 
  By August 2019, through our expansion of additional tutoring sessions and hiring of additional teacher 

assistance (T.A's), our school's regents completion rate will increase by ______% from our current ______% 

  By August 2019, there will be an increased focus on consistency sharing data with students and their families 

to ensure the four-year graduation rate for cohort U will exceed 80% 

 

 

Please answer the following question as it relates to meeting your Community School Program Annual Goal(s): 
How will achieving your Community School Goal(s)--in ELT, Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & 
Wellness--support your academic goals for students? 
It will support our goals by helping to improve our four year graduation rate. 

 

 
Part 2 – Community School Program Description 

Part 2a. Identify the CBO partnerships that you will develop in ELT, Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and 
Health & Wellness, their target student population(s), and scope of the services provided. As well as supporting 
schools’ supportive environment and attendance work, CBOs should be helping to support your school’s instructional 
focus. 

CBO Partnership 

Target Population 

Scope of Service 

Student Success Center 

9th-12th graders 

The SSC works closely with students 
and their families to support and 
advise them in the college application 
process. A full time college access 
counselor is assigned to work with 
every senior and their family in 
applying to college and for financial 
aid. Once students have committed to 
a school, they will then be assigned a 
persistence counselor who will track 
their academic progress throughout 
their college journey.  

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          78 

 

Student Success Mentoring 

Chronically absent and at risk 
students who are part of Cohort U 
2019. 

Partnership with Children 

Targeted students with mental health 
referrals and those who are 
interested in receiving services 

Future of Tomorrow (F.O.T) 

General Student Organization 

N/A 

  

 

CBO staff will be responsible for 
monitoring the academic and 
attendance progress of these 
students. CBO will also plan and 
facilitate monthly goal orientated 
luncheons for these students and key 
stakeholders such as guidance 
counselors and A.P's.  

To provide preventive care through 
one on one and group counseling . 
Along with supporting school staff 
with classroom intervention and 
professional development 

FOT will develop and strengthen 
student leadership, civic engagement, 
and develop community awareness. 

Students will have the opportunity to 
create change in their school by 
sharing ideas and participating in 
leadership activities. 

Targeted students with an attendance 
rate of 70%-85%, but any students 
who are passionate about advocating 
for their school and their 
communities can participate. 
Additionally, FOT will assist in 
planning and facilitating monthly 
town halls for the entire school body 
using the restorative justice circle 
model. 

Target students with an attendance 
rate of 70% and above 

N/A 

N/A 

Part 2b. Describe how the school will partner with the Lead CBO to do the following: 
1. 

Community Schools are expected to partner with a community-based partner organization (CBO) and 
together with members of the School Leadership Team, hire a Community School Director. The Director will 
lead implementation of the asset and needs assessment process, and other critically important coordinating 
activities. Indicate how you will leverage this aspect of the work. 
Community Schools are expected to personalize the needs of all students, through strategic programming and 
services, as determined by the asset and needs assessment, and must also offer Expanded Learning Time 
(ELT) and mental health programming. In completing this section, ensure that you think about how: (1) the 
right services are provided to the right students and families at the right time; and (2) how you will seamlessly 
coordinate services with instructional programming happening throughout and outside of the school day. 
Indicate how you will implement this work, and describe other programming you anticipate to be in place to 
strengthen this initiative. 
Community Schools are expected to emerge as Partnership Schools, which are places where parents and 
families feel welcome, actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of 
their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. Monthly meetings and Community 
School Forums engaging families and community stakeholders will be a critical part of this family engagement 
strategy. Describe how you will implement this aspect of the work. 
Community School Principals are expected to meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, 
select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual 
students. Data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter - and training will be available for schools to use. 
Indicate how you will implement this aspect of the work. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          79 

 

Community School Principal, CSD and key staff members will meet every Monday to discuss attendance trends and 
students who are of concern. We will use the New visions Data Sorter and ATS to determine which students are of 
high risk and which intervention is needs. We will also use the data tools to determine which cohort needs the most 
intervention and which events/trip incentive will have the biggest impact. 

 

 
 
Part 3 – Community School Partnerships Oversight 

Part 3a. Key Staff and Partners 
1.  Name and describe the scope of involvement of all community partners working in the school (include partners 

supporting ELT, counseling, enrichment, etc.) 

2.  Name the members of your Community School Team and how meetings will be organized and structured to 

engage all stakeholders and be focused on results. 

3.  Explain data strategies including the use of the data sorter, and steps that the school will take to ensure that the 

appropriate interventions are provided to the right students 

1. Community Partners will be fully integrated into the school-day. They will provide counseling services to students, 
elt classes on Monday afternoon, student engagement activities and attendance support. Community school partners 
including: Partnership with Children and Northwell Heath, Lyfe program, Good Shepherd's, Counseling in schools, Day 
One are brought together by lead CBO for monthly meetings.  

 

2. Our Community School Team will consist of students, parents, school leaders, CBO's and safety agents. Community 
School Team meetings will occur in collaboration with the other two Community School s on Campus and will be 
structured based on the guidelines given to us by DOE 

 

3. The new vision's heat map and ATS report will be used during our weekly attendance meeting to identify students 
who are in need of intervention. On a quarterly basis lead CBO will utilize the heat map to identify interventions that 
have occurred and those that need to be implemented by support staff and community partners.  

 

 
Part 3b. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to 
implement the Community School program. 
All Community School functions will be essentially funded through the Community School Funds.  

 

Part 3c. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. 
The Community School Planning and Assessment Phase will take place (May 2018-August 2018), we will focus on 
developing our comprehensive Community School (CS) Plan. The lead CBO will establish consistent communication 
and outreach strategies with school staff, students, families, community partners, and existing support services to 
continue to build trust and collaboration across each group of key stakeholders within the Community School. The 
lead CBO will work with SLT to identify preliminary members for the Community School Team (CST) and will introduce 
the CST during freshman orientation as a tool to introduce the Community School model and cultivate potential 
members. The CBO and parent coordinator will continue to have ongoing meetings with potential CST members 
throughout the summer with the goal of building participation over time. 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          80 

 

 

Using supports from the National Center for Community Schools, the CBO will oversee a needs assessment for 
students, families, and school staff. In partnership with the principals, SLTs and the CST, the CBO will use survey 
results to inform the CS Plan and to continue to identify partners for the CST, based on community needs.  

During the summer, the CBO will support and help enhance ongoing school-based summer activities, which currently 
include CHLDC’s college exploration and enrichment-focused program and summer bridge activities for incoming 9th 
graders, run by the school. The CBO will plan with SLT, parent coordinator and initial CST members to enrich existing 
activities through additional family outreach and potentially establish new partnerships that will strengthen program 
content.  

The CBO will work with the parent coordinator to conduct targeted parent outreach, including one-on-one phone 
calls, mailings and will assist with creating scaffolded plan for family engagement for the upcoming school year using 
the Karen Mapp model. Using the family and community surveys, the parent coordinator and CBO will establish a 
clear calendar of family-focused events that provide options for family engagement and will include, but are not 
exclusive to, parenting workshops, leadership development training, academic support, career support, adult 
education in ESOL and High School Equivalency, and connections to key social services around housing, health care, 
and food access.  

The CBO will work closely with school leaders to support the expanded instructional day and regular enrichment 
activities. Informed by the surveys and student focus groups, a scope and sequence of offerings will be set up that 
meet the interests and instructional needs of the school community. All activities will align with and enhance existing 
enrichment activities and will fill in identified gaps to ensure that all students have access to enrichment and 
extended instructional time. 

 
Part 3d. Mental Health Work Plan 

Separate from this R-CEP, schools will complete a Mental Health Work Plan that will become an addendum to this 
document. 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          81 

 

Section 8: Academic Intervention Services (AIS)  

(Required for All Schools) 

 

Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services 
(AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records 
need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area 
listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. 
 

Type of Academic 
Intervention Service 
(AIS) 

English Language 
Arts (ELA) 

Criteria for 
determining AIS 
services (For 
additional guidance, 
refer to NYSED’s 
memo.) 
-Less than a 75% on 
the Common Core 
exam 

-Less than a65%class 
average 

-A level I or II on the 
8th grade 
assessment 

-ELL students 

- Less than a 5th 
grade comparison to 
LexileLevels 

 

Method for delivery 
of service (e.g. small 
group, one-to-one, 
tutoring, etc.) 

When the service is 
provided (e.g. during 
the school day, 
before or after 
school, etc.) 

-Small elective classes 

-During the day 

-Regents review -non 
credit bearing 

-After school 

-Saturday school 

-Additional teacher in 
the room for support 

 

-Teaching Assistants 

-Tailored curriculum 
to support the 
students' individual 
needs 

-EngageNY 

curriculum 

 

Type of program or 
strategy (e.g. 
repeated readings, 
interactive writings, 
etc.) 

- Double period of 
ELA 

- Facing History ELA 
elective course 

- Writing Workshop 
using the Writing 
Scope and Sequence 

- Text-Dependent 
Questions/Answers 

- Writing is Thinking 
(WIT) strategies 

- Close Reading 
strategies 

- Reading program 

- Annotation 
strategies 

- Argumentative 
writing 

- Critical lens 

- Vocabulary 
enrichment 

 

 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          82 

 

Mathematics 

-Less than a 70% on 
the Common Core 
exam 

-Less than a65%class 
average 

-A level I or II on the 
8th grade 
assessment 

 

Science 

-Less than a 65% on 
the Regents 

-Less than a65%class 
average 

 

- Lab review manuals 

- An additional lab 
class 

- Greater experiment 
exposure 

Social Studies 

-Less than a 65% on 
the Regents 

-Less than a65%class 
average 

 

- Math Lab 

-Small elective classes 

-During the day 

- Double period of 
Algebra as a 
freshman 

- Extended written 
responses 

 

 

- Graphing skills 

- Vocabulary 
enrichment 

 

- Extended written 
responses for 
thematic and 
documents-based 
essay 

-Regents review -non 
credit bearing 

-After school 

-Saturday school 

-Additional teacher in 
the room for support 

-Teaching Assistants 

-Tailored curriculum 
to support the 
students' individual 
needs 

EngageNYcurriculum 

 
-Regents review -non 
credit bearing 

 

 

-During the day 

-After school 

-Additional teacher in 
the room for support 

-Saturday school 

 

 

-Teaching Assistants 

-Tailored curriculum 
to support the 
students' individual 
needs 

-New Visions 
curriculum 

 
-Regents review -non 
credit bearing 

-During the day 

-After school 

-Additional teacher in 
the room for support 

-Saturday school 

 

 

- Mapping skills 

-Teaching Assistants 

-Tailored curriculum 
to support the 
students' individual 
needs 

-New Visions 
curriculum 

 

- Close Reading 
strategies 

- Annotation 
strategies 

- Vocabulary 
enrichment 

 

 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          83 

-Group 

-During the 

-Individual 

school day 

-Push-in to class 

-After school 

 

 

At-risk services (e.g. 
provided by the 
Guidance Counselor, 
School Psychologist, 
Social Worker, etc.) 

-One or more 
suspensions 

-Targeted 
intervention 

-Late three or more 
times in a week 

-Peer mediation 

-Attendance rate 
lower than 90% 

-Behavior 
intervention 
techniques 

-Threeor more 
detentions a month 

-Referral for 
counseling 

 

-Referral made by 
parent or teacher 

 

 

 
 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          84 

 

Section 9: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH)  

 

Directions: 
-  All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. 
-  All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. 
 
Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) 
As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the 
federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and 
report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support 
your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: 
http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf   

Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 

 

1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your 
school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE 
systems and may change over the course of the year.) 

25 

 

2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. 

CBO will host a housing forum for all families in the STH population. We will connect families with organizations for 
legal resources, back-rent support, counseling on housing lotteries, etc. STH students are paired with an adult to 
mentor them and ensure that their needs are being met throughout the year. Students are provided with school 
supplies, Metro cards and any clothing or food that they need. Students are encouraged to attend after-school 
tutoring and join clubs and sports. A breakfast and dinner program is offered for the students. 

 

Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 

1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school 
(please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 

N/A 

 

2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          85 

 

N/A 

 

3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary 
housing.  If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation 
Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question.  If your school did not receive an allocation 
and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. 

N/A 

 

  

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          86 

 

 

Section 10: Title I Program Information 

Directions: 
  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1 
  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2 
  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3 
  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  
 

If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can 
be found 

  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage 
 
Part 1: Title I Status 

Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. 

X 

Schoolwide Program (SWP) 

 

Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools  

 

Non-Title I 

 
Part 2: All Title I Schools 

2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) 

Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support 
including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. 
When a position becomes available, a posting is made on the Department of Education Open Market site, the New 
Teacher Finder is used to find candidates and networking is continuously employed to recruit the best candidate 
available. Administrative staff attends hiring fairs to identify and recruit highly-qualified teachers. As resumes are 
received, the hiring committee, consisting of school leaders, ENL, history, science and ELA teachers, convene to 
review applicants. The committee reaches out to all qualified candidates to come in for an interview. The candidate 
may be asked to come in for a second interview and present a demonstration lesson. Once the candidate is selected, 
the principal’s secretary works closely with network HR personnel to ensure that the teacher meets all required 
documentation, certification and assessment deadlines. Mentors are assigned to support new, struggling and non-
highly-qualified teachers. Teachers are provided with differentiated professional development and given the 
opportunity to continue their education. 

 

 
2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development 

Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and 
paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS).  
A professional development calendar will be created prior to the start of the school year based on the most common 
areas of instructional and social-emotional need. The areas for growth will be determined using school-wide data, 
including the end-of-year Advance MOTP ratings and student exam results. The professional development plan will be 
edited through the year to reflect ongoing trends that are seen through cycles of observations. The teachers will also 
participate in PD with the Brooklyn North Field Support Office, specifically around co-teaching and integrating more 
technology into the classroom. A coach from Metaphorphosis will support the math teachers and provide them with 
PD. The teachers that are instructing the Imagine Math and REWARDS classes will partake in district-wide PD. 
Advanced Placement teachers will participate in AP for All PD. Multiple administrators and teachers will begin to 
attend International Baccalaureate (IB) PD for the roll out of the program in September 2018. Teachers have the 
opportunity to request professional development from both within and out of the DOE. 

 

 
Part 3: TA Schools Only 

3a. Use of Program Resources 

Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          87 

 

N/A 

 

 
3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program 

Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., 
providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from 
the regular classroom during regular school day). 
N/A 

 

 
Part 4: SWP Schools Only 

4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only)  

Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary 
school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, 
early intervention services, etc.). 
N/A 

 

 
4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments 

Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate 
multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to 
improve instruction.    
The MOSL team, comprised, among others, of an educator from all content areas, will be the key professionals who 
decide on assessments that will be administered. The team will share the information with other teachers. 
Professional learning is discussed while the assessment measures are selected and additional professional 
development is determined throughout the year from teacher feedback. Teachers will facilitate their department and 
grade meetings using an inquiry approach focused on improving literacy to increase student learning. They will 
ultimately produce better student-work products that are reviewed using a school-wide protocol. 

 

 
4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools 

Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and 
Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible 
for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its 
Schoolwide plan (R-CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program 
contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the 
intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, 
State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the 
amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met 
the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. 
Program Name 

Fund Source 
(i.e. Federal, 
State or Local) 

Funding Amount 
Indicate the amount 
contributed to 
Schoolwide pool. 
(Refer to Galaxy for 
school allocation 
amounts) 

Place an (X) in Column A below to verify 
that the school has met the intent and 
purposes of each program whose funds are 
consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section 
references where a related program activity 
has been described in this plan. 

Column A 

Column B 

Verify with an (X) 

Section Reference(s) 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          88 

 

Title I Part A (Basic) 

Title I School Improvement 
1003(a) 
Title I Priority and Focus 
School Improvement Funds 

Title II, Part A 

Title III, Part A 

Title III, Immigrant 

Tax Levy (FSF) 

Federal 

Federal 

Federal 

Federal 

Federal 

Federal 

Local 

0 

 
0 

 
0 

 
0 

 
0 

 
$12,366 

 
$2,306,733 

 

x 

 
x 

 
x 

 
x 

 
x 

 
x 

 
x 

 

N/A 

 
N/A 

 
N/A 

 
N/A 

 
N/A 

 
Section 5, 6, 7, 8 

 
Section 5, 6, 7, 8 

 

 
1Explanation/Background: 
Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and 
programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and 
advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools 
may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, 
State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This 
gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students.   
 
Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a 
single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual 
identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool 
to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds 
used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from 
which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to 
combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used 
conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the 
dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds.  
 
Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages: 

  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program 

separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different 
sources when accounting for their use. 

  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the 

statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., 
semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent 
and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended 
beneficiaries are met. 

 
2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as 
follows: 

  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to 
improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes 
provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH). 

  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified 

through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with 
district oversight and included in the DCIP/R-CEP.  

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          89 

 

  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement 

plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  

  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in 

grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not 
available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional 
program. 

  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, 
develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and 
achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another 
purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-
quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in 
effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the 
participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language 
instruction programs. 

  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of 

English language acquisition and content area achievement. 

 
Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated: 

  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and 
programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent 
representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities 
funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with 
student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. 

  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and 

 

more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. 
IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education 
designed to meet their individual needs. 

  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be 

used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          90 

 

Section 11: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 

  

 (Required for All Title I Schools) 

 

Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and 
representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will 
participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I 
program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson 
that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the 
parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school 
will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic 
achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family 
Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. 
 
The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current 
R-CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent 
Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent 
involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen 
family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy.  
 
Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample 
Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) 
as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. 
 
 

Parent and Family Engagement Policy 

Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. 
The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of 
parents and community in the school. Cypress Hills Collegiate Preparatory High School, in compliance with the Section 
1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent 
involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the 
families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-
making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School 
Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of 
the school community. 

 

 

 

Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students 

CHCP will support families of Title I students by: 

●providing materials and training to help families work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., 
literacy, math and use of technology; 

●providing families with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision 
making in support of the education of their children; 

●fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that families can effectively support and monitor 
their child’s progress; 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          91 

 

●providing assistance to families in understanding city, state and federal standards and assessments; 

●sharing information about school- and family-related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in 
languages that all families can understand; 

●providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of families to improve 
outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between families and other 
members of the school community; 

 

Parental Involvement and School Quality 

The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all 
parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The 
school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this Parent Involvement 
Policy with Title I families to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school 
surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of families, and 
enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school.  

 

Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement 

Families are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, Community 
Engagement Team and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school 
community.  

In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, families of Title I participating students, family members of the 
school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as family members of the School Leadership 
Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for 
additional input. To increase and improve family engagement and school quality, the school will: 

●actively involve and engage families in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I 
program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title 
I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; 

● engage families in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated 
directly to the school to promote family involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; 

● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for family engagement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as 
described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; 

●support school-level committees that include families who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent 
Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support 
and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills;  

● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. 
The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide family workshops based on the assessed needs of the 
families of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and 
inviting to all families. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for families 
each month and file a report with the central office; 

●conduct family workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability 
grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and 
technology training to build families’ capacity to help their children at home;  

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          92 

 

●provide opportunities for families to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/state accountability 
system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning 
Environment Survey Report; 

●host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise families of 
children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 
the program and the family engagement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable 
sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act; 

●schedule additional family meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or 
evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and 
allow families to provide suggestions; 

●translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed;  

●conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all families are invited to attend formal presentations and 
workshops that address their students' academic skill needs and what families can do to help; 

 

The school will further encourage school-level familial involvement by: 

● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; 

● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; 

● encouraging meaningful family participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher 
Association) and Title I Parent Committee; 

● supporting or hosting Family Day events; 

● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for families; 

● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; 

● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep families informed of their 
children’s progress; 

● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep families informed about school 
activities and student progress; 

● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, 
and to the extent practicable, in the languages that families can understand. 

 

School-Parent Compact (SPC) 

Cypress Hills Collegiate Preparatory High School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every 
Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of 
student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and 
programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will 
share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be 
developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. 

 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          93 

 

Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to 
meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: 

I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum 

● using academic learning time efficiently; 

● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; 

● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; 

● offering high-quality instruction in all content areas; 

● providing instruction by highly-qualified teachers and, when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by 
the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); 

 

Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: 

I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships 

● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be 
discussed as well as how this Compact is related; 

● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for families of students 
participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to 
be involved; 

● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and if funds 
are available) transportation or child care for those families who cannot attend a regular meeting; 

● respecting the rights of limited English-proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation 
services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education;  

● providing information related to school and family programs, meetings and other activities in a format and to the 
extent practicable in a language that families can understand; 

● involving families in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent 
Involvement Policy and this Compact; 

● providing families with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results 
for each child and other pertinent individual school information;  

● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with families 
each year; 

 

I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff 

Provide families reasonable access to staff by: 

● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited 
English-speaking families;  

● notifying families of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff 
member; 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          94 

 

● arranging opportunities for families to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to 
observe classroom activities; 

● planning activities for families during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences;  

 

 

Provide general support to parents by: 

 

● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment 
for parents and guardians; 

● assisting families in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their 
child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of 
families can attend); 

● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all 
members of the school community; 

● supporting family engagement activities as requested by families;  

● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for family engagement are utilized to implement activities as described in 
this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; 

● advising families of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and 
consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; 

 

● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate 
procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; 

II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 

● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and 
his/her age; 

● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; 

● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes);  

● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; 

● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as Extended Day Learning opportunities, clubs, team sports 
and/or quality family time; 

● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; 

● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; 

● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education;  

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          95 

 

● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education 

by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; 

● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; 

● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy 
and this Compact; 

● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn 
more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; 

● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on 
advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams;  

● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; 

 

 

III. Student Responsibilities 

● attend school regularly and arrive on time; 

● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; 

● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; 

● show respect for myself, other people and property; 

● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; 

● always try my best to learn. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          96 

Division of English Language Learners and Student Support 
Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 
52 Chambers Street, Room 209  
New York, New York 10007 
Phone:  212-374-6072 
http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY 
Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components: 
1. 

 

2. 

3. 

The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need 
These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154.  
Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. 
Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.   

Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high 
academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas.  
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on 
the teachers’ performance in classrooms.”  
1. 

Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term 
workshops and conferences.  

Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet 
community needs.   
1. 

These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process.  

 
NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional 
development, and 20% to OTPS.   
  
For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and 
Performance Specialist.  Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30.   
 

Part A: School Information 
Name of School:            
This school is (check 
one): 
 

DBN:            

conceptually consolidated (skip part E below)                
NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below)     

 

Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information  
The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): 

Before school                After school             

Saturday academy        

Total # of ELLs to be served:            
Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply):  

1       
7       

2       
8       

K       
6       

4         
10       
Total # of teachers in this program:            
# of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers:            
# of content area teachers:            

3       
9       

5 
11       

12 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          97 

 

Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information  
Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the 
· 
· 
· 
· 
· 
· 

rationale 
subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  
schedule and duration 
language of instruction 
# and types of certified teachers 
types of materials  

Begin description here:            
Rationale 
The rationale behind this program is that our ELL population has been steadily increasing as well 
as well as diversifying in native languages and English proficiency levels. As these changes are 
taking place, we find the need to provide more programs and opportunities to help our students 
achieve English language proficiency and college and career readiness.. CHCP strives to create 
student ownership in learning. One of our goals for the 2018-2019 academic year is student 
efficacy and student literacy. The supplemental instructional program will provide support for 
student learning, as well as provide  further opportunities for additional learning in order to 
acculturate and function in society. 
Our ENL population (current and former) totals ninety one.   This represents  30% of our student 
body. The percentage of SIFE students within out ELL student body is 21%. The number  of 
students with disabilities within our ELL student body is 23  %.  As indicated by these 
percentages, the demands of our instructional support need to be differentiated and expanded. 
Our students would benefit from additional hours and small group/individual instruction.  In an 
environment where NY State Assessments are becoming more rigorous and challenging, 
supplemental  instruction becomes even more crucial, particularly for the Common Core ELA 
and Social Studies Regents. 
Once the classes are established, students will be grouped according to needs. 
 The supplemental instruction program at CHCP will be  administered by at least two teachers, 
both of are  NYS ESL Pre K-12 licensed teachers. 
Language of Instruction 
The language of instruction will be English. However, there will be native language support 
provided via dictionaries, glossaries, i Pads and Laptop translation programs, native language 
textbooks and materials (where available.) Additionally, peer support will be a valuable tool used 
during the learning sessions. 
Schedule and Duration 
The  first semester Saturday ENL Academy  will begin on December 1 and  will run  until 
January 19th.  The second semester program will begin on approximately February 9th and will 
run until May 11. 
Additionally, we will hold a weekly pm school session for one hour duration running from the 
week of December 3rd through May 6. 
Types of Materials 
As Title III is an enrichment program, a wide variety of materials will serve as resources for 
supplementary instruction. The program would focus more on language skills rather than 
content, which is being addressed during the actual school day. We know that these students 
need enriched vocabulary in the areas of academics, content, and general communication. 
Textbooks and workbooks would revolve around the topics of developing communicative skills 
in a new society, assimilating into a new culture, cultural awareness books,  and citizenship 
workbooks  to name a few.  As mentioned earlier, the SIFE population has been increasing and , 
as such, literacy materials would be ordered.  These materials would be at cost to the Title III 
program. 
Some of the titles considered are: 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          98 

 

 

Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information  
Text                                                                                                      Publisher 
Oxford Picture Dictionary and Workbook                           Oxford University Press 
Now Hear This                                                                              Heinle and Heinle 
Interchange Series                                                                       Cambridge University Press 
U. S, Citizenship                                                                             Heinle and Heinle 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

rationale 
teachers to receive training  
schedule and duration 
topics to be covered 
name of provider 

Part C: Professional Development  
Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as 
other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs.   
· 
· 
· 
· 
· 
Begin description here:            
  
Rationale for ongoing professional development:  Our ELL student population has been 
changing over the past couple of years. The number of newcomers, combined with the increased 
SIFE student population has caused a greater need for literacy training. In addition, our 
population is becoming more diversified in language.  We are getting more students from all 
over the world with different levels of native language education.It is imperative that our 
teachers keep up with the latest teaching techniques that are aligned to Common Core Standards. 
We need continued Common Core and Danielson training in order to maximize student learning. 
Additionally, we are planning to use more technology in order to facilitate the learning of 
English.With this in mind, the Title III teacher and content area teachers will attend workshops / 
training sessions offered by DELLSS CUNY, Facing History, and outside 
consultants/organizations such as Harvard,  DataWise, TESOL, NYC Museums, NYSED, 
etc.  Bank Street College of Education offers a Language Series and Teachers College offers 
many workshop series for the ELL teacher. Some of these particular offerings are aligned to the 
Common Core Standards.These professional development opportunities will not be a cost to the 
Title III program.   The ENL teachers specifically will attend training on Title III Annual 
Measurement Achievement Objectives (AMAOs) and will be applying knowledge gained to 
develop and implement goals for the ELL population school wide. 
The ENL teachers who attend the training sessions and workshops will then return to school and 
turnkey the information at school staff meetings. This might take part during the Monday 
afternoon professional development or during the common planning sessions which take 
place  5th period daily. 
Record maintenance will be done in the following manner: 
· 
description of the professional development session and the agenda distributed by the facilitator. 
· 
The turnkey sessions will be part of the school's/department's Rolling Agenda maintained 
on Google Drive. These agendas are formatted according to DataWise. 

There will be a folder maintained by the ENL Coordinator that contains a brief 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          99 

 

 

Attendance will be taken and recorded following our school wide practice of signing in 

Part C: Professional Development  
· 
and maintained by Administration. 
Date                   Time                                  Provider                                                Topic____ 
9/13                     8:00-2:30                         Brooklyn North FSC                          HS ELL 
Coordinators' Working Group 
10/3                           "                                            "                                                            " 
11/7 
1/9 
2/6 
3/13 
11/30                  5:00-7:00                             NYS TESOL                                          Providing 
Essay Feedback 
12/4                                                                  NYU Steinhardt                                  Addressing 
the Socio-Emotional Needs of ELLS 
12/5                     8:30-2:30                            Brooklyn North FSC                          Nuts and Bolts 
2/1                                                                     NYU Steinhardt                                  Teacher 
Institute for Teachers working with ELL/MLL 
 
 
 
             
 
 
 

rationale 
schedule and duration 
topics to be covered 
name of provider 
how parents will be notified of these activities 

Part D: Parental Engagement Activities   
Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact 
higher achievement for ELLs.  NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as 
parent orientation during ELL identification process.   
· 
· 
· 
· 
· 
Begin description here:            
Parental involvement has always been and continues to be a top priority/goal at Cypress Hills 
Collegiate Prep High School. We believe in the 'whole child' approach when educating our ELL 
population. We aim for family inclusion and support in the education process, believing that with 
more parental support and involvement, the greater the chances for student success. 
Our students hail from at least ten different countries. They, along with their parents, need to 
acculturate to life in general in the United States. 
Some offerings dedicated to parental engagement are as follows: 
Career and Technology Workshops : once each quarter conducted by the parent coordinator 
Parents and Guardians as Partners: four times annually, dates to be determined for an hour and a 
half meeting. This series is to provide parents and guardians with the information and skills 
needed to assist their child/children attain success during their years of high school. 
Communicative English skills classes which will be conducted by licensed ENL teachers and 
held at the school once a month from 6 to 7:30 pm. 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          100 

 

 

Part D: Parental Engagement Activities   
Community School Family Celebrations are scheduled periodically throughout the year. The first 
one was September 28th.  Another new parent initiative is hosted by the Student Success Center 
and revolves around parents of seniors. 
Parents and guardians will be invited (pending funding availability) along on student trips in the 
spring semester.  The purpose of these trips would be to expose students and their families to 
"American" culture and apply their English language skills in the 'outside world.' Some possible 
trip ideas are to Ellis Island/Statue of Liberty and downtown Manhattan. 
Parents will be notified of these activities by emails, phone calls, and letters home. The 
notifications will be translated into students' native languages. Our Parent Coordinator is fluent 
in Spanish; and we will use the Office of Translation for assistance in languages other than 
Spanish as our language needs are diversifying. 
Records will be kept and organized by event. For each event there will be a folder which 
contains a copy of the agenda, sample parent notification letters, in English and parents' preferred 
language of communication, phone call logs which indicate date of phone call notifications, 
along with phone responses,  and attendance sheets with parent name and contact number or 
email address.  These files will be kept by the parent coordinator in her office, as well as folders 
maintained by the ENL Coordinator. 

Part E: Budget  
FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY.  Ensure that your 
Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. 
Allocation Amount: $           
Budget Category 

Budgeted Amount 

Professional salaries 
(schools must account for 
fringe benefits) 
1. 
2. 
Purchased services 
1. 

Per session 
Per diem 

High quality staff 
and curriculum 
development 
contracts. 

Supplies and materials 
2. 

Must be 
supplemental. 
Additional 
curricula, 
instructional 
materials. 
Must be clearly 
listed. 

3. 

4. 

Educational Software 
(Object Code 199) 
Travel 

Other 

           
N/A 

           
N/A 

           
N/A 

           
N/A 
           
N/A 
           
N/A 

Explanation of expenditures in this 
category as it relates to the 
program narrative for this title. 
           
N/A 

           
N/A 

           
 N/A 

           
N/A 
           
N/A 
           
N/A 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          101 

Part E: Budget  
FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY.  Ensure that your 
Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. 
Allocation Amount: $           
Budget Category 

Budgeted Amount 

Explanation of expenditures in this 
category as it relates to the 
program narrative for this title. 
           
N/A 

 

 
 
 
 

TOTAL 

           
N/A 

 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          102 

 

DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT 

GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY 

SUBMISSION FORM 

2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR 

 

DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information 

necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English 

language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a 

part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the 

services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should 

be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily 

available on file in the school.  When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces.  For 

additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. 

Part I: School ELL Profile 

 

 

 
 

A. School Information 

District  19 
School Name   Cypress Hills Collegiate Prep 

Borough  Brooklyn 

School Number   659 

 
B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant 

principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. 
 

Principal   Amy Yager 
Coach  N/A 
ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher  
 Elaine Cohen 
Teacher/Subject Area Anthony Stipanov 
Teacher/Subject Area N/A 
Related-Service Provider Phillip Varghese 
Superintendent N/A 

 

Assistant Principal  Danielle Naughton 
Coach N/A 
School Counselor  
N/A 
Parent  N/A 
Parent Coordinator Elizabeth Guy 
Field Support Center Staff Member N/A  
Other (Name and Title) type here 

C. Teacher Qualifications  
Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section.  Press TAB after each number entered to calculate 
sums and percentages.  
     
Number of certified 
ENL teachers currently teaching in the 
ENL program 

Number of teachers who hold both content 
area/common branch and TESOL certification 

1 

3 

1 

Number of certified 
bilingual teachers not currently 
teaching in a bilingual program  
Number of certified foreign 
language/world language teachers 
providing home language arts 
(HLA) to students in bilingual 
programs [applicable to grades 7–
12] 
Number of teachers currently 
teaching a self-contained ENL class 
who hold both a common branch 
license and TESOL certification 
[applicable to grades K–6] 

0 

0 

Number of teachers who hold both a 
bilingual extension and TESOL 
certification 

Number of special education teachers 
with bilingual extensions 

0 

1 

Number of certified 
bilingual teachers currently 
teaching in a bilingual program 

Number of certified ENL teachers 
not currently  teaching in the ENL 
program  

 

0 

0 

D. Student Demographics  
Total number of students in 
school (excluding pre-K) 

205 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          103 

Total number of ELLs 

55 

ELLs as share of total student population 
(%) 

26.83% 

 
 
 
 
Part II: ELL Demographics 
 
 
 
 
 
A. ELL Programs 

This school serves the following grades (includes 
ELLs and non-ELLs) 
Check all that apply 

 
 
This school offers (check all that apply): 

K

    1

    2

     3

     4

     5

 

6

   7

     8

    9

     10

     11

    12

 

Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) 

Yes

             No

Dual language program (DL) 

Freestanding ENL 

Yes

             No

Yes

             No

 

 

 

If yes, indicate language(s):            

If yes, indicate language(s):            

 

 
Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a 
separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. 
 

Bilingual Program Breakdown 

School 
Year 

Lang. 

Opened 
(e.g., 2013-14) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

K 

 
 

1 

 
 

3 

 
 

4 

 
 

2 

 
 

         

       

         

         

         

         

         

Program 
TBE 
TBE 
TBE 
DL 
DL 
DL 
Total 
 
 
 
Part III: Assessment Analysis 
 
 

 
 
0 

 
 
0 

 
 
0 

 
 
0 

       

       

       

 
 
0 

5 

6 

7 

8 

         

         

         

         

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

9 

0 
 
 

10 

11 

12 

0 
 
 

0 
 
 

0 
 
 

       

       

       

       

       

       

       

       

 
 
0 

 
 
0 

 
 
0 

 
 
0 

 
 
0 

 
 
0 

 
 
0 

 
 
0 

Tot # 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 

After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 

1.  What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, 

teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? 
All ENL students study the Engage NY Curriculum in their ELA classes (which are co-taught by a licensed ELA teacher and 
licensed ESL teacher.) This curriculum includes embedded assessments such as extended writing assignments, 
scaffolded graphic organizers, and  TDQs,  Teachers supplement these with self-created assessments such as entry tickets, exit 
tickets, Do Now activities, quizzes, modified graphic organizers. In the stand alone ENL classes, the ENL teachers use these 
types of formative assessments as well. One of the most common assessments in an ENL class is student-teacher conferencing 
and portfolios. The Engage NY Curriculum assignments are modified for the ENL students based on their 
NYSESLAT levels.  Such modifications include, but are not limited to, front loading vocabulary to assist the ENL student's 
comprehension, chunked text, and sentence frames for writing assignments. 
 

2.  What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          104 

 

 

Each teacher within each department is responsible for their student formative assessment trackers. These trackers are 
analyzed using the Data Wise process. The data is then aggregated to reach departmental analyses from which instructional 
decisions are made. All departments utilize the same data collection tools so as to achieve results that are reliable and valid. 
Strategies and contents are re-taught when necessary and are then re-assessed for purposes of analyzing student 
performance. 
 
 

3.  What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL 

Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? 
 
We find the students struggle in those classes which are language rich both in reading and writing. Vocabulary is often a 
struggle for students as they have not yet achieved advanced enough levels in vocabulary proficiency. As a school, we focus on 
vocabulary and are constantly assessing and reassessing students' progress in order to make instructional 
modifications/adjustments as necessary. 
 
 

4.  What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered?  

All summative assessment data is shared across each grade level and discipline through group meetings and Google Docs. Item 
analysis is performed, as well as task analysis on extended responses in order to determine student misconceptions, strengths, 
and areas of need. We examine multiple sources of information regarding the students' performance. We then 
create/design/modify/implement supplemental supports based on students' needs. Programming decisions are made by a 
team conferring together, often consisting of content teachers, ENL teachers, guidance counselors, and member(s) of 
administration. 
 
 

5.  How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-
5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.]  
N/A 
 

6.  What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? 

([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS].  
NYSESLAT 
NYS Regents - ELA, Math, U.S, History, Global History, Living Environment, LOTE 
SAT 
PSAT 
Gates-McGintie 
Learning Surveys 
 

7.  What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? 

As part of our daily schedule, CHCP holds two department meetings per week, as well as two common planning periods for co-
teachers to meet. Once the outcome assessment data is obtained, it is then immediately shared during these such meetings. 
Together as a unit, all department members work on analyze the data results. This data analysis, in turn, leads to decision 
making around program adjustments and instructional modifications.  
All of this is then disseminated/shared through Monday afternoon meetings. 

 
 
 
Part IV: ELL Programming 
 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          105 

 

Programming and Scheduling Information 

1.  How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented 
as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students 
regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in 
one class]).  

a.  Freestanding ENL program. 

Our student population is grouped into cohorts who travel together for their content classes. The cohorts are 
comprised of mixed level students and ELL and SWD students are integrated with General Ed students.  The 
standalone ENL classes consist of heterogeneous levels of students,  may consist of two different grade levels (at 
most), and also may consist of ELL students with disabilities. 
CR Part 154.2 informs our programming decisions as to what specific type of services are delivered to the students 
based on their proficiency levels. 
We follow a co-teaching model in the content area subjects. In order to satisfy CR Part 154.2 regulations, the ELA 
classes are co-taught by a licensed ELA teacher and licensed ESL teacher. Our social studies teacher is also licensed in 
ESL and so he delivers content and services at the same time. The stand alone ENL classes are taught by a licensed ESL 
teacher. 
 

b.  TBE program.  If applicable.   

Not applicable   
  

c.  DL program.  If applicable.    

Not applicable 

 

2.  How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each 

program model? 

a.  How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 

below)? 

Cypress Hill Collegiate Preparatory's (CHCP) schedule consists of nine periods everyday. The duration of each period is 45- 47 
minutes. The core classes meet everyday for a total of at least 225 minutes per week. The ELA classes are co-taught by a 
licensed ELA teacher and a licensed ESL teacher.  We provide service units based on the lowest proficiency level in that 
particular class. For example, an ELA class with mixed English proficient students will have an ESL teacher co-teach for the 
maximum amount of time. We feel that the higher levels in the class will certainly benefit from the extra units offered. The ELL 
population, in addition to having integrated classes, will also be serviced by stand alone ENL classes. Home language support is 
provided in the ENL model. Once again, depending on the proficiency level, these classes might be held five days a week or 
less. Our ELL students receive even further additional support in their history courses, as the social studies teacher possesses 
an ENL extension certificate.     
Home language support is utilized in the ENL model in a couple of different ways. Glossaries and dictionaries are always on 
hand for the students to refer to. Students are also provided with laptops where they are able to tap into translation programs 
for support. Our greatest area of native language support is our student base. All of our students willingly help each other out 
during class time be it in cooperative group learning, pair work, and/or individual work. 
 

3.  Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and 

methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core 
Learning Standards.  
The program model used at CHCP is ENL. Each ELL student and former ELL receives instruction by a licensed ESL teacher along 
with the content teachers.The ELA classes are co-taught by an ELA teacher and an ENL teacher and are taught in English as per 
Common Core requirements. The curriculum is based on grade level Engage NY. Teachers modify the lesson plans 
to  differentiate for ELL students. ENL strategies are used throughout each lesson as well. Dictionaries, peer support, and other 
supports are available. The  activities are scaffolded, the readings are chunked, cooperative learning is employed, graphic 
organizers are distributed, and flexible skill groups are created to name a few methods. At CHCP, we use the whole language 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          106 

 

approach to instruction. In other content classes, native language support is delivered in several ways. Native language 
textbooks, glossaries, dictionaries, and extended time are elements of classroom assignments. Content area teachers consult 
with the ESL teachers for exchange of ideas and approaches to make the content comprehensible. Most importantly, in all 
classes, ELL students are encouraged to participate in classroom activities both in written form and orally.   
 

4.  How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? 

Our Spanish speaking ELL students take Spanish as an elective. It is through this course that they are evaluated throughout the 
year. This may be accomplished in some of the following ways; teacher created assessments, quizzes, daily do now activities, 
exit tickets, on demand writing, reading assessments, etc. Additionally, students are often presented with content area 
materials in their native language and allowed to complete related activities in their native language. This student work is then 
assessed by a licensed teacher who is evaluating the content as well as the language. 
For languages other than Spanish, we use Duo Lingo for students and Teacher Dashboard. There are activities that the students 
complete and are given scores for. These scores are monitored throughout the year by teachers for analysis purposes. As our 
immigrant population is changing, we are investing other alternatives for home language assessment. 
 

5.  How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? 

SIFE   

a. 
b.  Newcomer  
c.  Developing   
d. 
e. 

Long Term 
Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status  

SIFE: The first approach we take is to consider how standards and the curriculum can be adapted so that SIFEs learn critical 
material in a way that is effective and accessible for them. 
Some specific strategies may include how to recognize cognates, looking for the heading of a chapter in pre-reading exercises, 
using a dictionary, or how to take notes using graphic organizers. This year we will continue to provide intensive 
literacy/language instruction in order to help with reading. Some of this will revolve around explicit instruction in an age-
appropriate manner of the five components of reading - phonemic awareness, phonics, fluency, vocabulary, and 
comprehension (p.7), increasing student access to literacy-rich environments and print materials, and unifying language and 
content instruction . 
   We provide a print rich environment by using a lot of visuals in the classroom. Lessons are presented both orally and visually 
simultaneously. Signage, such as the alphabet, directions, and classroom norms and  procedures are hung on posters around 
the classroom.  Newcomers are provided with bilingual dictionaries, as well as simplified English dictionaries. Each newcomer 
is assigned a buddy in the classroom who is a level above him/her. Visuals are used very often. Pictures, maps, diagrams, etc, 
are an integral part of each lesson.  We provide a rich print classroom environment. The alphabet, directions, procedures, etc. 
are hung on posters all around the room. Students are grouped cooperatively after they are taught the procedures and 
expectations for effective group work.  There are frequent ongoing checks for understanding in written and oral forms. Most 
importantly, we provide a safe, secure environment where the newcomer student feels encouraged and supported to take 
risks in learning English.The Developing ELL population is similar to those two sub-groups discussed above. Not previously 
mentioned are the following differentiation techniques; curriculum modification, adapted texts, extended time, multiple entry 
points, and modified assessments.Our Long Term ELL population has very different needs than our other subgroups. The 
differentiation for these students focuses on academic vocabulary, active engagement, and high quality writing. The focus for 
Long Term ELLs is academic language. Increasing academic vocabulary abilities will, in turn, lead to better reading 
comprehension skills, leading to more sophisticated writing.These students are buddied up with native English language 
speakers or former ELL students who have achieved a commanding level.Former ELLs are now required to have ninety minutes 
of support. In the ELA classes, these students are provided with adapted texts (when possible), and simplified directions or 
instructions. They also receive peer support from a native English speaker, and benefit from having two teachers in the room. 
The process and the product are differentiated for this subgroup.    
 
 
 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          107 

 

6.  What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic 

content areas and accelerate English language development?  
All students in ELA are following the EngageNY curriculum for their grade.  As far as instructional strategies, the teachers use a 
variety. The most employed strategy is differentiation (as discussed in an earlier question.) The teachers use reading strategies 
such as graphic organizers, vocabulary development, guided reading, and prediction. Oral strategies such as paraphrasing, 
story telling, backwards build-up and gestures, to name a few are used. Writing strategies consist of journal writing, guided 
writing, and model and shared writing among many other strategies.  Our integrated co-teachers often employ small group 
settings within the classroom to assist with instruction. As we progress from the integrated coteaching ELA classes to the 
standalone ENL , the level of scaffolding increases and the support is more individualized. 
 

7.  How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and 

attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? 
The first consideration for scheduling ELL-SWDs is to make sure that the required minutes are provided as per the CR 154 Part 
2. Students are placed into their classes , an ESL/Sped teacher will co-teach the class for the required minutes. Both teachers 
plan lessons together with the content teacher focusing on content material, and the ESL/Sped teacher modifies/adapts the 
lesson and classroom setup to meet IEP requirements. Such techniques, include but are not limited to, scaffolding, chunking, 
peer collaboration, multiple entry points, and small group settings. These differentiation techniques are an integral part of the 
lesson as all students, regardless of language or special needs, are responsible for learning the same curriculum. All students 
are instructed via EngageNY and New Visions curriculum. 
 

8.  Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups 

targeted).  List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which 
they are offered. 
 
CHCP utilizes academic intervention services during its regular school day as well as expanded learning time and Saturdays. The 
services we offer are determined by data based decision making (Data Wise.) We refer to data trackers which are periodically 
analyzed for trends, classroom on the spot observations of performance, and student assessment results.  
The intervention services are offered in English with native language support. The range of services is as follows: 
- extended learning time during the day 
-Saturday school 
-summer school 
-computer assisted instruction 
-Technology programs such as READ 180, Achieve 3000, Duo Lingo 
-Rewards Program 
-Co teaching models 
-social work services 
-attendance support 
-counseling services 
-communicative ENL courses 
 
We focus on providing our entering and emerging students the most resources for supplemental learning experiences. These 
students benefit the most from technology programs, such as Duo Lingo, Wordify, Achieve3000, and Rewards.  
 
All students attend extended learning time during the week as programmed into their 9th period part of the school day. 
 
Transitioning and Expanding are given more tasks in settings that are connected to College and Career Readiness. Additionally, 
the commanding students, who are entitled to two years of support, receive this as well. These commanding level students 
serve as role models and mentors for new arrivals through our peer mentoring program. 
 
 
 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          108 

 

  
 
 

9.  Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year?    

Technology is a big part of CHCP. 
We use the following programs:Light Sail, Duo lingo, Computer Science for All, EDU Creation, and Rosetta Stone. A new 
program to be instituted is the Academic Vocabulary Tool Kit bt Dr. Kate Kinsella as recommended by the DELLS Curriculum 
Support office.  Students already have, and will continue to have, iPads for the day.  We are currently looking at Literacy 
programs for the upcoming school year. We are hoping to employ more interactive/hands on learning in each classroom. We 
are continuing with the Judith Hochman writing revolution writing strategy methodology. New this year, is a 
CUNY LINCT program which is available to all ELL students, both former and current, which prepares them for college and 
career readiness.  
 
 

10.  If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? 

CHCP has not had a bilingual program. 
 

11.  How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs?  Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in 

your building. 
Each and every student at CHCP is provided the same opportunities to participate in programs. We offer many after school 
enrichment programs.  All ELL students and ELL-SWDs have equal access to programs and can join in. There are no activities or 
clubs specifically designed for an audience that would exclude ENL students. They have the opportunity to choose an after-
school elective course, participate in our mentoring programs, join a sports team, work on Cypress News, etc.  Additionally, 
supplemental academic support programs are offered after school and on Saturday mornings. ELL students are encouraged to 
join and unite with native English speakers as this gives them additional opportunities for acculturation.  
This is further addressed inCHCP's Title III Document. 
 

12.  What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language 

materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. 
Graphic novels, adapted novels, novels, short story collectionsMilestones series - Beginner, Intermediate, AdvancedMore 
Grammar Practice 1,2,3Longman and Oxford Picture Dictionaries with accompanying workbooksNow Hear ThisAcademic 
Vocabulary ToolkitEngage NY for ENLAchieve 3000DuoLingo 
Light SailQTEL strategiesNYSESLAT Review BooksDeveloping Core Literacy Proficiencies 
NY Times Learning Network 
Building Academic Vocabulary (Marzano) 
Computer Science for All 
No Fear Shakespeare 
NYC Writing Scope and Sequence 
NYC ELL Curriculum 
TEALS 
Campus Coalition 
   
 
    
 

13.  How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? 

Home language support is provided through a variety of methods in our ENL program. Bilingual dictionaries, English 
dictionaries, and content area glossaries are kept in the classroom and easily available for individual student use.  Secondly, 
the ESL teachers will have bilingual books in their classroom libraries for students to read during sustained reading 
times.  Thirdly, there are several native Spanish speaking teachers in the school who support the ESL teachers in making 
instructional modifications to the lesson plan. All students have access to iPads for use during the school day in each of their 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          109 

 

classes.  And the greatest source of home language support is delivered through expanding and commanding level ELL 
students taking on a role of peer support.   
 

14.  Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels.  

Required support services and resources correspond to the ELL's age and grade levels. Understanding that part of language 
acquisition is the affective filter and humanistic factor, the ESL teachers are particularly cautious about the material selected 
and topics discussed. We want the students to know that their intelligence level is not in doubt, that it is simply a matter of 
language. We believe in having students make connections as a strategy, and so we choose materials that are relevant to these 
students' worlds. Such materials engage the students more and thus assist in the success of the learning process. The supports 
we use, such as technology tools, audio and visual supplementary material are age appropriate as well.  All content area 
instruction for ELL students is NYC DOE determined.  
 

15.  If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the 

ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met?   
There are four other schools currently in our building. A close working relationship has been established amongst all of the ENL 
Coordinators. The majority of events held for the ELL population and families are held as a building-wide event rather than a 
single school event. We encourage the intermingling of populations as a support technique. For example, if a school has one 
student who is the only speaker of his/her language, we will reach out to the other schools in order to make a connection for 
this one student.  If there is a need for certain materials, each coordinator feels free to contact the others for additional 
materials. The knowledge gained from professional development workshops is turn keyed amongst the schools. Through this 
collaboration, our ELL students' needs are attended to effectively. 
 

16.  Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for 

new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, 
parent coordinator).  
Our new ELL students are offered much support as they enroll throughout the school year. Freshman have orientation 
programs during the summer held by our CBO and Parent Coordinator. Twice a year, we have an ENL family night which serves 
as an informational event, as well as a social event. This is attended by the ESL teachers, the guidance counselors, 
administration,  parent coordinator, students and their families, and content area teachers as well. All materials are 
disseminated in English and native languages, depending on the makeup of our population. 
 
We have a support team that operates throughout the year for new admits/readmits. The parent coordinator meets the 
student(s) and his/her/their families upon entry to the school building. The student meets the ENL Coordinator and future ESL 
teacher as well as the guidance counselors. We will also ask a current student to act as a mentor for the newly enrolled 
student to kind of 'show them around.' Additionally, we have monthly town halls where the students learn about policies, 
procedures, and resources within the school itself and school building. Counseling in Schools offers its services to these 
students as well. 
   
 

17.  What language electives are offered to ELLs?  

Cypress Hills High School offers the following language electives: 
Journalism, Film and Literature, DEAR, Dystopian Literature, and Spanish 
. 
 

18.  For schools with dual language programs: 

a.  What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day 

(percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. 
In which language(s) is each core content area taught? 

b. 
c.  How is each language separated for instruction? 
d. 

Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same 
time (simultaneous)? 

Not applicable    

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          110 

 

 

 

Professional Development and Support for School Staff 

1.  Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic 

staff.)  What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs 
as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? 
 
 Professional development opportunities are offered both internally and externally to all personnel at our school. Every 
Monday we hold an after school PD session for eighty minutes wherein all teachers and paraprofessionals are required to 
attend. These pd sessions are primarily led by three Teacher Leaders (one is a licensed ENL teacher, one has an ESL extension.) 
These professional development meetings are based on the following ; coherent instruction, common language, 
communication, and consistent/cohesive pedagogical practices and are aligned with the school wide Instructional Focus and 
Common Core Learning Standards.  Weekly Department meetings are another form of internally generated professional 
development. These meetings, led by a Teacher Leader and Administrator are around sharing best practices and the analysis of 
data to inform instruction.Another source of professional development is our own faculty. Those who attend 
conferences/workshops/trainings always come back and turnkey what they have learned. Common topics have been 
Differentiated Instruction, Common Core Alignment, Special Population needs, and Literacy. Our teachers have been trained in 
Wit (Writing is Thinking) strategies for all students. The use of these strategies will continue throughout the upcoming school 
year. These strategies, designed to improve writing, are particularly helpful for ENL students  Another major focus for this year 
is  Academic Vocabulary, which will be led by our licensed ENL teacher. Our ENL teacher has gone through the initial training 
and will continue to participate in workshops, as well as turn keying the strategies to the content area teachers.  
This year we have two teachers participating in the Campus Coalition Initiative which focuses on ENL students and 
SWD students. Each time the teachers attend a professional workshop, they will turnkey their newly gained knowledge with 
the entire staff at a successive Monday professional development.The ENL teacher has participated in professional 
development for On Demand Academic writing for ENL students. This will be an ongoing area for development.  As integrated 
co-teaching is becoming more predominant, ENL teachers, along with content area teachers, will attend together the 
professional development sessions offered by DELLS and other departments/organizations. 
   
 

2.  Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all 
teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include 
how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance).  Refer to ELL Policy and Reference 
Guide, Professional Development section. 
 
As per CR Part 154.2, the 15% required hours will be accomplished through in-house Monday afternoon professional 
development. Attendance sheets are passed around throughout the meetings, a complete agenda and related materials is 
distributed before the start of the meetings.  All information is shared on Google Docs which assists teachers in keeping their 
own logs of  development for licensing requirements. The ENL teachers attend outside professional development workshops. 
Sometimes they go alone, other times with one of their content co-teachers. The information learned will be turnkeyed at the 
Monday professional development conferences, as well as meetings held during professional periods. 
Please refer to question 1. for additional information.   
 
 

 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          111 

 

Parental Involvement 

1.  How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language 
development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? 
Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent 
orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences?  
CHCP provides several opportunities for interaction with parents to discuss their child's/children's performance. When the 
parent or guardian comes up to register their child/children, the ENL coordinator and/or ENL teacher will meet with them 
briefly after all paperwork is completed. Introductions are made and a general overview of our school programs is discussed. 
Throughout the year, we communicate with parents through Gmail, letters, phone calls, Pupil Path, and in-person meetings..   
Our school is on a quarterly cycle for report cards and progress reports. After the first progress report is distributed, we reach 
out to families for individual meetings. Our time frame is from the first progress report to the second report card.  If 
translation is needed, we have two options; for Spanish speakers we use our own faculty and staff, for speakers of other 
languages we contact the translation and interpretation unit for assistance. During these individual meetings, the ENL teacher, 
as well as content area teachers, will present student assessment data and discuss the student's language progression in 
his/her classes. 

 

2.  Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. 

From the moment a student with his/her parent or guardian enters this building, they are escorted up to the school  by our 
parent coordinator, greeted by our pupil accounting secretary and ENL Coordinator. During the identification/admissions 
process, the parents are informed about our school. We spend time conversing in English or native language(if possible) 
describing what we offer for the parents. The ways we attempt to foster parental involvement is by; extending invitations to 
hosted "Multicultural" dinners, inviting parents to attend planned school trips, participating in Saturday morning classes along 
with their child/children, and Awards Night to name a few. We also encourage these parents to join the Parent Association.We 
have ENL classes for adults in the building. This year we have added, and will continue to add, seminars and workshops on 
topics such as Immigration and Knowing your Rights. 
Department of 
Education 
CYPRESS HILLS COLLEGIATE PREP 
2017-2018 EVENT/ PA MEETINGS & WORKSHOPS 
Carmen Fariiia, Chancellor 
DATE TITLE TIME 
October 19th (Thurs.) PA Mtg I Student Success Part 1 6:30 pm - 7:30 pm 
(Distribution of report cards, intro to 
Skedula) 
Facilitators, Mrs. Guy and Counselors 
Location Student Cafeteria I 75 people 6:00 pm to 8:30 pm 
December 21st (Thurs.) PA Mtg I Parent Social 6:30pm- 8 pm 
:tcookies, hot coco, tea and coffee) 
Location Student Cafeteria I 75 people 5:30 pm to 8:30 pm 
January 18th (Thurs.) PA Mtg I Family Social 6:30pm- 9 pm 
''new spiderman movie 2hr & 13 mins.) 
' family movie night, free p_oQ_corn) 
'middle schools will be invited) 
Location BiQ Auditorium I 300 people 5:30 pm - 9:30 
February 6th (Tues.) Award Night (dinner served) 6 pm - 7:30 pm 
Location Student Cafeteria I 200 people 5:30 pm to 8:00 pm 
ltincludes kids, family & staff) 
February 15th (Thurs.) PA Mtg I Student Success Part 2 6:30 pm - 7:30 pm 
ltOistribution of report cards, next steps) 
Facilitators, Mrs. Guy and Counselors 
Location Student Cafeteria I 75 people 6:00 pm to 8:30 pm 
April 18th (Thurs.) PA MtQ I Nomination Night 6:30 pm - 7:30 pm 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          112 

 

 

ltinterested candidates for next year PA) 
Location Room 400 I 15 people 6:00 Q_m to 8:30 pm 
May 31st (Thurs.) PA Mtg I Elections 6:30 pm - 7:30 pm 
(celebration and recognition to board 
members) 
Location Room 400 I 15 people 6:00 pm to 8:30 pm 
 

Additional Information 

Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for 
ELLs.  You may attach/submit charts.   This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted.   
ELL students are targeted to participate in a Newcomers Group provided by Northwell Health to support them in transitioning to 
New York and managing the social/ emotional stresses with becoming accustomed to a new atmosphere. We provide bi-monthly 
immigration clinics and legal clinics for students and families to be better education and to support them with housing needs. 
Parents also have the opportunity to take ENL classes in the evening on campus,  
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          113 

Part V: ELL Identification Attestation 

Principal Certification 

2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 
6. 

7. 

8. 

9. 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL 
Policy and Reference Guide, I, Amy Yager, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to 
and staff are trained on the following: 
 
1. 

The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for 
students entering with IEPs). 
Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined 
a. 

If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status 
relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level.  

The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue.   
a.  The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services 
are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality 
translation service.   

Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined.   
a. 

If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility 
to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. 

Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible.   
Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language.  
a.  Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. 
If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish 
LAB.  
Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources 
available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-
education-sife.  
If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting.  
a.  Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent 

video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask 
questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided 
throughout the meeting. 

10.  ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected.  

a. 

b. 

If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program 
in accordance with DOE transfer policies. 
If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent 
choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice.   

11.  Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process).  
12.  If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose 

ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 
 

 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          114 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

Part VI: LAP Assurances 

School Name:   Cypress Hills Collegiate Prep                                                                              School DBN: 19K659 
Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate.  Names listed in Part A, should align with this 
section.  

Name (PRINT) 

Amy Yager 

Title 

Principal 

Danielle Naughton 

Assistant Principal 

Elizabeth Guy 

Parent Coordinator 

Elaine Cohen 

ENL/Bilingual Teacher 

n/a 

Parent 

Phillip Varghese 

Teacher/Subject Area 

Anthony Stipanov 

Teacher/Subject Area 

n/a 

n/a 

n/a 

n/a 

n/a 

           

           

           

Coach 

Coach 

School Counselor 

Superintendent 
 
Field Support Center Staff 
Member 
               

Other            

Other            

Other            

 

Signature 

Date (mm/dd/yy) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

1/1/01 

1/1/01 

1/1/01 

1/1/01 

1/1/01 

1/1/01 

1/1/01 

1/1/01 

1/1/01 

1/1/01 

1/1/01 

1/1/01 

1/1/01 

1/1/01 

1/1/01 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          115 

2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS 

Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools 

 

School 
Name: 

 

Cypress Hills Collegiate Preparatory  

Superintendent:  Michael Alcoff  

 

 
 

DBN: 

19k659  

 

 

 
The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. 
If there is more than one LAC, list all. 
 

First Name  

Last Name  

Title  

Has the LAC attended a 

2018-19 training 

The LAC was involved in 
the development of this 

conducted by the Field 

plan? Yes/No  

Language Access 

Coordinator? Yes/No  

Liz 

Elaine 

Elizabeth 

   

Suarez 

Cohen 

Guy 

LOTE Teacher 

ENL Teacher 

Parent Coordinator 

Yes 
 

 

Yes 
 

 

 
* The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs 
on translation,  
interpretation, compliance and budget.  
 

School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful 
opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's 
Regulation A-663).  
 
By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and 
interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). 
 
Part A:  Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 
 
1.  Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written 

and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from: 

  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS) 
  Automate The System (ATS) reports 
  Student Emergency Contact cards 
  Surveys conducted by your school. 

 

All data is collected from the Home Language Survey, the actual interview and meeting with the 
parents/guardians. During the intake process, the Language Access Coordinator sits down and interviews the 
parents/guardians. If Spanish is the preferred language, intercommunication is conducted. For languages other 
than Spanish, we automatically see that the parents' preferences will be for their native language. 

Blue card and other forms filled out by students and parents also help us determine the language of preference. 

 

 
 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          116 

 
2.  List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, 

which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language 
Report (RCPL) ATS report. 
 

Language  

Written Preferred  

Percent Written  

Oral Preferred  

Percent Oral  

English 

Spanish 

Bengali 

Arabic 

   

 

180 

131 

14 

6 

53.57 

38.99 

4.17 

1.79 

178 

133 

14 

6 

52.98 

39.58 

4.17 

1.79 

3.  From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at 

least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, 
French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. 
 

N/A 

 

 
 
Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 
 
1.  List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be 

distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents.  
 

Document Name  

Month/Frequency Distributed to 

How do you plan to translate? 

Families  

Include procedures to ensure timely 
provision of translated documents to 

parents.  

Family Newsletter 

1 time a month August - June 

In-house translation 

 

 

 

 

 

On-needs basis 

 

 

 

Letters from school leadership and 
Chancellor  

In-house translation and provided 
translations from DOE Central Office 

Announcements of Parent Teacher 
Conferences  

4 times a year (September, November, 
March, May) 

Translation provided on 
schools.nyc.gov website 

 

 

ENL Meeting 

 

 

April 2018 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          117 

 
 

PA/SLT/CET Meetings 

1 time a month September - June 

In-house translation 

 

 

In-house translation 

In-house translation, plus translated 
versions from New York State website 
for Regents 

Assessment Dates  

4 times a year for mid-terms, finals and 
Regents 

After school program information 

2 times a year September & February, 
plus any updates as needed 

In-house translation 

   

 

2.  List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as 

parent-teacher  
conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings.  
   

Meeting Name  

Month/Frequency of Meetings  

How does your school plan to provide 

interpretation service(s)?  

Parent Teacher Conference 

4 times a year (September, November, 
March, May) 

Staff members, CBO staff, parents and 
students translate for each other 

ENL Night 

Awards Night 

 

Graduation 

   

 

April 2018 

2 times a year (February and June) 

DOE Vendor for translation services 

Staff members, CBO staff, parents and 
students translate for each other 

June 2018 

DOE Vendor for translation services 

3.  Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of 

a school emergency.  
 

Robo-calls are sent home in the preferred home language 

 
 

 
 
Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure

 
Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and 
what resources are available to meet compliance.  
 

Staff will be trained and will review Chancellor's Regulation A-663 on the first day of staff professional development. 
The DOE translation unit is always available when teachers have the documents in advance and we use internal staff 
and CBO members to support with translation. 

 

 

 
 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          118 

 
Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services 
 
Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive 
information. Include any: 

  Translated signage 
  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents 
  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) 

 

The PA is personally reaching out to each family to speak to them about their preferred language for materials sent 
home, will connect the family with another parent that speaks the same preferred language and will get confirmation 
from them about what events they are attending so that we ensure that translation is available 

 

 
 
Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services 
Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the 
language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services?   
 

Cypress Hills Collegiate Prep High School will use parent surveys and feedback forms in order to assess the 
performance of our translation and interpretation services. This will be done annually. Letters and short forms to be 
completed by the parent/guardian will be sent directly to the home; as well as given to each student. We will also 
receive feedback by the number of responses we get when sending out requests for phone calls, meetings, visits to 
school. 

 

 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          119 

