 
 

 

 
 

 

 

 
 

 
 
 

2018-19 

RISE SCHOOL 

COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN 

(R-CEP) 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 

DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 

04M377 

School Name: 

RENAISSANCE SCHOOL OF THE ARTS 

Principal: 

BRIAN BRADLEY 

 
 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                         

 

 

 1 

 
 

Rise School Comprehensive Educational Plan (R-CEP) Outline  

 
 
Section 1: School Information Page 
 
 
Section 2: Executive Summary and Organizing Principles 
 
 
Section 3: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page 
 
 
Section 4: Rise School Narrative 
 
 
Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  

  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction 
  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment 
  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers 
  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership 
  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties  

 
 
Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) 
 
 
Section 7: Community School Partnerships 
 
 
Section 8: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) 
 
 
Section 9: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH)  
 
 
Section 10: Title I Program Information  
 
 
Section 11: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)  
 

 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          2 

 

 

 
School Name: 

BEDS Code: 

Grades Served: 

School Address:  

Section 1: School Information Page 

School Information 

 

Renaissance School of the Arts 

04M377 

 
310400010377 

 
6, 7, 8 

School Number (DBN): 

 

 
319 E. 117 street., New York, NY 10029 

 
(212)534-6072 

(212)534-7418 

Phone Number: 

 

Brian Bradley 

Fax: 

 

Bbradley3@schools.nyc.gov  

School Contact Person:  
 
Community School CBO: 

 

Principal: 

Community School Director: 

UFT Chapter Leader: 

Parents’ Association President: 

SLT Chairperson: 

Title I Parent Representative (or 
Parent Advisory Council 
Chairperson): 

Student Representative(s): 

 

Geographical District: 

4 

 

Superintendent’s Office Address: 

Email Address: 

 

MarielMejia 

 
Brian Bradley 

 

 
DainelleWinsko 

 
LashaunaCain 

 
Pilar Wilkins 

 

BeliaEnglish 

 
Brianna Vega 

 
AmayaHernandez 

 

 

District Information 

 

Alexandra Estrella 

Superintendent: 
 
160 East 120 Street 

 
AEstrel3@schools.nyc.gov  

Superintendent’s Email Address: 

 

212.348.2873 

Phone Number: 

 

212.348.4107 

Fax: 

 

 

Manhattan 

FSC: 

 

Field Support Center (FSC)  

Executive 
Director: 

 

Yuet Chu 

 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          3 

 

 
 

Executive Director’s Office 
Address: 

333 Seventh Ave, 8th floor NY, NY, 10001 

 
YChu@schools.nyc.gov 

Executive Director’s Email Address: 
646.470.0721 

 

Phone Number: 

 

 

917.339.1765 

Fax: 

 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          4 

 

Section 2: Executive Summary and Organizing Principles 

 

The Objective 
To guide, support and accelerate the early progress demonstrated by the schools graduating out of the Renewal 
program, as Rising Schools of Excellence (Rise), with a compelling theory of action, clear strategy for sustainment, 
targeted individualized supports, continued accountability, gradual release of responsibility, such that they 
independently accelerate their growth trajectory. 
 
Background 
Rise Schools have demonstrated: 

● 

● 

they have the will and conditions in place to accelerate student growth and meet school improvement 
benchmarks. 
they have the capacity to lead/implement a school improvement strategy. 

Rise Schools have seen some gains1 across multiple measures including graduation rates, college readiness, state 
test scores and attendance. As a result, these schools will fully transition out of the Renewal Schools program at 
the end of the 2017-2018 SY and continue under the guidance of the Office of Field Support, in partnership with 
the Office of School Support and Supervision. 
 
1All Rise Schools met at least 67% of their benchmarks, are not on the State’s Priority list, and have demonstrated a 
sustainable school improvement structure that will allow them to build on their progress. 
 
Six Rise Keys for Continued Improvement  
 

 

1.  Strengthen the Instructional Core  
2.  Strengthen Instructional Leadership Capacity  
3. 
4.  Apply a tiered approach to student intervention 
5.  Promote a positive, inclusive school environment for students, staff, parents and 

Improve Data Driven Practices 

community partners 
Increase monitoring and accountability 

6. 

 
Theory of Action 
If the NYC Department of Education provides customized supports to Rise schools and principals designed around the 
“Six Rise School Keys for continued improvement” then, Rise principals and their teams will have the tools and resources 
to accelerate outcomes for ALL students and increase students’ access to an excellent and equitable education. 
 
Structure of the Rise School Comprehensive Educational Plan (R-CEP) 

The Rise School Comprehensive Educational Plan (R-CEP) will serve as the organizing and overarching document for each 
Rise school and will be directly aligned and developed around the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, New 
York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, and Strong Schools, Strong 
Communities, including the following: 

●  Rise Benchmarks: please refer to the 2018-19 Rise benchmarks provided to your school. 
●  Establishing an overarching summative vision aligned with elements of the Framework for Great Schools and 
documenting key areas of celebration and Rise through analysis of assessments and by envisioning what the 
desired outcome for each school will be at the end of the School Rise process.  

●  Setting mid-year point benchmarks that create the path for improvement by focusing on desired outcomes and 
goals. In this way, the plan will be mapped to the overarching summative vision. In addition to the five discrete 
goals formed around the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, each school will create an action plan. 
●  Transformation into a community school in order to increase student and family access to physical and mental 

health services and other social-emotional supports made available in or near the school. 

●  Expanded learning opportunities for all students, including additional instruction provided during afterschool 

and/or summer programming provided in collaboration with community partners. 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          5 

 

 

● 

Intensive professional development for all staff to ensure effective implementation of curriculum and 
instruction aligned to the Next Generation Learning Standards (NGLS) and to support staff in effectively 
responding to the differentiated academic and social-emotional needs of all students. 

●  Additional, focused strategies to increase parent and family engagement. 

Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools 

The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect 
the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms 
where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity 
and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and 
classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more 
attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and 
Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our 
families and students. 

Information on the Framework for Great Schools and the DTSDE 

Strong Schools, Strong Communities  

The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, 
educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school 
prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult.  

The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers 
and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools 
centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school 
leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. 
Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to 
Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students.   

The Framework for Great Schools and the R-CEP Development 

The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and 
external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase 
learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently 
ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Rise School Comprehensive 
Educational Plan (R-CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for 
continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review 
and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities 
and strategies that improve outcomes for students. 
 

Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase 
student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework 
for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members 
concrete ways to improve. 

In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in 
consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to 
participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a 
comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with 
the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all 
the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements 
work together to support student achievement. 
 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          6 

 

 

The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools  

Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards 
are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical 
thinking skills. 
Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, 
and challenged by their teachers and peers. 
Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. 
They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous 
improvement. 
Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, 
developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. 
Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by 
welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. 
Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school 
and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value 
each other. 

 
Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools 

 

In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in 
improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for 
School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the American Institute of Research (AIR) Needs Assessment, the 
NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. 
 
NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets 

To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the 
current tools – they call it a Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple 
instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent 
statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure 
how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district 
will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement.  All Priority and Focus Schools and Focus 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          7 

 
Districts must use the new tool; and districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and 
Comprehensive Education Plans also will use the tool.  
 
The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an 
effective school and school district across the following six tenets: 

  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity 
  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions 
  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support 
  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions 
  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and 
  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement 

 

 

NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) 

The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by 
coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality 
Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 
2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below:  
I.  Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) 
II.  School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4)  
III.  Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and 
Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) 

 
Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 

Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, 
professional development, and parent and family engagement. 
 
To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in 
improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will 
serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the 
administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish: 
 

a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          8 

a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) 

 
 
 
It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School 
Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the 
joint development of the R-CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 
1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% 
budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent 
and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the R-CEP. For additional guidance 
on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. 
 

Next Steps for R-CEP Development 

School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  

  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists in every Rise school and 

meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655. 

  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the American Institute of Research (AIR) needs 

assessment, the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative 
data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year. 

  Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Rise Key and the corresponding statement of 

Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an 
Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select 
their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major 
findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other 
qualitative and quantitative data.   

  Step 4: Discuss and respond to the guiding questions under each Framework element. 

  Step 5: Revisit your school’s current goals, and strategically create new goals informed by the needs 

assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, 
Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor 
progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you have identified, and will let your school 
community know when you have reached your goal. 

  Step 6: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action 
plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement. 

  Step 7: Update your school’s AIS section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement 

Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). 

  Step 8: Complete the Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and the Community School sections. 

  Step 9: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall 

cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether strategies and activities outlined in the action 
plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. 

 
Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust practices along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful 
implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to 
accomplishing desired results. 

Rise Program Priorities 
 
Our Rise Theory of Action (page 4) is drawn from research1 on turnaround schools, the DOE Framework for Great 
Schools, DTSDE Tenets, and the Quality Review, which suggest that these key priorities have the greatest impact on 
student achievement. 
 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          9 

 

 

RISE Keys 

Priorities 

 

1. Strengthen 

the Instructional 

Core 

 

2. Strengthen 
Instructional 
Leadership 
Capacity 

3. Improve Data 
Driven Practices 

 

4. Apply a tiered 

approach to 

school support 
and intervention 

 

5. Promote a 

positive, 

inclusive school 
environment for 
students, staff, 

parents and 
community 

partners 

6. Increase 

monitoring and 
accountability 

  A clear focus aligned to students’ instructional needs, including college and career 

readiness 

  Access to common, standards-based curricula for all students, including ELLs and SWDs 
  Explicit and intentional embedding of culturally responsive Instruction in all content areas 
  Formative and summative assessments for all students in all grades that are aligned to 

curricula and produce clear evidence of learning 

  Tiered approach to teacher professional learning opportunities.  
  Partnership with families to increase engagement in students’ academic success 

 

Implementation of a coherent vision for school improvement - a vision for leading 
learning, leading people, leading schools and leading change 

  Development of a system to support distributive leadership and build the capacity 

and sustainability of teacher leaders through continuous improvement 

  Developing leadership competencies, specific to turnaround efforts, including 

leveraging multiple stakeholders, a commitment to student learning and a sustained 
pursuit of measurable progress. 
Strategic allocation of resources to support instructional and professional learning 
plans and family engagement in leadership opportunities 

Integrative use of formative and summative assessment tools and practices to 
target resources and support throughout the year to achieve academic priorities 

 

 

  Ongoing analyses of school-wide and student-level data and adjustments to 

curricular resources and instructional moves 

  Prioritization of the use of standards and data to inform teaching and learning 

 

 

 

Implementation of a tiered intervention system that engages teacher teams in frequent 
cycles of progress monitoring and adjustments to address diverse student needs 
School establishes coherent system, adopted by all to ensure that interventions are 
effective, differentiated and timely 
Increased use of teacher teams’ data-driven practices to accelerate student 
achievement 

  Clear strategy that establishes social norms within the school community and 

promotes a culture for learning with clear and high expectations for all students, in 
partnership with CBOs. 

  The sustainability of an environment where students feel safe, connected and engaged 

through practices that are culturally relevant and build their scholarly identity 

  The development of a whole school approach, in partnership with families, with 

 

 

specific attention to social, physical and behavioral environments 
Social emotional learning practices embedded in teaching and learning as aligned to 
the Collaborative for Academic, Social and Emotional learning (CASEL) competencies 
and supported by CBOs. 

School leaders implement effective monitoring systems to ensure that instructional 
practices and interventions are monitored closely at the classroom, team, and school 
wide level 

  Establish effective teacher team practices that ensure teachers are accountable for 

data findings and set timely and appropriate interventions 

  Data analysis results in adjustments to the programs and priorities to better service 

 
 

students 
Foster positive systems for accountability driven by reflection and action planning 
Support from district leaders to focus efforts toward results and problem solving 
actions that lead to turnaround success. 

1.  Darden/Curry PLE – Turnaround Leadership Competencies and Turnaround Action Shown to Influence Student Achievement 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          10 

 

Achievement Network – SY 18-19 Foundations Rubric 
COSEBOC Standards and Promising Practices for Schools Educating Boys of Color 
Harvard Graduate School of Education and Harvard Business School: Certificate in School Management and Leadership 
Learner-Centered Initiatives Multidimensional Principal Performance Rubric 

Monitoring and Accountability 

●  Rise schools will be monitored for implementation of the Rise Comprehensive Educational Plan (R+CEP) by 

Superintendents and Office of Field Support. 

●  Rise schools will be held accountable for making progress according to annual targets set by the 

Department of Education, as evidenced by their attainment of named benchmark scores for each 
annualized key metric. Schools not achieving annual targets by June 2019 are subject to additional 
oversight and consequences, to be determined at a later date. 

●  OFS will bring increased oversight and accountability by monitoring FSC supports to schools and ensure 
that these are aligned with the school’s instructional focus, student and teacher needs, and moving the 
school toward achieving interim goals. 

●  OSSS will monitor DSR oversight of all supports to Rise Schools. 

 

 

 

 
 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          11 

 

  

Section 3: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page 

Directions: All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this 
Rise School Comprehensive Educational Plan (R-CEP). SLT members’ signatures indicates that they have been 
consulted with and given the opportunity to provide feedback on the plan and the plan’s alignment with the school-
based budget to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic 
Intervention Services (AIS), Expanded Learning Time, Community School initiative, Parent and Family Engagement 
Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a 
minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the 
New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. 
 
On the chart below: 

1.  List the names of each SLT member in the second column.  
2. 
3. 

In the first column, indicate using an “X” if the person is an SLT member. 
In the third column, record the position and constituent group represented such as staff, parent, student, 
Community Based Organization (CBO), or other contributor. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an 
asterisk*.   

4.  SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does 

not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be 
maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates 
participation in the development of the R-CEP, not approval. 

5.  The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the 

principal’s office and be made available upon written request. 

Signature 
(Blue Ink) 

 

Check 
if SLT 

X 

 
X 

 
X 

 
X 

 
X 

 

X 

 
 

 

Name 

Position and Constituent Group 

Brian M. Bradley 

 
Danielle Winsko 

 
MorymaAvelis 

 
JullissaOrtiz 

 
BeliaEnglish 

 

MarielMejia 

 
 

 

Represented 

*Principal or Designee 

*UFT Chapter Leader or Designee 

*PA/PTA President or Designated 
Co-President 

DC 37 Representative (staff), if 
applicable 

Title I Parent Representative or 
Parent Advisory Council 
Chairperson 

Community School Director (staff) 

Student Representative  
(optional for elementary and 
middle schools; a minimum of two 
members required for high 
schools) 

Student Representative  
(optional for elementary and 
middle schools; a minimum of two 
members required for high 
schools) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          12 

 

Check 
if SLT 

X 

 
X 

 
 

x 

 
X 

 
X 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Name 

Position and Constituent Group 

Represented 

Signature 
(Blue Ink) 

Shirley Wade 

 
Frances Garland 

 
 

Raquel Lopez 

 
CarynMoore 

 
PilarWilkins 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

Parent 

 
Parent 

 
Staff/Parent/Other Contributor 
 
Parent 

 
Staff 

 
Staff 

 

Member/ 
 

Member/ 
 

Member/ 
 

Member/ 
 

Member/ 
 

Member/ 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          13 

 

Section 4: Rise School Narrative 

 

In a brief narrative, describe the current state of the Rise school addressing the following and please use existing data, 
where applicable: 

1.  Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, 

including your school’s mission statement and a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or 
special initiatives being implemented.  
Identify any special student populations that the school has and what their specific needs are. 

2. 
3.  Describe your school’s approach to family engagement and progress made with establishing families as 

partners in furthering student achievement  

4.  Describe how your school is leveraging community school partnerships to support progress in elements of the 

Framework for Great Schools and your Rise Benchmarks and indicate where this has been a challenge. 

5.  Summarize the Expanded Learning Time (ELT) opportunities that have been offered to your students this year. 

 

Renaissance School of the Arts (RSA) offers a curriculum that focuses on core content academics with a heavy focus in 
the arts. The curriculum combines academic instruction, intensive arts study and exposure which affords every one of 
our students the opportunity for high academic success. During the 2018-2019 school year our faculty will collaborate 
with the Metamorphosis and Teachers College Reading and Writing Project to enhance the rigor of the curriculum. 
Additionally, every child is required to participate in an area of arts study. Our students receive instruction from both 
our staff and our partnership teachers in their areas of discovery. One of the unique aspects of this school is its 
instructional model which includes cross-content, cross-discipline planning and instruction. 

 

As a school we have the deep belief that all our students are capable of achieving great heights. Additionally, we 
believe our students learn best when they are actively engaged and learning from one another. Each lesson begins 
with a student leading the class and each lesson has specific activities that support collaborative exploration of 
content. Through engagement our students learn best. 

We are striving to become one pf the best Arts programs in the city. To that end our schools mission articulates the 
vision shared by all. 

Vision  

Renaissance School of the Arts will become the premier arts program in District 4. Our students will gain entrance to 
and be competitive at the top arts high schools in New York City. 

Mission 

Through high level arts courses, the collaborative inquiry process, rigorous academic curricula, explicit social 

emotional instruction and a focus on enhancing literacy rates, our students will be prepared for success in all aspects 

of life. 

 

39% of the student body at RSA receives special education services. The primary need of our special education 
student population is literacy. Many of our special education students read between a 3rd to 4th grade reading level 
which precludes them from having success on standardized assessments. To enhance the literacy rates for these 
students student we have employed several strategies. Additionally, we have 91% of our students receive free lunch. 
Finally, we have 12% of our student body that is eligible for ELL services. Another larger subgroup that we are focusing 
on is our young men. Over the course of the last three years, our female students have outperformed our male 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          14 

 

students. Again to address these subgroups we have implemented a series of interventions within our academic 
program. 

 

 

1.  Strategic Reading Periods that include our Response to Intervention, a tiered approach provides three types 

of interventions for our students. 

1.  MSQI tool kit for 70% of our student population 
2.  Just Words & MSQI tool kit for 20% of our student population 
3.  Wilson & Just Words for 10% of our student population 

2.  Focus on a blended learning approach 

1. 

i-Ready instruction-During ELT and AIS periods 
3.  A curriculum shift to the TC readers and writers project 
4.  AIS periods twice a week for student’s that have been identified as at-risk. 

Additionally, our partnerships provide our students with opportunities to broaden their horizons and enhance their 
exposure to high level academics and arts projects. These partnerships include but are not limited to: 

 

● Partnership With Children has been identified as RSAs lead CBO fro the renewal schools program. Partnership with 
Children works to strengthen the emotional, social and academic skills of at-risk children to help them succeed in 
school, society, and life. This group provides trauma-informed counseling, crisis intervention, school-wide services, 
and family and community outreach to New York City’s public school students who are at the highest risk of academic 
failure and drop-out. 

 

● Citizen School’s vision is to educate children and strengthen communities. By providing an extended day program 
to our sixth grade students, Citizen School professionals work to close the opportunity and achievement gap by 
expanding the learning day and engaging students in real world learning ensuring that all children graduate high 
school ready to succeed in college and careers. Citizen school professionals provide homework help called, Academic 
League, small reading intervention groups for our lowest third called Book Clubs, and opportunities for students to 
engage apprenticeships focused on different career based paths such as artistry, graphic design, animation, and 
robotics. 

 

● Inside Broadway is a non for profit theater company that brings the magic, pageantry and profession of Broadway 
to students throughout NY. This school year we will be producing the musical the Lion King. 

 

During the past three school years Renaissance School of the Arts have exceeded targets in students’ progress as 
reported in the 2016-2017 NYC DOE school quality guide and progress report. Additionally, our curriculum that has 
undergone a shift that allows it to be more rigorous, engaging coherent and aligned to the Common Core Learning 
Standards. This curriculum aligns use of resources to support instructional goals that meet students’ needs. 
Additionally, the curriculum has been under constant review from the faculty as RSA through the formalized structure 
of the Collegial Review process and during Monday and Tuesday professional development sessions. Renaissance 
School of the Arts educators pride themselves in examining data and knowing the needs of the students they teach. In 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          15 

 

knowing the intricate capabilities and struggles of their student body and being provided with the appropriate 
professional development, educators craft original and diverse curriculum that is completely Common Core aligned. 

 

Teachers examine universal topics through text, technology, art, music, poetry, and various other avenues. The Unit 
Essential Questions as well as the Lesson Essential Questions are all anchored to the curriculum to explicitly show 
what students will be learning. To ensure that students understand concepts in a real world context, educators create 
formative and summative assessment tasks in which students showcase understanding by making connections. 

 

As a curriculum is a living document, a team of consultants, administrators, and teachers sit together to revise 
curriculum. This team works together to provide feedback and enhance curriculum. There is at least one 
representative of each content area on the team. This year, members worked to build alignment in assessment 
templates, ensure that tasks were not only Common Core aligned, but also use the language of the standards within 
task and assessments. As a result each curriculum meets the requirements of the State wide rubric used to assess the 
effectiveness of curriculum. As such each curriculum is rigorous, scaffolded for diverse learners, and challenges the 
thinking of students. In addition to regular revision of the curriculum, all of the assessments administered at RSA are 
aligned vertically to ensure continuity between grades. 

 

The area in which RSA has made the most growth is around distributive leadership. As RSA is a small learning 
community, all stakeholders play a crucial role in building systems and structures to ensure students achievement. 
Teachers take a lead role in helping run AIS programs, tracking student progress and areas in need of improvement. 
Teachers also program students in support structures such as our afterschool program, Citizen Schools. Teachers take 
responsibility in making decisions about new city wide initiatives such as the professional development blocks and 
how that time is best used. The proudest development enhancement we have made to our instructional program is 
through the Arts where every student has an opportunity to develop in an arts discipline of their choosing. These 
disciplines include; Dance, Visual Arts, and Instrumental. Every child selects the discipline that speaks to them. 
Additionally, each child receives instruction in those disciplines 5 days a week. In addition to the traditional discipline 
instruction we offer an honors band and dance instruction to our outstanding artists. Also, we collaborate with Citizen 
Schools to offer individual arts instruction to our students during the extended learning time. 

 

By the conclusion of the Renewal Schools process our Renaissance School of the Arts will be at or above the city-wide 
average in both ELA and Mathematics state wide tests. Additionally, our daily attendance rate will be at 95%. 

Extended Learning Time 

Our extended learning time will offer several programs that will impact our students in a variety of ways. Our school 
days will run from 8:40 AM- 6:00 PM on Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday. On Friday our school day 
operates from 8:40 AM- 3:00 PM. We integrate our CBO Citizen Schools staff into our regular program to enhance 
continuity between our first and second shifts. During our ELT we are offering courses that are not offered during the 
regular school day. We are able to have differentiated Strategic Reading Periods during the regular day because we 
can offer core classes in the ELT. Additionally, we are offering small group AIS services for students that have been 
identified as at-risk.  

 

 

 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          16 

 

 

School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 04M377 

School Configuration (2018-19) 

Grade Configuration 

06,07,08 

Total Enrollment (2017-
18) 
English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 

147 

SIG Recipient (Y/N) 

Transitional Bilingual 

N/A 

Dual Language 

N/A 

Self-Contained English as a Second 
Language 

Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) 

# Special Classes (ELA) 
# Special Classes (Math) 

# Visual Arts 
# Foreign Language 

% Title I Population 
% Free Lunch 
% Limited English Proficient 

11 
11 

13 
 

% American Indian or Alaska Native 
% Hispanic or Latino 
% White 

# SETSS (ELA) 
# SETSS (Math) 
Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) 
# Music 
# Drama 
# CTE 
# Dance 

16 
16 

10 
7 

# Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) 
# Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) 

School Composition (2017-18) 

93.0%  % Attendance Rate 
92.5%  % Reduced Lunch 
8.8% 

% Students with Disabilities 

Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) 

% Black or African American 

0.7% 
61.9%  % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 
2.7% 

% Multi-Racial 

Personnel (2015-16) 

Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) 
% of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate 
% Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 

4.04 
5% 
47% 

# of Assistant Principals (2016-17) 
% Teaching Out of Certification 
Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) 

Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) 

ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 

32.3%  Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 

Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 

N/A 

Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-
17) 

Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) 

ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 
Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 
4 Year Graduation Rate 

Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 

N/A 
N/A 
N/A 

N/A 

Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 
US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 
6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) 
% ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures 
(2015-16) 

Reward 
In Good Standing 
Focus District 

Priority School 

Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) 

No 
Yes 
Yes 

Recognition 
Local Assistance Plan 
Focus School Identified by a Focus District 

No 

Focus Subgroups 

N/A 

Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) 

Elementary/Middle School 

Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) 

American Indian or Alaska Native 
Hispanic or Latino 
White 
Students with Disabilities 
Economically Disadvantaged 

American Indian or Alaska Native 
Hispanic or Latino 
White 
Students with Disabilities 
Economically Disadvantaged 

American Indian or Alaska Native 
Hispanic or Latino 
White 
Students with Disabilities 
Economically Disadvantaged 

American Indian or Alaska Native 
Hispanic or Latino 
White 
Students with Disabilities 
Economically Disadvantaged 

American Indian or Alaska Native 
Hispanic or Latino 
White 
Students with Disabilities 
Economically Disadvantaged 

American Indian or Alaska Native 
Hispanic or Latino 
White 
Students with Disabilities 
Economically Disadvantaged 

N/A 
YES 
N/A 
NO 
YES 

Black or African American 
Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander 
Multi-Racial 
Limited English Proficient 
ALL STUDENTS 

Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) 
Black or African American 
Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander 
Multi-Racial 
Limited English Proficient 
ALL STUDENTS 

N/A 
YSH 
N/A 
N/A 
YSH 

Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) 

N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
YES 
High School 

Black or African American 
Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander 
Multi-Racial 
Limited English Proficient 
ALL STUDENTS 

Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) 

N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 

Black or African American 
Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander 
Multi-Racial 
Limited English Proficient 
ALL STUDENTS 

Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) 
Black or African American 
Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander 
Multi-Racial 
Limited English Proficient 
ALL STUDENTS 

N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 

Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) 
Black or African American 
Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander 
Multi-Racial 
Limited English Proficient 
ALL STUDENTS 

N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 

No 

N/A 

35 
35 

 
 

92.7% 
0.7% 
30.6% 

32.7% 
1.4% 
1.4% 

0 
37% 
4.1 

29.3% 

44% 

N/A 
N/A 
N/A 

N/A 

N/A 
No 
No 

YES 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
YES 

NO 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
YSH 

N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
YES 

N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 

N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 

N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          17 

 
 
 

 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          18 

 

Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  

 

Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, 
and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious 
intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) 
 
Part 1 – Needs Assessment   

Part 1a.  Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice 
Tenet 3 Statement of Practice  
Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one.  Place an “X” in the 
appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 
3.2 

The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of 
rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning 
Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. (aligned to 
Rise Keys 2 and 6) 
Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction 
(DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and 
address student achievement needs. (aligned to Rise Key 3) 
The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner 
within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the 
arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. (aligned to Rise Keys 1 and 4) 
Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative 
assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student 
reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. (aligned to Rise Key 1) 

3.3 

3.4 

3.5 

SOP(s) 

Addressed 

X 

 

 

 

 

Part 1b.  Needs/Areas of Focus: 

1.  Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs 

selected above. 

2.  Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs 

selected above. 
Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 

3. 
4.  What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, 

Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? 

 

On the 2016-2017 Quality Review our school was rated well developed in the area of Teacher Teams and using data to 
drive instruction. Additionally, the area of collaborative teachers on the school quality guide is always rated highly by 
our faculty. We have rigorous team structures in place. All of our teacher teams use a rolling agenda to track their 
progress. We use the data wise method and several protocols from the Harvard Graduate School of Education to 
analyze data.  

In the past we have had success in this area, we feel as though we could leverage our teacher team time to dig deeper 
into standards based instruction. Through a partnership with the Achievement Network we plan to examine student 
work products at a higher rate. Hence we intend to focus on aligning our instruction closer to the CCL and NYS Content 
Standards.  

● 3.3 Focus area : At RSA, the school community takes an active role in analyzing student data and trends in order to 
plan for intervention. Teachers in Tier 1 and Tier 2 classes will work to use data to create more formative assessments 
for students. The data from formative assessment will then be used to address learning needs quickly and on a 
individualized level. 

 

 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          19 

 
 
Part 2 – Summative Vision for Rigorous Instruction 

What is your school’s instructional focus? What is your vision for promoting the instructional focus consistently across 
classrooms?   
 

During the 2018-2019 school year Renaissance School of the Arts instructional focus is three fold. We have three 
instructional focus for the 2018-2019 school year. 1) Students will further cultivate their close reading skills by 
mastering the RSA protocol for close reading which requires students to : Read for the Gist, Chunk ideas and 
summarizing, and annotating text for analysis. 2) Students will enhance their vocabulary through an explicit focus on 
high frequency academic words. 3) Through increased standards specific diagnostic assessments will we be able to 
determine the best way to modify specific units of study. 

We plan on promoting these instructional focuses in the following ways. First we dedicate our first cycle of inquiry 
September 17-November 28 to Close Reading and implementing the systemic close reading strategy across the school. 
We will use our strategic reading period to first introduce the three close reading strategies to the students then we will 
implement these skills in teh other content areas. . We are targeting reading strategies for two reasons. After reviewing 
the preliminary data from the Spring 2018 NYS ELA examinations. The leadership team has identified that the area of 
reading analysis for both informational and literature texts. Secondly, as we transition to the next generation learning 
standards, it is essential that the school has a uniform approach to analyzing documents. Each content area might vary 
slightly but the three basic Tennent’s of Reading for the Gist, Chunking and using annotations will be evident in each 
classroom.  

This will be ensured using the following process measures. There will be three specific processes' that will be used to 
achieve this instructional goal. Each of these processes has several quality control metrics that will be used to monitor 
the effectiveness of the intervention.  

System 1: Professional Development Cycle of Inquiry Process Measures: Classroom Walkthrough Checklist, Professional 
Development evaluations, student work products  

System 2: Strategic Reading Process Measures: SRP notebook collection, conference logs, i-ready benchmark 
assessments  

System 3: Teacher Teams Process Measures: Running Agendas, classroom walkthrough checklists, student work 
products. 

Our next instructional focuses are the promotion of high frequency vocabulary words throughout the school and 
maximize our student’s exposure to academic vocabulary. We will promote this through our second cycle of inquiry. 
This cycle of inquiry will run from December 1-February 1. During this cycle of inquiry we will use Wordly Wise sevral 
times a week to promote further vocabulary development.  

 

Our final instructional focus will be supported with our partnership with the Achievement Network. We plan on 
leveraging our teacher team time to dig deeper into using standards based assessments to determine specific 
deficiencies our student have that preclude them from having success on standardized examinations. These practices 
will be promoted through regular meeting agendas and norming several protocols for examining student work.  

 

 

How will you implement a standards-aligned curricula that meets the needs of your diverse learners, including ELLs 
and SWDs? 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          20 

 

 

 

 

 

This year our first cycle of inquiry is dedicated ensuring that all students have access to rigorous texts through a close 
reading strategy. Through reading strategies that will be used in all classes, students will have access to grade level 
texts. Teacher's will use classroom data to give formative assessments reflecting these skills. Teachers will differentiate 
tasks to ensure that students receive standards based instruction that meets their specific needs.  
 

What is your vision for ensuring that all student have access to rigorous coursework that moves them towards career 
and college readiness? How will you support the personal and academic skills, habits, and behaviors needed for 
students to be career and college ready? 
Each year we have made incremental shifts to our instructional program to prepare our students to be college and 
career ready. Our major shift that we have done this year is shifting away from 8th grade mathematics and towards 
Algebra for everyone. The Algebra program is a requirement for all of our 8th grade students. In 2018 we had 63% of 
our 8th grade students pass the algebra regents examination. We believe that every student is capable of passing both 
the Algebra courses and the Regents examination. We will be transitioning our 6th and 7th grade curriculum's to 
provide our next cohorts of students with the prerequisite knowledge to be successful with this rigorous course 
work.Additionally, we have instituted a computer programming for every student in the school. We believe that every 
student can leave RSA with an understanding of writing code at a proficient level.  
 

How do you envision embedding the elements of culturally responsive instruction and how will you know that 
implementation is successful? 
Our vision for the delivery of instruction is student centered and student led. We believe students learn best by doing 
and deeply engaging with content. This includes students leading portions of the lessons and explicitly making their 
thinking visible. Additionally, our classrooms will use a series of sentence stems that will instigate debate and 
accountable talk among our students. Incorporating multi-modal experiences in content which includes individuals that 
look like the students in the class matter. Additionally, our equity team will be using the courageous conversation text 
by Glenn Singleton to dig into implicit bias and promoting equity.  
 

What is your vision for the use of a comprehensive assessment strategy (diagnostic, formative, benchmark, and 
summative) to drive curricular, instructional, and organizational decisions that impact student outcomes? 
Teachers use a variety of data points to identify the appropriate entry point for students. These data points reflect 
formative and summative assessments. In addition teachers use observational data and benchmark assessments as 
well. We use iReady and Ready examinations as diagnostic and benchmark testing during the school year. Students take 
these benchmark examinations four times during the school year. These diagnostic and benchmark results are 
examined in teacher teams using protocols developed from the leverage leadership text by Paul Bambrick where teams 
develop short term plans to resolve student misunderstanding.  

Additionally, results are shared with parents through our student led conferences which occur twice a year. During 
these conferences, students take ownership over their work and present their digital portfolios to their parents.  
 

How do you envision differentiating teacher professional learning opportunities to support instructional foci, meet 
students’ unique needs and advance culturally responsive education in your school? 
Teacher's will all improve their capacity to look at student data. Through this analytics lens teacher's will be able to find 
area's of weakness within their practice and gaps in student learning. Staff PD will aim to address these weak areas and 
provide staff with the tools to remedy them. 
 

 
Part 3 – Annual Goal 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          21 

 

Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this 
element of the Framework for Great Schools – Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be consistent with the 
expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – 
Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact 
meeting at least one of your Rise Benchmarks. 
By June 2018, proficiency rates on state-wide assessments in both ELA and Mathematics will increase by 20%. 
Students will have a 50% proficiency rate in both ELA and Mathematics in 2019.  

 

 

Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Rigorous Instruction Annual Goal:   Which school 
benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Rigorous Instruction Annual Goal? 

Average ELA proficiency rating 2.5 

Average Mathematics proficiency rating 2.2 

Trust- 4.36 as measured by the NYC DOE School Quality Guide 

Collaborative teachers-3.12 as measured by the NYC DOE Quality Guide 

  

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          22 

 
Part 4 – Action Plan 

Key Initiatives: 
Concisely indicate the 
key initiatives (up to 
five) that your school 
will implement to 
achieve the identified 
goal for this 
Framework for Great 
Schools element. 

Target 
Group(s) 
Who will 
be 
targeted? 

Which Benchmark(s) 
indicated above does 
this initiative target? 

Timeline 
What is the 
start and 
end date? 

Key Personnel 
Who is responsible for 
implementing and 
overseeing the 
activity/strategy? (include 
school, educational 
consultants and/or CBO 
staff) 

Teacher teams will 
meet during period 4. 

Teachers 

Iready 

 

September 
2018-June 
2019 

The PCT is the lead teacher 
for th 8th grade and the 
ELA team 

How will you 
assess the 
interim 
progress of 
the 
initiative?(ex. 
decrease in 
serious 
incidents, 
increase in 
students 
participating 
Big Sibs 
program) 

Teachers will 
use google 
docs to 
recorded 
teacher team 
minutes and 
agendas. 

A teacher is the lead 
teacher for the 7th grade 

A teacher is the lead 
teacher for the 
mathematics team 

The master teacher is the 
lead teacher for the 
Science team. 

A teacher is the lead 
teacher for the social 
studies team 

Grade team meetings 
will be held on 
Tuesdays 

The ELA teacher team 
will be held on 
Mondays 

The mathematics 
teacher team will meet 
on Tuesdays  

The Science teacher 
team meets period 8 
on Tuesdays 

the Social Studies 
teacher team meets 
on Tuesdays during 
period 1  

We will use the 
Monday and Tuesday 
PD time in the 
mornings to cultivate 
protocols and systems 
unique to our school 
culture 

We will offer after 
school AIS for student 
that have been 
identified as at-risk.  

Teachers 

Iready 

Formative assessment 

September 
2018-
October 
2018 

The Principal and lead 
teachers will lead the 
professional development 
sessions.  

Classroom 
data  

At-risk 
students 

I ready 

Taechers 

November 
2018-April 
2019 

Stduents will 
improve by 
30% on the 
January Iready 
examination 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          23 

Parents 

I ready 

February 
2019 and 
April 2019 

Community School 
Director 

 

We will offer 
workshops for parents 
about our curriculum 
and the shifts we are 
making to our 
curriculum to address 
students needs.  

Parents will 
monitor 
student 
progress on 
iready with the 
assistance of 
triennial 
progress 
reports.  

  
 
4b – Parent and Family Engagement 

How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York 
State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible 
for implementation and oversight. 
During curriculum nights, staff will introduce state standards to parents and families. This will happen during 
September- October 2018. Key staff will be: Ms. Fitzmaurice, Ms. Diaz, Ms.Collins, Ms. Dixon. 
 

 
Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment 

Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including 
human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, lead CBO’s community school budget, FSC Supports, 
etc. 
After school targeted AIS program 

● 1 Guidance Counselor on Wednesdays and Thursdays for 1 hours each day 

● 6 teachers on Wednesdays and Thursdays for 1 hours each day 

● 1 Administrator on Wednesdays and Thursdays for 3 hours each day 

● The professional development for faculty that will be required to deliver the software based applications to the 
students 

Second AIS program  

● Consumable workbooks for our students 

● Allocation to pay for teachers to provide instruction during a preparation period 

● The creation of a detailed program that targets specific students for remedial instruction during the school day. 

Standardized Assessment Program 

 
Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 

X 

Tax Levy 

X 

Title I 
SWP 

 

Title I 
1003(a) 

 

Title III 

 

 

Title I TA 

PTA 

Funded 

 

 

P/F Set-
aside 

SIG 
Grant 

 

 

21st Century 

School 

Achievement 

Funding 

 

 

C4E 

Other 

 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          24 

 
Part 6 – Progress Monitoring  

Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement 
planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 
Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and 
Time-bound. 
  

Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 
I ready examination, Unit Summative tasks, Advance observations, instructional walkthroughs, and teacher 
intervisitation. 

 
Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action 
plan, if applicable. 

 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          25 

 

Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans 

 
Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and 
school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 
5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) 

Part 1 – Needs Assessment   

Part 1a.  Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice 
Tenet 5 Statement of Practice 
Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one.  Place an “X” in the 
appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 
5.2  The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and 
sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. (aligned to 
Rise Key 4) 

5.3  The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional 

developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning 
experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 
(aligned to Rise Key 4) 

5.4  All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance 

of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and 
fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health 
supports tied to the school’s vision. (aligned to Rise Key 5) 

5.5  The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish 

structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional 
developmental health needs. (aligned to Rise Key 5) 

X 

X 

X 

X 

Part 1b.  Needs/Areas of Focus: 

SOP(s) 

Addressed 

 

 

 

 

1.  Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs 

selected above. 

2.  Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs 

selected above. 
Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 

3. 
4.  What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? 
5.  What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, 

Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? 

Renaissance School of the Arts has tremendous strengths in terms of supportive environment. Through our partnership 
with Partnership with Children, we are able to offer a robust at-risk counseling program. Partnership with Children is our 
lead Community based organization. This organization provides mental health services to our school community.` 
Currently we have a full time social work director, a part-time social worker and several social work interns. These staff 
members offer counseling to students for a variety of reasons.  

While we are providing services for our students we are having difficulty engaging our families and supporting all of 
their needs. As our partnership with our lead CBO intensifies we have identified that our parents and guardians need 
mental health support. During the 2017-2018 school year we started a parent support group. Last school year we had a 
regular presence at our monthly parental support meetings, however, we believe our greatest area for growth is to 
increase the level of participation within our parental support group.  

By addressing the needs of our families we intend to work through some of the trauma that our families are 
experiencing. This school year our percentage of students in temporary housing has increased by 10%. Additionally, we 
have identified an increase in the level of social services involved in our students lives. As a result, we are seeking to 
address the needs of the larger family unit in addition to our students needs.  

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          26 

 

● 5.5 Need: Establish publicized systems and structures that address time, space and resources to collect and analyze a 
wide variety of student data that increases the accountability for all the stakeholders responsible for addressing the 
academic, social and emotional needs of each student and to monitor the effective use of collected data. As per the 
2014-2015 QR, "Although the team employed various strategies, school documents such as conference notes, student 
journals and lesson plans did not indicate that they will monitor the progress of students or increased student progress."  

 

 
Part 2 – Summative Vision for Supportive Environment 

What is your vision for a supportive school environment? How will you, in partnership with each CBO and families, 
enact your vision? 
RSA stakeholders will describe RSA as a place that everyone is welcome and anything is possible. Students will describe 
RSA as a place where they are celebrated for their talents and rewarded for their effort. Teachers will describe RSA as a 
place that every staff member works diligently to meet the needs of our students. Parents will describe RSA as a 
resource for their families and a one-stop shop for social services.  

RSA has experienced a decrease of chronically absent students during the 2014-2015 school year. As of today, the 
percentage of chronically absent students has been reduced from 43% to 17%. Additionally, our daily attendance has 
risen from 88.3% to 91.8% during the 2014-2015 school year. Next year we plan on bolstering our approach to 
increasing daily attendance and reducing the percentage of chronically absent students. Through two strategic 
partnerships with our lead CBO Partnership with Children and NYU we will have additional social workers housed in our 
school. We will have two full time social workers and three part-time social work interns. Each of these staff members 
will have caseloads no greater than 10 to work with. The students that have been identified as chronically absent will 
work closely with one of the social workers to improve their course grades, performance on standardize assessment and 
attendance rates. Partnership with Children facilitate weekly attendance meetings that identify an 

The student government at RSA is an elected body that consults with school leaders on a monthly basis to ensure their 
voice is heard. Additionally, we teach our student self-advocacy in their classes and in life. We conduct morning 
meetings on Monday and Friday mornings before school starts, students take charge of the meetings and relay 
important information to the rest of the school community.  

Through the increased counseling our entire community will regularly refer students to counselors based on necessity as 
well as for regular at-risk counseling. Counselors and the Community Schools Coordinator will collaborate with families 
to be proactive in addressing the social emotional needs of our students.  

Additionally, we have generated a PBIS team and will be developing a robust PBIS system for the 2018-2019 school year. 
The PBIS team will work to develop a sustainable system for PBIS and several professional development programs for 
the faculty.  

The ELT program offered by Citizen Schools will be for all of the students at RSA. The program will include an academic 
block which will be bolstered by a blended learning model using Achieve 3000 and Revolution K12. The Citizen Schools 
program will also offer additional opportunities for exposure to the Arts and athletics. Through the CHAMPS program 
we plan to offer basketball, competitive dance, bikram yoga and Beat the Streets wrestling for our students. We believe 
that offering enticing activities for the students will bolster student attendance in the afterschool program.  

 

Stakeholders will describe RSA as a place that everyone is welcome and anything is possible. Students will describe RSA 
as a place where they are celebrated for their talents and rewarded for their effort. Teachers will describe RSA as a place 
that every staff member works diligently to meet the needs of our students. Parents will describe RSA as a resource for 
their families and a one-stop shop for social services.  

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          27 

 

 

RSA has experienced a decrease of chronically absent students during the 2014-2015 school year. As of today, the 
percentage of chronically absent students has been reduced from 43% to 17%. Additionally, our daily attendance has 
risen from 88.3% to 91.8% during the 2014-2015 school year. Next year we plan on bolstering our approach to 
increasing daily attendance and reducing the percentage of chronically absent students. Through two strategic 
partnerships with our lead CBO Partnership with Children and NYU we will have additional social workers housed in our 
school. We will have two full time social workers and three part-time social work interns. Each of these staff members 
will have caseloads no greater than 10 to work with. The students that have been identified as chronically absent will 
work closely with one of the social workers to improve their course grades, performance on standardize assessment and 
attendance rates.  

 

The student government at RSA is an elected body that consults with school leaders on a monthly basis to ensure their 
voice is heard. Additionally, we teach our student self-advocacy in their classes and in life. We conduct morning 
meetings on Monday and Friday mornings before school starts, students take charge of the meetings and relay 
important information to the rest of the school community.  

Through the increased counseling our entire community will regularly refer students to counselors based on necessity as 
well as for regular at-risk counseling. Counselors and the Community Schools Coordinator will collaborate with families 
to be proactive in addressing the social emotional needs of our students.  

Additionally, we have generated a PBIS team and will be continuing to develop a robust PBIS system for the 2018-2019 
school year. The PBIS team will work to develop a sustainable system for PBIS and several professional development 
programs for the faculty.  

The ELT program offered by Citizen Schools will be for all of the students at RSA. The program will include an academic 
block which will be bolstered by a blended learning model using Achieve 3000 and Revolution K12. The Citizen Schools 
program will also offer additional opportunities for exposure to the Arts and athletics. Through the CHAMPS program 
we plan to offer basketball, competitive dance, bikram yoga and Beat the Streets wrestling for our students. We believe 
that offering enticing activities for the students will bolster student attendance in the afterschool program.  

 

 

Describe your plan to implement a culture of trust and high expectations for teachers, students, families and 
community partners. 
Through the implementation of an equity committee, areas of low expectations will be addressed.  

 

 
 

Who are your CBO partners? How will each CBO sustain and support the social-emotional and academic growth of 
your students? 

CBO Partner 

Partnership with 
Children  

Social Emotional Learning 

Citizen Schools 

Extended Learning Time Instruction 

CBO Focus 

  

 

How will you, in partnership with your CBO, create a supportive and engaging environment for your students’ 
families? 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          28 

 

Together the RSA staff and the staff from Partnership with Children, have collaborated to develop several structures 
that will engage the families and students at RSA. First we have developed a monthly family night which alternates 
between movie night and game night. Additionally, through Partnership with children, we offer a broad range of 
services that support struggling families. We coordinate with a variety of governmental agencies to ensure all of our 
families needs are met these agencies include but are not limited too, NYCHA, ACS, and Dept. of Homeless 
services.Finally, we offer parental counseling for families in crisis that need additional mental health services.  

 
 

 

What essential questions, or key themes, will be explored by all staff and students that acknowledge and celebrate the 
culture and heritage of the student body? 
Are any of our students being underrepresented in our school? 

What can we do to make all students feel special?  

How can we acknowledge students cultural learning styles? 

 

 

What evidence will you use to gauge the impact of your plan to create a positive school environment? 
Student, parent and teacher surveys and a reduced number of incidents reported. .  

 

 
 
Part 3 – Annual Goal 

Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this 
element of the Framework for Great Schools – Supportive Environment. Your goal must be consistent with the 
expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – 
Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact 
meeting at least one of your Rise Benchmarks. 
By June 2019, parent participation in Partnership with Children support group will increase by 100%. 

 

 

Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Supportive Environment Annual Goal:    
Which school benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Supportive Environment Annual Goal? 

List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve 

Daily attendance rate 90.8% 

Trust 4.36 

  

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          29 

Target 
Group(s) 
Who will be 
targeted? 

Which Benchmark(s) 
indicated above does 
this initiative target? 

Timeline 
What is the 
start and 
end date? 

Key Personnel 
Who is responsible for 
implementing and 
overseeing the 
activity/strategy? (include 
school, educational 
consultants and/or CBO 
staff) 

Daily Attendance 

September   CBO/Partnership staff 

Chronically 
absent and 
at-risk for 
failure 

Parents 

Daily Attendance 

October-
May 

Parent Coordinator 

At-risk 
Students 

Daily Attendance 

August-June  Entire Faculty 

 
Part 4 – Action Plan 

Key Initiatives: 
Concisely indicate the 
key initiatives (up to 
five) that your school 
will implement to 
achieve the identified 
goal for this 
Framework for Great 
Schools element. 

Social workers will 
counsel to several 
groups of students 
that have been 
identified as being 
chronically absent or 
at-risk of failing. 

Parent coordinator will 
run several workshops 
(i.e. preparing for the 
common core exams, 
resume writing, 
achieve 3000, financial 
literacy, resume 
writing) for parents 
and focus on student 
out reach.  

PBIS system will be 
developed with a team 
of teachers during the 
months of July and 
August and 
implemented through 
whole staff PD in 
September and 
October 

Through the increased 
counseling our entire 

At-risk 
students 

Daily Attendance 

August-June  CBO/ Partnership with 

Children 

How will you 
assess the 
interim 
progress of 
the 
initiative?(ex. 
decrease in 
serious 
incidents, 
increase in 
students 
participating 
Big Sibs 
program) 

Chronically 
absent 
students will 
be reduced 
from 27% to 
10% by 
December of 
2018 

Chronically 
absent 
students will 
be reduced 
from 27% to 
10% by 
December of 
2018 

Chronically 
absent 
students will 
be reduced 
from 27% to 
10% by 
December of 
2018 

 

The number of 
occurrences 
will be 
reduced by .5 
by June 2019 

Chronically 
absent 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          30 

 

community will 
regularly refer 
students to counselors 
based on necessity as 
well as for regular at-
risk counseling. 
Counselors and the 
community schools 
coordinator will 
collaborate with 
families to be 
proactive in addressing 
the social emotional 
needs of our students.  

 

Partnership with 
Children hold weekly 
attendance meetings  

students will 
be reduced 
from 27% to 
10% by 
December of 
2018 

All Students  All attendance metrics 

August-June  Partnership with Children  Daily 

measured by ATS 

attendance 
will be at 95% 
by December 
2018 

  
 
4b – Parent and Family Engagement 

How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to 
support  the  whole  child?  Include  the  timeline  and  identify  key  personnel  and  stakeholders  responsible  for 
implementation and oversight. 
Partnership with Children will promote the parent support group through orientation and PTA meetings.  
 

 
Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment 

Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including 
human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, lead CBO’s community school budget, FSC Supports, 
etc. 
New technology in our classrooms (4 new smart boards to enhance our coding classes) 

Additional staff that will monitor our PBIS program-Community School Director, Parent Coordinator, Full-time Dean, 
key school aids) 

Teachers 

Skedula Licenses 

Pupil Path accounts for our Parents and Students 

 
Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 

X 

Tax Levy 

X 

Title I 
SWP 

 

Title I 
1003(a) 

 

Title III 

 

 

Title I TA 

PTA 

Funded 

 

 

P/F Set-
aside 

SIG 
Grant 

 

 

21st Century 

School 

Achievement 

Funding 

X 

 

C4E 

Other 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          31 

 
 
Part 6 – Progress Monitoring  

Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement 
planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 
Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and 
Time-bound. 
By January 2019, the partnership with children parent support group will meet 4 times with 10 or more members. 
 

Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 
SKEDULA, New Visions data sorter.  

 

Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action 
plan, if applicable. 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          32 

 

Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans 

Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success 
and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional 
development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices 
and Decisions) 
 
Part 1 – Needs Assessment   

Part 1a.  Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice 
Tenet 4 Statement of Practice 
Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one.  Place an “X” in the 
appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 
4.2  School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized 

around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. (aligned to 
Rise Key 2) 

4.3  Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards 

(CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. (aligned to Rise 
Key 1) 

4.4  Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning 

environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths 
and needs of all students. (aligned to Rise Key 4) 

4.5  Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by 
using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, 
and progress monitoring). (aligned to Rise Key 3) 

X 

X 

X 

X 

Part 1b.  Needs/Areas of Focus: 

SOP(s) 

Addressed 

 

 

 

 

1.  Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs 

selected above. 

2.  Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs 

selected above. 
Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 

3. 
4.  What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, 

Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? 

Our teacher team structures have been in place for four school years. We have scheduled content and grade teams that 
meet weekly. Additionally, we use teams to support a variety of other activities throughout our school. During the 2016-
2017 Quality Review, our school was rated Highly Effective in the area of collaborative teachers. Additionally, we 
received support through the Harvard Graduate School of Education with the Datawise program. We have sent several 
teachers to Harvard to serve as facilitators on our myriad of teacher teams. We use research based protocols to analyze 
student data and work.  

While we have strong systems in place we do not offer many cross-curricular opportunities for our students. We found 
that our content teams do not collaborate with one another. This fractured approach has yielded growth over the last 
two years but the staff has determined they could provide more real world applications for concepts through cross 
content opportunities.  

4.3 Need : Currently we engage in collaborative reviews of curriculum across all grades and subjects and worked 
together to create rigorous performance task, literary anchors and multiples means of demonstration of understanding 
for students. RSA’s current curriculum includes unit and lesson essential questions, Universal Design for Learning 
strands, CIE connections, performance tasks, and literacy anchors to ensure alignment with CCLS. Teacher's will 
continue to review student data and adapt curriculum until it addresses the needs of our diverse learning population. 

 

 
Part 2 – Summative Vision for Collaborative Teachers 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          33 

 

What is your vision for collaborative teaching?   

Teacher collaboration will be promoted through programming/scheduling and capital investment in substitutes or 
coverage for teachers. Each teacher will have five periods of teacher team meetings programmed into their weekly 
schedule. In addition to those set times, teacher teams will be a focus for the teacher directed portion of the allotted 
professional development time that will occur on Wednesday morning from 8:00-8:40AM. Additionally, our teachers will 
collaborate with liaisons from National Teaching Network, Inside Broadway, MSQI and Partnership with Children to 
examine areas that we could enhance our instructional program.  

 

Our teacher teams consist of content area teams that consist of each teacher in a specific discipline. Teachers in each 
content from each grade participate on content teams. Our grade teams consist of each teacher on a specific grade that 
span beyond just content teachers but across content areas as well. Additionally, we have a team dedicated to both 
SWD and ELL students. 

Teachers will provide opportunities to deepen learning for our high achieving students through the AIS program. 
Students that have been identified “high-flying students” in the eighth grade will be offered both HS algebra and Living 
Environment in both the Fall and Spring terms of the 2018-2019 school year during the Renewal Hour.  

Teachers will help the students feel safe through two methods. First the use of PBIS to promote appropriate behavior in 
class and second through the referral process to our triage team. Our PBIS team will identify students that are at-risk for 
the intensive counseling.  

 

Teachers will conference with the principal quarterly to review benchmark assessment results. These results will be 
processed through a Teacher Data Report created by the principals aligning all of the teachers data to one document. 
Teachers will regularly review formative assessment data by way of summative performance tasks and unit 
examinations.  

Community educators and partners will be utilized in very specific ways. Partnership with Children will focus on Parental 
Engagement and enhancing our response to the social emotional needs of our students. Citizen schools will focus on 
enhancing our academic program through book clubs and offering extended learning opportunities for our students 
until 6:00PM. Each of our partners will be deeply involved in teacher teams and professional development sessions 
relating to these specific goals.  

 

 
 

How do you envision enhancing collaboration amongst your Instructional Leadership Team to improve teacher 
practices and student learning? 
During our instructional leadership team we examine school wide initiatives and collaborate on the best course of 
action for addressing these initiatives. Additionally, we also use the Instructional Cabinet time, once a month to meet 
with the PD committee and examine our next steps in the inquiry cycle. Finally, we agree on specific look-fors in each 
classroom that we will expect throughout the school building. The impact of these actions will result in an enhancement 
to classroom instruction.  
 

 

How do you envision collaboration within teacher teams to improve teacher practices and student learning? 
Through the Data Wise process, we have developed ridged structures that allow our teams to maximize the scheduled 
teacher team times. We have Content teams on Tuesdays and Grade teams on Wednesdays. During these meetings 
every teacher team adheres to the ACE habits of mind and records their progress in Google docs on a running agenda.  
 
2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          34 

 
 

 

How do you envision collaboration across teacher teams to improve data driven teacher practices that result in 
improvement in student achievement? 
 

What data will teachers and the Instructional Leadership Team regularly review to ensure that they are reflecting upon 
needed adjustments to teaching practices and meeting individual student learning needs? 

Data Reviewed 

2017 NYS 6-8 ELA 
Examination Data 

2017 NYS 6-8 
Mathematics 
Examination Data 

Intent 

Teachers will examine student proficiency in specific standard to drive groupings lesson 
objectives.  

Teachers will examine student proficiency in specific standard to drive groupings lesson 
objectives.  

Iready Benchmark 
assessment Data 

Teachers will examine student proficiency and growth in specific standard to drive groupings 
lesson objectives.  

  

 

Describe the screening process you use to identify students who need extra help? How do you use this process to 
determine which intervention to provide? 
Students will be given iReady diagnostic test in the beginning of the school year. Teachers will the analyze this data in 
teacher teams to identify at risk students and necessary intervention. 

 

 
Part 3 – Annual Goal 

Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this 
element of the Framework for Great Schools – Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be consistent with the 
expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – 
Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact 
meeting at least one of your Rise Benchmarks. 
By June 2019, 100% of the teachers at RSA will collaborate to create an interdisciplinary exit project to count for 50% 
of student’s fourth quarter marking period grade. 

 

 

Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Collaborative Teachers Annual Goal:   Which 
school benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Collaborative Teachers Annual Goal? 

List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve 

Collaborative Teacher3.12 

Average Math Proficiency Rating 2.17 

  

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          35 

 
Part 4 – Action Plan 

Key Initiatives: 
Concisely indicate the 
key initiatives (up to 
five) that your school 
will implement to 
achieve the identified 
goal for this Framework 
for Great Schools 
element. 

Programmed teacher 
team meetings every 4 th 
period. During these 
meetings the staff will 
engage in the Data Wise 
system using a set of 
protocols to determine 
action steps to address 
students needs.  

 

 

Predetermined agendas 
for each team meeting 
will be provided to each 
team based on the Data 
Wise process. The 
agendas will be 
generated through 
analysis of student 
performance data ion 
Iready examinations, 
NYS Examination Data  

Develop an 
intervisitation program 
for our teachers to view 
best practice among 
their colleagues. 

Develop a culminating 
project that addresses 
key content and literacy 
standards for grades 6-8. 

Which Benchmark(s) 
indicated above does 
this initiative target? 

Target 
Group(s) 
Who will 
be 
targeted? 

Timeline 
What is 
the start 
and end 
date? 

Key Personnel 
Who is responsible for 
implementing and 
overseeing the 
activity/strategy? (include 
school, educational 
consultants and/or CBO 
staff) 

Teachers, 
CBOs 

Average Mathematics 
& ELA 

9/2/18-
6/28/19 

Teachers, Administrators, 
school partners 

Proficiency  

How will you 
assess the 
interim 
progress of 
the 
initiative?(ex. 
decrease in 
serious 
incidents, 
increase in 
students 
participating 
Big Sibs 
program) 

Increase of 
30% in January 
Iready testing 

Teachers, 
CBOs 

Average Mathematics 
& ELA 

9/2/18-
6/20/19 

Teachers, Administrators, 
school partners 

Increase of 
30% in January 
Iready testing 

Proficiency  

Teachers,   Average Mathematics 

& ELA 

Proficiency  

9/3/18-
6/20/19 

National Teaching Network 
consultants 

Increase of 
30% in January 
Iready testing 

Teachers 

Average Mathematics 
& ELA 

4/19-6/19  Teacher leaders, Substitute 

teachers, Principal 

Increase of 
40% in June 
Iready testing 

Proficiency  

  
 
4b – Parent and Family Engagement 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          36 

 

How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies 
to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and 
identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 
Families will be notified of the same data that is being used by teachers in teacher teams. The data that will be sent 
home tri-annually will be student reading levels and Ready testing scores. Families also have access to all student data 
via Skedula. 
 

 
Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment 

Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including 
human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, lead CBO’s community school budget, FSC Supports, 
etc. 
Per Diem Funds for coverages and substitutes 

Consultant fees from National Teaching Network 

 
Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 

X 

X 

Tax Levy 

X 

Title I 
SWP 

X 

Title I TA 

Title I 
1003(a) 

 

Title III 

 

PTA 

Funded 

X 

X 

P/F Set-
aside 

SIG 
Grant 

X 

X 

21st Century 

School 

Achievement 

Funding 

X 

X 

C4E 

Other 

 
Part 6 – Progress Monitoring  

Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement 
planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 
Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and 
Time-bound. 
By February 2019, the teachers will examine three units between may and June to combine with another content 
area.  

 
Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 
iready and ready examinations given four times during the school year. 

 

Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action 
plan, if applicable. 

 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          37 

 

Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans 

 

Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and 
nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional 
support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) 
 
Part 1 – Needs Assessment   

Part 1a.  Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice 
Tenet 2 Statement of Practice 
Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one.  Place an “X” in the 
appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 
2.2  The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, 

Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive 
of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational 
Plan (SCEP). (aligned with Rise Key 2) 
Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital 
resources. (aligned with Rise Key 6) 

2.3 

2.4  The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual 

Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and 
track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. (aligned with Rise Key 
1) 

2.5  Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical 

individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum 
and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student 
social and emotional developmental health). (aligned with Rise Keys 4 and 5) 

X 

Part 1b.  Needs/Areas of Focus: 

SOP(s) 

Addressed 

 

 

 

 

1.  Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs 

selected above. 

2.  Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs 

selected above. 
Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 

3. 
4.  What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, 

Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? 

Renaissance School of the Arts has a distributive leadership structures built-in to our school. Teachers have 
opportunities to take on leadership roles and develop as leaders. Our Principal's Cabinet is comprised of teacher leaders 
throughout the school. We have taken steps to ensure there is a system for accountability and feedback is continuous. 
We have one master teacher and one peer collaborative teacher that help coordinate our instructional program at RSA. 
We have a Dean of student culture that focuses exclusively on creating an environment that is both academically 
rigorous and developmentally appropriate. We offer multiple levels of Arts programs for our students and our student 
take on leadership roles throughout the school. During the 2017-2018 school year our instructional focus was to 
cultivate student autonomy. Through that effort we have created an engaged student government that informs much of 
our organizational decision making.  

While we have created structures to enfranchise the entire community and empower different stake holders, we have 
not looked with-in. Our next step is to explore the implicit bias that resides within our staff. Then we need to examine 
how disproportionately manifests itself within our school. A committee of teacher leaders, parents and students needs 
to examine this issue in further depth and specifically identify the disparity that exists and craft a plan to correct 
disproportionately.  

2.5 Need : In the fall of 2018, Principal will form an equity committee that will convene weekly to address equity issues 
seen within RSA, particularly in the areas of student engagement and teacher practices. 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          38 

 

 

 
Part 2 – Summative Vision for Effective School Leadership 

What is your vision for effective school leadership at your school? 

The school leader will articulate a shared vision for the school through weekly correspondence with staff in a Principals 
Notes newsletter that will be emailed to the staff every Monday morning prior to start of the week. In the notes will be 
dates and deadlines that will be focused on for the week. These notes will detail events and identify point-people for 
each of the events. Additionally, we will continue with our monthly maintenance calendar which is arranged based on 
the schools instructional focus. Additionally the school leader plans to continue to send home a monthly calendar for 
parents and other school community members with a monthly newsletter from the Principal. Also, through the use of 
Datacation and School Messenger we intend on keeping the lines of communication open for parents.  

School leaders are cultivating a robust benchmark assessment system to generate sufficient reliable data for our school 
community members to examine to adjust the curriculum and improve the delivery of instruction for students. Teachers 
will collaborate during period 4 using the Data Wise method for inquiry. RSA faculty, Citizen schools team members and 
Partnership with Children staff members will participate in this team inquiry. The collaborations will be focused on each 
of the areas of the Data Wise model each meeting depending on where the meeting falls within the cycle. For instance, 
each of the 4 weeks out of the month will have a specific focus of either Data, Feedback, Strategy Building, Assessment 
and Development of Mastery Targets. Additionally, those meetings will be based on specific instructional focus based on 
the nature of the team. For example our ELA team might examine their exemplars for the summative tasks at the 
conclusion of a unit. Other teams might focus on school wide events and develop a method for evaluating the events 
success.  

The school leader will organize the teacher and student programs to have team meeting times built into the day 
seamlessly for each teachers program. We will increase the number of lunch periods to create greater flexibility in the 
program to ensure teachers can meet with a wide range of their colleagues for a variety of purposes.  

School leaders will conduct daily classroom visits including Advance related observations and collaborate with 
pedagogues with high frequency. The principal will maintain an open door policy for all school community member and 
schedule regular conferences with teachers to ensure timely feedback is given.  

Based on an assessment of teacher practice, a professional development plan has been crafted for the component 3b. 
Part of the professional development plan includes an emphasis on Socratic seminar, Q focus strategies and station 
teaching. Additionally, our Instructional Leadership Team will meet to analyze pedagogical trends and determine next 
steps for professional development.  

 

What are your core belief(s) for school improvement and how they inform your vision for developing instructional 
leadership at your school? 
Providing all students with access to rigorous concepts by implementation of strategies and changes identified by equity 
committee. We believe that by individualizing the approach for each student is essential for the improvement process .  
 

 
 

 
 
 

What is your vision for developing differentiated leadership throughout your school? How will you utilize teacher 
leaders to build broad capacity within your school?  
2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          39 

 

 

 

RSA has two official teacher leaders. We have a Master teacher that coordinates the Arts department. Our Peer 
Collaborative Teacher in ELA will coordinate our teacher team structures, Strategic Reading Period. The Principal 
monitors and assigns tasks top the teacher leaders.  
 

How will the leader foster collaborative school governance processes, and ensure full family participation together 
with other stakeholders? 
Every Wednesday morning the PPT will identify areas which we could best serve both our students and their families 
both socially and emotionally. Our PTA will be active in every school wide activity. Our PTA will participate in 
chaperoning events and planning school wide events. Additionally, our equity team meets every Thursday during period 
4. They are currently examining the inequity between male and female students.  
 

How will you use evidence-based systems to ensure school and teacher leaders are led by a cycle of continuous 
learning and use this to inform their teams’ priorities? 

Evidence-Based System 

Support(s) 

Collaborator(s) 

Benchmark Assessments (iready) 

Anecdotal logs 

Unit Summative tasks 

  

 
Part 3 – Annual Goal 

Teacher Team time is carved into their 
schedules 

PPT team examines students at risk of 
failure 

Self-assessment cards, chunking 
strategies, tiered assessment 

Teacher, Principal, DSR 

Teachers, Social Workers, Principal 

Teachers, Principal 

Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this 
element of the Framework for Great Schools – Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be consistent with the 
expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – 
Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact 
meeting at least one of your Rise Benchmarks. 
By June 2019, an Equity committee will identify issues of inequity within the school and will develop and facilitate a 
cycle of professional development to address these issues school wide.  

 

 

Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Effective School Leadership Annual Goal:   Which 
school benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Effective School Leadership Annual Goal? 

List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve 

Average ELA proficiency rating 2.40  

Average Math proficiency rating 2.17 

Collaborative Teachers 3.12 

  

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          40 

 
Part 4 – Action Plan 

Key Initiatives: 
Concisely indicate the 
key initiatives (up to 
five) that your school 
will implement to 
achieve the identified 
goal for this 
Framework for Great 
Schools element. 

Principal will form an 
equity committee 
made up of key 
stakeholders within 
the school.  

Principal in 
collaboration with 
teachers, will identify 
key issues of inequity 
within RSA. 

Equity committee will 
create quarterly goals 
and action plans to 
address identified 
issues.  

The principal meet 
with committee 
quarterly to analyze 
and discuss action plan 
and progress 
monitoring. 

Committee continually 
gather data to identify 
progress and adjust 
action plan. 

Target 
Group(s) 
Who will 
be 
targeted? 

Which Benchmark(s) 
indicated above does 
this initiative target? 

Timeline 
What is the 
start and 
end date? 

Key Personnel 
Who is responsible for 
implementing and 
overseeing the 
activity/strategy? (include 
school, educational 
consultants and/or CBO 
staff) 

Teachers 

Average ELA proficiency 
rating 2.40  

September 
2018 

Administrators 

Teachers 

Average ELA proficiency 
rating 2.40  

Teachers 

Average ELA proficiency 
rating 2.40  

Administrators 

Administrators 

September 
2018-June 
2019 

September 
2018-June 
2019 

Teachers 

Average ELA proficiency 
rating 2.40  

Principal 

September 
2018-June 
2019 

How will you 
assess the 
interim 
progress of 
the 
initiative?(ex. 
decrease in 
serious 
incidents, 
increase in 
students 
participating 
Big Sibs 
program) 

Increase on 
Iready bench 
mark 
assessments 

Increase on 
Iready bench 
mark 
assessments 

Increase on 
Iready bench 
mark 
assessments 

Increase on 
Iready bench 
mark 
assessments 

Teachers 

Average ELA proficiency 
rating 2.40 

September 
2018-June 
2019 

Instructional Leadership 
Team 

Increase on 
Iready 
benchmarks 

  
 
4b – Parent and Family Engagement 

How  will  your  school  engage  parents/families  and  support  their  understanding  of  Effective  School  Leadership  and 
strategies  to  promote  parent  leadership  and  engagement  in  order  to  support  their  children  at  home?  Include  the 
timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 
Teachers will administer student learning surveys to identify the different ways that our students learn in a culturally 
diverse setting. This information will be shared with parents during student led conferences. 
 

 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          41 

 
Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment 

Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including 
human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, lead CBO’s community school budget, FSC Supports, 
etc. 
● Time for professional development, per session and per diem 

● Scheduled time during the school day for individual conferences with each teacher  

Schedule four professional development sessions 

 

 
Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 

X 

Tax Levy 

X 

Title I 
SWP 

X 

Title I TA 

 

Title I 
1003(a) 

 

Title III 

X 

PTA 

Funded 

 

 

P/F Set-
aside 

SIG 
Grant 

 

21st Century 

School 

X 

Achievement 

Funding 

X 

 

C4E 

Other 

 
Part 6 – Progress Monitoring  

Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement 
planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 
Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and 
Time-bound. 
By February 2019, the equity committee will have met 5 times. 

 

 
Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 
Iready benchmark assessments and marking period passing rates, Advance observations and walkthroughs 

 

Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action 
plan, if applicable. 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          42 

 

Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans 

 
Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a 
welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. 
(Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) 
 
Part 1 – Needs Assessment   

Part 1a.  Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice 
Tenet 6 Statement of Practice 
Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one.  Place an “X” in the 
appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 
6.2  The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their 

high expectations for student academic achievement. (aligned with Rise Key 2) 

6.3  The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and 
community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to 
augment learning. (aligned with Rise Key 4 and 6) 

6.4  The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and 

provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to 
support student success. (aligned with Rise Key 5) 

6.5  The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school 

community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and 
empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services 
for their children. (aligned with Rise Key 3) 

X 

Part 1b.  Needs/Areas of Focus: 

SOP(s) 

Addressed 

 

 

 

 

1.  Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs 

selected above. 

2.  Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs 

selected above. 
Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 

3. 
4.  What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, 

Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? 

As per the 2017-2018 NYC DOE School Quality Guide, our school was 88% above the district average in the area of 
strong family community ties. The School Quality Guide reports that 97% of our students families say the communicate 
with the staff on a regular basis. 94% of the teachers have identified that the school works closely with families to 
provide appropriate support. Additionally we were able to achieve 100% parental participation during our 2017-2018 
Student Led Conferences. Additionally, we have cultivated strong partnerships within the greater community.  

While we have support from our families, we have identified that we do not engage the fathers or males in our students 
lives with a great frequency. This school year we are committed to developing a plan of action to engage our students 
fathers. We feel as though through a targeted approach we can achieve greater paternal participation within our school.  

6.4 Need: Plan specific strategies and opportunities with pertinent school staff and community agency partners for 
sustaining productive partnerships with families as well as high levels of family engagement so that parents and 
caregivers can meaningfully support student learning and success. School and community agencies will particularly 
target addressing the lack of male guardian attendance at school functions. 

 

 

 
Part 2 – Summative Vision for Strong Family and Community Ties 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          43 

 

What is your vision for strong family and community ties at your school?  What opportunities exist for the school staff 
to know the students and their families in order to better communicate and partner with families and communities in 
the vision for the school? 
Summer BBQ & Orientation- Partnership with Children social workers will participate along with the school with 
welcoming students and families to Renaissance School of the Arts during a summer BBQ & orientation. This provides an 
opportunity to build relationships, provide information about programming being offered, obtain enrollment forms, and 
engage students and families in activities. 

Parent Teacher Conferences- Partnership with Children staff is present during parent/teacher conferences to provide 
support should issues arise that call for a social worker’s expertise. Social workers might also arrange to attend the 
conference along with the parent and teacher, especially when it is clear that the student or family require additional 
school or community-based supports. 

Casework Needs- Partnership with Children staff is able to meet with any parent or guardian who requires assistance for 
themselves, their family, or their child. Social workers can provide referrals for a variety of needs including but not 
limited to mental health services, medical providers, housing assistance, legal assistance, support with ACS or Family 
Court issues, etc. Social workers are available to attend appointments with families if they wish to have this level of 
support. 

Parent University- Partnership with Children offers a University workshop series on a monthly basis. Some of the topics 
that were covered included supporting your child with ELA/Math exams, healthy eating, talking with your child about 
gangs, and helping your child build healthy relationships. Parents earn credits for each session they attend. At the end of 
the series, there will be a graduation and a prom. This spring, PwC conducted a session about supporting your child with 
the ELA and Math exam which was filmed and a video was produced. The video was posted on the school website and 
Facebook page so that parents who were unable to attend the session were able to access the information. 

Each year, Partnership with Children conducts parent surveys to determine parent satisfaction with services provided 
and to identify gaps.  

Parents United Group-Partnership with Children will offer a monthly parent support group to increase parents 
attendance and participation among the school. It is an opportunity for parents, guardians, and caregivers to come 
together to share ideas, get support from one another, and build school community. The group should address the 
specific needs of the community. Parents should be made to feel ownership of the group. After one year of guided 
facilitation by Partnership with Children social workers, parents should be encouraged to continue the group on their 
own with support around session planning and recruitment ideas.  

Home Visits-Partnership with Children will conduct home visits to support parents with resources so their children will 
be able to attend school on a daily basis and timely manner. 

Arts performances held quarterly will attract parents to participate in school wide events.  

School staff and school safety agents participate in an orientation that outlines the expectations our school has around 
generating a welcoming environment. Additionally, there is a dedicated family room on the first floor in room 121. Our 
school community provides several different learning opportunities for our students these include but are not limited to 
ESL courses, Resume writing, Understanding the common core, how to generate better relationships with your child's 
teachers.  

 

 

Within the Community School model, how will families be welcomed into the school and made a part of the school 
community?  What support will administrators, teachers, school staff and school safety officers be given to help create 
a welcoming environment?   Will there be a dedicated space for families in the school? 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          44 

 

 

 

 

 

Families will be welcomed at RSA through a series of invitations to participate in events. We have regular family events 
that occur at RSA. Additionally, we have sought out to hire bilingual staff members that can communicate with families 
in their home language. Also, we use datacation to regularly communicate with families about their child's progress. 
Teachers, Administrators, and School Safety have attended a workshop on the community schools model and the 
Framework for great schools. Through these trainings we have engaged as a community in dialogue designed to identify 
areas where we could enhance our collaboration with the families of our students.  
 

How will the school identify and develop families to take leadership roles in school decision making/school governance 
structures? 
Currently our parents function in a leadership capacity through the School Leadership Team, the Parent Teacher 
Association, and the Principal's cabinet. Families coordinate with the Parent coordinator to provide workshops and 
support school wide events.  
 

How will the school engage the community and families? How will they ensure that teachers are able to learn from 
families about the children being taught? 
We hold Student Led Conferences through the school year where parents receive individual appointments to meet with 
a student's teacher. During these meetings parents engage in a goal setting procedure that they conduct with their 
parents and teachers.  
 

How do families partner with the school and CBO to support student success?  Will there be dedicated space for 
families?   
Family partnerships with 
school: 

Familiespartner with theschool through our parental engagementtime which occurs 
every Thursday morning from 8:05-8:40. 

Family partnerships with CBO: 

Partnership with children run a parent support group and provide a wealth of 
resources for families in crisis to take advantage of. 

 

Is there dedicated space for 
these partnerships? 

 

425, 410 

 

What data and student progress feedback loops will be present at the school to ensure that families knowledgeable of 
their children’s scholastic success, in addition to report cards? 
We use an on line data reporting system which the teachers update on a weekly basis. The system is datacation, parents 
use an app on their smartphone to communicate or interface regularly with staff at RSA.  

 

 
Part 3 – Annual Goal 

Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this 
element of the Framework for Great Schools – Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be consistent with 
the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – 
Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact 
meeting at least one of your Rise Benchmarks. 
 
Goal: By June 2019 Renaissance School of the Arts will hold four family and community events that that will engage at 
least 75% of male guardians/father figures. 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          45 

 

 

 

Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Strong Family and Community Ties Annual Goal:   
Which school benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Strong Family and Community Ties Annual 
Goal? 

List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve 

NYS ELA (2.40) and Mathematics (2.17) Proficiency ratings 

Average daily attendance 90.8 

  

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          46 

 
Part 4 – Action Plan 

Target 
Group(s) 
Who will 
be 
targeted? 

Key Initiatives: Concisely 
indicate the key 
initiatives (up to five) 
that your school will 
implement to achieve 
the identified goal for 
this Framework for 
Great Schools element. 

Which Benchmark(s) 
indicated above does 
this initiative target? 

Timeline 
What is 
the start 
and end 
date? 

Key Personnel 
Who is responsible for 
implementing and 
overseeing the 
activity/strategy? (include 
school, educational 
consultants and/or CBO 
staff) 

Curriculum night 
introduce concept of 
RSA male guardian 
participation to all 
participants.  

Messages about school 
events sent out via 
Skedula and Pupil path  

implementation of 
awards and incentives 
for students classes with 
most parental 
involvement.  

Creation of a male role 
model buddy system for 
students who do not 
have male guardian. 

Teachers  

ELA and Math 
Proficiency  

11/3/16 

Teachers 

Teachers 

ELA and Math 
proficiency  

9/16 

Technology Coordinator 

All staff 

ELA and Math 
proficiency 

8/20/16 

Principal 

All Staff 

ELA and Math 
proficiency 

9/16-5/17  Lead Teachers 

How will you 
assess the 
interim 
progress of 
the 
initiative?(ex. 
decrease in 
serious 
incidents, 
increase in 
students 
participating 
Big Sibs 
program) 

Increase on 
iready 
benchmark 
assessments 

Increase on 
iready 
benchmark 
assessments 

Increase on 
iready 
benchmark 
assessments 

Increase on 
iready 
benchmark 
assessments 

  

 
Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment 

Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including 
human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, lead CBO’s community school budget, FSC Supports, 
etc. 
Agendas, surveys, and implementation 

Staff attendance at PTA meetings 

Parent coordinator’s planning and hosting of parent offerings 

Staff attendance at Student recognition events 

Per session for staff 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          47 

 

the use of Circular six periods for teacher teams 

 

 
Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 

 

 

Tax Levy 

X 

Title I 
SWP 

Title I 
1003(a) 

 

Title III 

 

 

Title I TA 

PTA 

Funded 

 

 

P/F Set-
aside 

SIG 
Grant 

 

 

21st Century 

School 

Achievement 

Funding 

X 

 

C4E 

Other 

 
 
Part 6 – Progress Monitoring  

Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement 
planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 
Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and 
Time-bound. 
By February 2019, 60 % of our male parents will attend school wide events as measured by sign-in sheets.  

 

 
Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 
iready examinations in ELA and Mathematics., sign in sheet s and parent satisfaction surveys 

 

Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action 
plan, if applicable. 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          48 

 

Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Program Description 

 

Directions: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) activities are directly aligned to the elements of the Framework for Great 
Schools, Rigorous Instruction, Supportive Environments, and Strong Family and Community Ties. ELT provides enriching 
educational experiences that happen outside of the traditional school day and blend skill acquisition, relationship-
building and fun to foster academic and social-emotional growth. Summer learning, afterschool programming, and 
extended-day ELT models, when well-implemented, play a critical role in supporting students in all grades and ensuring 
that they graduate from high school, college and career ready. SED requires that Priority schools offer a minimum of 200 
additional student contact hours as Expanded Learning Time in addition to the current mandated length of 900 hours of 
instruction per year (25 hours per week) in grades K-6 and 990 hours of instruction per year (27.5 hours per week) in 
grades 7-12. Effective ELT models will blend school staff with community partners, and will provide a balanced 
curriculum that can include ELA, math, STEM, arts, physical activity, and leadership development. Complete the sections 
on this page to demonstrate how the school will meet these requirements. 
 
Part 1 – ELT Program Goal(s) 

Describe the summative goal(s) of the ELT program for the 2018-19 school year. Goals for ELT should aligned to the 
Rise Benchmarks.  How will the school will ensure that all students’ individual needs are served during the Rise ELT 
and how the school’s vision for ELT will impact both academic achievement and social emotional growth? Be sure to 
construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. 
By June 2019, 70% of students will demonstrate mastery of 21st century skills on two end-of-semester performance 
task assessments. 

 

 
Part 2 – ELT Program Type 

Is the ELT program voluntary or compulsory? 

 

Voluntary 

X 

Compulsory 

Rise ELT – Describe what accountability structures the school will employ to ensure participation of all students, 
including special populations, will participate fully in Rise ELT. 
Additional ELT - If there is a voluntary ELT program in addition to the compulsory Rise ELT, indicate how you will 
actively encourage the participation of all students, with the goal of serving at least 50% of students. 
Our program has been structured that students will have core content classes during the renewal hour. Additionally, 
during our school wide orientation in August, families are alerted that our instructional day will last until 6:00PM.  

 

 
Part 3 – ELT Program Description 

Target Population: The ELT program for a Rise School will be offered to all students in the school. 

Describe how the school will meet the following SED requirements for an ELT program: 
How will the school integrate academics, enrichment, and skill development through hands-on experiences that make 
learning relevant and engaging?   
How will CBO staff and the school’s teachers be integrated to provide a seamless learning day? 

  Offer a range of activities that capture student interest and strengthen student engagement in learning so as 

to promote higher attendance, reduces risk for retention or drop out, and increases the likelihood of 
graduation. 

  Actively address the unique learning needs and interests of all types of students, especially those who may 

benefit from approaches and experiences not offered in the traditional classroom setting. 

  What new content areas and opportunities will be offered to students? How will the school ensure all IEP and 

language mandates are met during ELT? 

  Contain components designed to improve student academic, social, and emotional outcomes, including 

opportunities for enrichment programs such as in music and art. 

  Ensure instruction in any core academic subject offered in the program will be delivered under the 

supervision of a teacher who is NYS certified in that particular content area. 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          49 

 

  How will community educators receive professional development?  Are there plans to provide joint PD to 

school faculty and community partner staff? 

  What content will be led by pedagogical staff and what content will be led by CBO partners? 
  How will the school best utilize CBO partners to impact student achievement? 
  How will effective outreach be conducted to families? 
  How will programming be made easily accessible to students and families in order to encourage 

participation? 

Core to the Community School model, Citizen Schools’ Expanded Learning Time program is naturally aimed at 
comprehensively supporting student development by connecting a web of Citizen Schools professional staff, 
AmeriCorps Teaching Fellows, community volunteers, families, and students. Citizen Schools fosters academic success 
through targeted support; our Teaching Fellows (Team Leaders) reteach lessons from the school day and assist 
students with homework in the after school hours. Through Citizen Schools’ signature apprenticeship program led by 
volunteers from community organizations, students learn to connect their current coursework and effort to future 
success, developing greater engagement in school and increasing their access and belief in their ability to succeed in 
college and career. During the course of the school year, Citizen Schools offers its 980 students over 550 adult 
mentors who are invested in their success. The 12-week volunteer commitment offers a unique level of consistency 
for both students and volunteers, so in addition to benefitting from exposure to volunteers’ professional expertise, 
students are positively impacted by seeing caring adults return week after week. Additionally, parents and families 
also benefit from the apprenticeship model because it provides the opportunity for them to engage in their children’s 
work each semester through showcase presentations and performances, called WOW!s. 

Program Activities  

Citizen Schools’ expanded learning model is built around the belief that middle school students thrive in a hands-on 
learning environment that provides them with additional time to learn, form strong relationships with volunteer 
mentors from the community, and explore new interests. Central to this model is the idea that all citizens can make a 
contribution to education by sharing their experiences and talents with students and serving as caring role models.  

Citizen Schools’ integrated program combines education, social-emotional development, and community connections 
to serve each student’s overall health and well-being—qualities that are central to the community school model. We 
recognize that the development of non-cognitive skills such as oral communication, leadership, grit, tenacity, and 
perseverance are key to preparation for long-term success. Our program is designed to ensure that students are not 
only on-track academically to complete high school, but that they are building the 21 st century and social-emotional 
skills that put them on-track to thrive in high school, college, and beyond.  

Citizen Schools’ apprenticeship program is tightly aligned with efforts to improve students’ non-cognitive skill 
development. Each apprenticeship curriculum emphasizes specific 21 st century skills and social-emotional learning 
competencies. Apprenticeships are offered in a variety of fields, including business and entrepreneurship, robotics, 
and theater arts. For example, because RSA has a focus in the arts, Citizen Schools has built a partnership over the 
past few years with Creative Art Works, an organization that provides teaching artists for afterschool programming. 
Creative Art Works has taught apprenticeships in mural painting, in which students design a mural of a scene that is 
socially relevant to their community, and cartooning, in which students create a character biography and narrative. 
Apprenticeships also encourage healthy lifestyle choices. In Fall 2015, students at RSA in the “Healthy Living” 
apprenticeship learned about healthy foods and components of balanced nutrition, including how to make their own 
nutritious smoothies. Physical activity is also incorporated into our program model through student electives, such as 
dance or basketball.  

Through dedicated homework time and daily math or literacy lessons aligned with Common Core standards, Citizen 
Schools’ academic support offers students more time to practice essential academic skills and more personalized 
assistance in reaching and exceeding proficiency standards. Citizen Schools’ staff coordinate with daytime classroom 
teachers to share data about students’ strengths and challenges, and work with students individually to set goals and 
illustrate the connections between effort and outcomes. 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          50 

 

Citizen Schools’ program provides positive learning experiences and support for students, as well as fosters 
aspirations and positive life choices. Students expand their awareness of future opportunities and connect those 
opportunities with current decisions and choices. In-depth college readiness programming, which includes visits to 
college campuses, whet students’ appetites for the opportunities that college offers, and connects those 
opportunities with choices they can make, starting in middle school, to make college accessible. In addition, students 
travel to the workplaces of our corporate partners and volunteers to take tours, see demonstrations, and participate 
in various activities, such as career panels. For example, a group of students recently visited Time Warner Cable to 
tour their server floor and participate in a panel discussion about technology careers with Time Warner Cable 
employees. 

These activities are well-suited to a community school approach, as they are designed to help all students experience 
mastery and positive recognition, develop concrete visions of success, grow socially and emotionally, and build the 
skills, attitudes, and beliefs they need to reach their goals. 

Staffing, Training, and Professional Development  

Citizen Schools Team Leaders (AmeriCorps Teaching Fellows) receive extensive training of up to 70 hours per 
semester and ongoing coaching and professional development opportunities. Training begins with a weeklong 
national Summer Institute, followed by state- and site-based training. During the school year, training continues in 
weekly staff meetings and in monthly workshops on topics such as managing behavior, developing lesson plans, and 
working with students who have special needs. Each Team Leader is observed weekly and receives regular feedback 
and coaching. They are formally assessed five times annually based on an Instructional Rubric. Citizen Schools’ staff 
also attend school and district trainings when possible, and each Team Leader is paired with a school-day teacher who 
may provide mentoring and feedback on instructional skills. 

Citizen Schools also provides volunteers with extensive training to prepare them to work effectively with middle 
school students and provides professional development training for our site-based staff on managing volunteer 
relationships. The formal training for Citizen Teachers is about five hours and is divided into three sessions: Intro to 
Apprenticeships (volunteers learn the basics of a high-quality apprenticeship and the roles and expectations of 
volunteering); Apprenticeship Design (volunteers create a semester unit guide based on a codified curriculum with 
support from a Team Leader); and WOW! Planning (mid-semester training to plan the end-of-apprenticeship student 
showcase). In addition to these formal sessions, Citizen Schools provides ongoing support to volunteers. Every 
apprenticeship is co-taught by a Team Leader, who assists with lesson planning, classroom management, logistical 
support, and alignment with school-day learning. 

Parent Engagement  

Parents/guardians are key partners in ensuring that the gains made during the afterschool hours are fortified at 
home, and we are dedicated to engaging families in the community school strategy in multiple ways. Citizen Schools 
staff currently make biweekly phone calls to each child’s family to discuss student progress (at preferred times 
designated by the family and in the family’s native language wherever possible). The first goal of the calls is to 
establish a trusting partnership with families in advancing students’ learning and growth. Building on a platform of 
trust and mutual commitment, the staff can then serve as a bridge between parents and schools, increasing parents’ 
comfort levels in contacting teachers and advocating for their children. Staff are trained in protocols for constructive 
communication with families, and ongoing feedback, training and professional development regarding parental 
involvement are provided through coaching, supervision, and peer groups of Team Leaders. 

There are also a variety of activities/events targeted at increasing parent engagement currently provided by Citizen 
Schools and RSA. Citizen Schools invites families to events such as orientation meetings at the start of the school year, 
potluck dinners, and WOW!s (end-of-semester presentations/performances of what students learned in 
apprenticeships). Citizen Schools and RSA provide workshops throughout the year as a resource to understanding and 
engaging in students’ work (e.g. Common Core, state testing, and STEM learning) and adult courses in topics such as 
English as a Second Language and salsa dancing. As the Community Schools Plan is implemented, part of Citizen 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          51 

 

Schools’ and RSA’s vision is to increase parent attendance at these events. To date, the best parent attendance is 
achieved at student showcases, so pairing student performances with other courses or meetings may produce better 
attendance. On an individual level, if parental outreach has been unsuccessful through regular means, the Campus 
Director and Principal will tailor appropriate alternative means to encourage full participation of parents and to share 
information on student progress. 

 

 
Part 4 – ELT Program Implementation and Oversight 
Part 4a. Who will implement the ELT program? Who will oversee the program? 
1. 

Indicate the key personnel that will be responsible for implementing and overseeing the ELT program, 
including school-based staff and any high-quality community partners that will be involved. 
If applicable, describe the scope of involvement of all community partners and how the joint ELT program is 
structured. 
How will the school assess the impact of ELT on individual student achievement and social emotional 
development?   

2. 

3. 

The key personnel responsible for the implementation and oversight of the ELT program are as follows. 

● Citizen Schools Campus Director (Expanded Learning Director) 

● Managing Director of Program 

● Executive Director Citizen Schools New York–New Jersey 

● Managing Director of External Engagement 

● AmeriCorps Teaching Fellows (Team Leaders) 

Community Partners  

In addition to the staff members listed above, Citizen Schools will engage volunteers from business and community 
organizations throughout the year to help deliver the apprenticeship courses. Citizen Schools will coordinates and 
implement all ELT services, including training volunteers and supporting them in the classroom. At least once per 
year, Citizen Schools meets with its partner organizations to discuss highlights, challenges, and future volunteer 
engagement potential. For example, Citizen Schools partners with Creative Arts Works (CAW), that works to bring 
teaching artists into classrooms, and plans to deepen the partnership to bring teaching artists to the school outside of 
the apprenticeship program, as well. In the past two years, volunteers have taught apprenticeship courses in mural 
painting, in which students design a mural of a scene that is socially relevant to their community, and cartooning, in 
which students create a character biography and narrative. Citizen Schools has also partnered with organizations such 
as UBS, PricewaterhouseCoopers, NYU School of Medicine, and New York Institute of Technology to provide 
apprenticeships, such as “Shark Tank”, “Next Big Tech Company” and “Invisible World”—an apprenticeship that 
studies bacteria and viruses through weekly experiments. Citizen Schools will continue to build new relationships and 
leverage current partnerships to expand their involvement in the program. 

Program Evaluation  

Citizen Schools is dedicated to consistent and accurate monitoring of program quality and student achievement and 
to continuous improvement of programs. We partner with TASC (The After School Corporation) to collect and analyze 
student data on academic performance, social and emotional well-being (using the Devereaux Student Strengths 
Assessment), and engagement measured by school attendance. TASC researchers compare student outcomes with 
program participation and program design, enabling Citizen Schools to take a close look into how it is achieving goals 
and what adjustments need to be made to program activities/design to address student needs. 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          52 

 

Internally, Citizen Schools uses a Program Scorecard to summarize key indicators of program quality (including staff 
teaching proficiency and apprenticeship quality) and short-term outcomes (including attendance, grades, test scores, 
and 21st century skills). Citizen Schools also conducts biannual surveys of key constituent groups, including students, 
parents, school leaders, staff, and volunteers.  

Performance on the Citizen Schools Program Scorecard, tracked with real-time dashboards tied to a secure online 
database, serves as the primary method of site monitoring. The Managing Director of Program (MDP) has primary 
responsibility for assuring high program quality at all program sites and supervises the Campus Director (Expanded 
Learning Director), who in turn supervises program staff using a data-to-action protocol. The MDP conducts regular 
site visits, sometimes multiple times per week. Site-based staff will work with school leadership to monitor activities 
via internal evaluation systems and make adjustments for program improvement as needed. 

Through the community schools model, Citizen Schools will prioritize the following programmatic inputs:  

• Citizen Schools teaching staff develop excellent core teaching skills 

• Citizen Schools’ apprenticeships and volunteer experiences are high quality 

• Community school partnerships are functioning effectively 

• Increased parent engagement in school activities  

Through this holistic, whole-school approach, Citizen Schools anticipates increased student outcomes in the following 
measures: 

• Students develop socio-emotional skills  

• Students demonstrate mastery of 21st century skills 

• Students demonstrate mastery of academic content in ELA and/or math 

• Students achieve high growth on Common Core-aligned assessments 

 
Part 4b. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. 
We will build on our partnership started in the 2017-18 school year. Currently, the Citizen Schools Campus Director 
and Principal meet one-on-one weekly and the Campus Director participates in the school administration meetings. 
Citizen Schools’ staff also meet weekly with daytime teachers to discuss lesson alignment and student achievement 
and challenges. We hold ourselves mutually accountable for providing high-quality services to students, recognizing 
our shared role in developing all aspects of our children, promoting healthy youth development and academic success 
throughout the day. Consistent collaboration allows us to strategically deploy school day and other community 
resources to serve program participants.  

● May–June 2017: Collaborate to create/revisit shared vision between all Community Schools partners and align ELT 
priorities at RSA. Articulate a plan for communicating to and soliciting feedback from all stakeholders (school & CBO 
faculty and staff, students, families, other school partner organizations) about vision, ELT program structure, services 
and goals. 

● June–July 2017: Announce preliminary plans for school schedule and expanded learning for the following year. 
Review needs assessments, review and analyze data (state tests, in-school formative assessments, social and 
emotional learning diagnostics) to inform programming and staffing resources for following year. Inform parents 
about expanded day and family engagement plans. 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          53 

 

● July–August 2017: Finalize program/schedule of activities and staffing plan for extended day and other support 
services, secure relevant resources and training for staff in areas articulated by vision, begin recruitment of staff, 
including teachers and community educators. 

● August–September 2017: Staff orientation and training, including joint training with in-school teachers; 
communication with families and students, personalized calls home or home visits targeting high needs students (e.g., 
chronically absent students), determine communication plan, protocols for feedback, meeting and data sharing 
schedule and process for academic year. During the first community school team meeting, we will review community 
school vision for ELT and goals, organizational chart, communication plan, and program schedule. 

  

- September-October 2016 Students will begin apprenticeships and complete a level set of iready during these two 
months 

- November-December 2016 Students will participate in Wow events and collaborate with tutors during ELT time.  

- December-June 2017-2018 Students will continue to participate in a series of partnerships and receive small group 
instruction during ELT time.  

 

 
Part 5 – ELT Budget and Resource Alignment 

Part 5a. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to 
implement the ELT program. 
The primary allocation of funding for the Citizen Schools ELT program is for direct service in the form of salaries and 
staff payroll expense and fringe. These direct service costs are for the purpose of providing participating students and 
their families quality hands-on learning opportunities, academic enrichment, and youth development activities. The 
proposed budget will also include allocations for consumable supplies, which include materials and supplies for the 
ELT program’s enrichment (apprenticeships), academic support, leadership development, and physical and healthy 
living activities; and for materials and supplies related to volunteer recruitment and family engagement (including 
events such as potlucks and game nights).  

 
Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support the ELT Program.  
Note: If the program is funded by 21st Century Community Center Learning Funds, it must be offered in conjunction 
with a high quality, high capacity community partner.   

X 

 

21st 

Century 

Title I 
1003(a) 

 

 

Tax 
Levy 

Title III 

 

 

Title I 
SWP 

PTA 

Funded 

 

 

Title I TA 

SIG 
Grant 

 

 

P/F Set-aside 

School 

Achievement 

Funding 

 

 

C4E 

Other 

 
Part 6 – ELT Progress Monitoring  

Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement 
planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 
Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and 
Time-bound. 
By February 2019, 45% of students will demonstrate mastery of 21st century skills on end-of-semester performance 
task assessments. 

 
Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          54 

 

 

We use a survey used by the Citizen Schools program to determine program effectiveness, Iready benchmark data 

 

Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action 
plan, if applicable. 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          55 

 

Section 7: Community School Description  

Directions: The Community School strategy is directly aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. Community Schools 
bring schools and community partners together and integrate academics, health, youth development, and family 
engagement to provide students with the tools and opportunities they need to succeed.  The Core Services in 
Community Schools are Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & 
Wellness. 
 
Part 1 – The Community School Program Goal(s) 

How is the Community School strategy integrated into academic instruction at your school, and what impact has it 
had on student academic outcomes? 
The community school staff play integral roles in our organization. Our community School director functions as a 
pseudo administrator. Our social work director coordinates several teacher teams and helps organize our community 
engagement arm of our school.  

 
Indicate the summative goal(s) of the Community School program for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct 
the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound.  
As of the 2017-2018 school year 10% of our registered students were identified as chronically absent. By June 2019 
the percentage of students identified as chronically absent will be reduced to 5% of our overall register. 

 

 

Please answer the following question as it relates to meeting your Community School Program Annual Goal(s): 
How will achieving your Community School Goal(s)--in ELT, Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & 
Wellness--support your academic goals for students? 
At RSA, we are committed to developing our students as whole people and strong members of the community. 
Through a focus on educating the whole student, attendance will improve because students will have more incentives 
to  

 

 
Part 2 – Community School Program Description 

Part 2a. Identify the CBO partnerships that you will develop in ELT, Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and 
Health & Wellness, their target student population(s), and scope of the services provided. As well as supporting 
schools’ supportive environment and attendance work, CBOs should be helping to support your school’s instructional 
focus. 

CBO Partnership 

Target Population 

Partnership with Children 

At-Risk students 

Citizen School 

Total school population 

Scope of 
Service 

Provide social 
emotional 
support to 
students that 
have been 
identified as 
at-risk 
through the 
PPT process.  

Provide 
additional 
quality 
academic 
opportunities 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          56 

 

  

 

for all 
students 

Part 2b. Describe how the school will partner with the Lead CBO to do the following: 
1. 

Community Schools are expected to partner with a community-based partner organization (CBO) and 
together with members of the School Leadership Team, hire a Community School Director. The Director will 
lead implementation of the asset and needs assessment process, and other critically important coordinating 
activities. Indicate how you will leverage this aspect of the work. 
Community Schools are expected to personalize the needs of all students, through strategic programming and 
services, as determined by the asset and needs assessment, and must also offer Expanded Learning Time 
(ELT) and mental health programming. In completing this section, ensure that you think about how: (1) the 
right services are provided to the right students and families at the right time; and (2) how you will seamlessly 
coordinate services with instructional programming happening throughout and outside of the school day. 
Indicate how you will implement this work, and describe other programming you anticipate to be in place to 
strengthen this initiative. 
Community Schools are expected to emerge as Partnership Schools, which are places where parents and 
families feel welcome, actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of 
their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. Monthly meetings and Community 
School Forums engaging families and community stakeholders will be a critical part of this family engagement 
strategy. Describe how you will implement this aspect of the work. 
Community School Principals are expected to meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, 
select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual 
students. Data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter - and training will be available for schools to use. 
Indicate how you will implement this aspect of the work. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

This school year, we have reduced administrative headcount to afford to hire additional teaching staff. The 
Community School Director will function as a school administrator and a close role with the Principal to coordinate all 
three capacities of the community schools plan we have outlined.  

 

We will offer an ELT program through Citizen Schools whom will coordinate activities for student between the hours 
of 4 and 6 pm on Mondays through Thursdays. We plan on strengthening this aspect of the work through a push-in 
program where second shift staff will push into the classes of first shift staff. Also employees of the Citizen Schools 
will participate in school wide professional development.  

 

The mental health program will be coordinated by Partnership with Children. PWC will employ two full time social 
workers and monitor three social work interns who will provide mental health services for our students. The team of 
social workers will work with families of students that have been identified as chronically absent and at-risk of failure. 
Students that regularly display undesired behaviors or experience social emotional malfunctions will meet with a 
social worker in both group and individual settings. Additionally, PWC will partner with other community based 
organizations from the East Harlem Community Board to identify mental health resources for families in need of 
social and emotional support.  

 

The Community School Coordinator will collaborate with the District Family Advocate to ensure parents are afforded 
multiple workshop opportunities each month. The CSC will coordinate with the President of the PTA to provide 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          57 

 

families with workshops that address parent needs. The workshops include but are not limited to the High School 
application process, Skedula training for parents, and legal support workshops.  

 

Weekly we conduct the Principals Cabinet meeting where key stake holders meet to discuss common issues, and 
make organisational decisions and allocate appropriate resources.  

 

 
 
Part 3 – Community School Partnerships Oversight 

Part 3a. Key Staff and Partners 
1.  Name and describe the scope of involvement of all community partners working in the school (include partners 

supporting ELT, counseling, enrichment, etc.) 

2.  Name the members of your Community School Team and how meetings will be organized and structured to 

engage all stakeholders and be focused on results. 

3.  Explain data strategies including the use of the data sorter, and steps that the school will take to ensure that the 

appropriate interventions are provided to the right students 

There are three primary community schools partners that will work together to ensure the community schools model 
is implemented with fidelity. First RSA staff members will be responsible for delivering regular classroom instruction 
to the students of RSA. The Partnership with children staff will be responsible for coordinating our attendance 
interventions and providing emotional support to our students and families. The Americorps employees from Citizen 
Schools will coordinate book clubs, push-in to content classes, and provide an extend learning time program that 
targets 21st century skills.  

 

The key personnel involved in the coordination fo the community school program at RSA are: 

Principal 

Dean 

Community School Coordinator 

Citizen School Program Director 

Master Teacher 

Model Teacher 

Peer Collaborative Teacher 

UFT Chapter Chair 

 

Concerning the ELT program Partnership With Children will sub-contract Citizens Schools to provide the ELT program 
here at RSA. Citizens Schools employs 13 Americorps volunteers to teach during the ELT program. The Americorps 
volunteers supervisor the supper period, and the 1.5 hours of instruction that is provided between 4 and 5:40 PM on 
Monday through Thursday.  

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          58 

 

 

The program will be evaluated through benchmark assessments. These assessments include, Achieve 3000 data, Rally 
examination data, and attendance rates. Finally our students performance on the state-wide examinations will 
provide the final determination of the programs success.  

 
Part 3b. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to 
implement the Community School program. 
To fully implement the community schools program we need the following staff: 

Community Schools Coordinator 

Citizen Schools Program Director 

13 Americorps volunteers 

1 Social Work Supervisor 

1 Social Worker 

 

We will need the following resources to fully implement the Community Schools Program. 

141 iready login accounts for ELA and Mathematics 

Consumable test preparation material 

 

 

We will make the following schedule adjustments to fully implement the Community Schools Program. 

-A 12 period day 

-Each period will be 45 minutes 

-A 9.5 hour school day on Mondays-Thursdays 

-Small group counseling will be held during multiple periods on a daily basis 

 
Part 3c. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. 
August 2016 Full staff orientation at the Alley Pond Adventure Center 

September- Community School Staff will work during lunch period and unstructured times to cultivate relationships 
with our students. Our ELT program will commence.  

October 2018 all counseling groups will be organized and begin by October 15th 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          59 

 

 

November 2018- The second round of interim assessment will illustrate the effectiveness of the program. 
Additionally, we will be able to determine if the program is effective through parental participation at school wide 
events.  

December 2018- Plan a community school forum with Coalition HS to highlight the community partnerships available 
to our families.  

January 2019-Hold the community schools forum on January 18th. Our ELT program will begin to execute Wow 
events and our Arts program will have our initial school showcase. 

February 2019- We will hold a school play and several parent workshops about the importance of standardized 
assessments and their benefit to our school. 

March 2019-Family movie night and our monthly parent workshop 

April 2019-Family Bingo night and our monthly parent workshops 

May 2019- Family movie night, Citizen Schools Wow event, and our monthly parent workshop 

June 2019- Spring Showcase, Awards ceremony, and PTA elections 

 
Part 3d. Mental Health Work Plan 

Separate from this R-CEP, schools will complete a Mental Health Work Plan that will become an addendum to this 
document. 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          60 

 

Section 8: Academic Intervention Services (AIS)  

(Required for All Schools) 

 

Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services 
(AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records 
need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area 
listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. 
 

Type of Academic 
Intervention Service 
(AIS) 

English Language 
Arts (ELA) 

Criteria for 
determining AIS 
services (For 
additional guidance, 
refer to NYSED’s 
memo.) 
Lowest Third, ELL and 
SWD 

 

Type of program or 
strategy (e.g. 
repeated readings, 
interactive writings, 
etc.) 

AIS in ELA will use 
Test Prep materials 
such READY and 
COACH to ensure skill 
and content 
development. Within 
Resources, students 
will engage in reading 
comprehension and 
writing tasks. 

Method for delivery 
of service (e.g. small 
group, one-to-one, 
tutoring, etc.) 

1) Small group 
support 

2) One-to-one 
instructional tutoring 

3) Tutoring and 
enrichment group 
instruction 

 

Mathematics 

Lowest Third, ELL and 
SWD 

 

2.Within ELA we will 
also use technology 
to provide Tiered 
Intervention via 
programs such as 
Achieve 3000 

 
AIS in Math is being 
implemented in 
several different 
ways: support is 
differentiated by 
group size, learning 
styles and 
assessment analysis. 
A special ELL’s 
intervention is also 
provided to students 
who receive these 
mandated services. 
The Wilson system is 
also provided for AIS 
students. 

Holt mathematics 
and intervention 
programs are used 

1) Small group 
support 

2) One-to-one 
instructional tutoring 

3) Tutoring and 
enrichment group 
instruction 

 

When the service is 
provided (e.g. during 
the school day, 
before or after 
school, etc.) 

Small group support 
is provided 
Wednesday and 
Thursday from 2:40-
5:40pm One-to-one 
instructional tutoring 
is provided as a pull 
out service during 
lunch, before and 
after school. Tutoring 
and enrichment 
group instruction is 
provided during the 
renewal hour from 
3:00-4:00pm 

 

Small group support 
is provided 
Wednesday and 
Thursday from 2:40-
5:40pm One-to-one 
instructional tutoring 
is provided as a pull 
out service during 
lunch, before and 
after school. Tutoring 
and enrichment 
group instruction is 
provided during the 
renewal hour from 
3:00-4:00pm 

 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          61 

 

Science 

Lowest Third, ELL and 
SWD 

 

Social Studies 

Lowest Third, ELL and 
SWD 

 

for assessment, 
remediation, 
preparation and 
general instruction. 
Both plans include 
weekly tracking 
software, virtual 
instruction for 
individual student 
remediation, online 
assessment and 
analysis and high-
interest teacher 
instructional 
materials. 

 
AIS in science is being 
implemented in 
several different 
ways: In school 
Intervention services 
are provided daily in 
small groups with 
teachers. One-to-one 
instructional tutoring 
is provided during 
lunch, before and 
after school as 
needed. We conduct 
Parent Workshops to 
support parents of 
AIS students 
understanding of the 
science state exam. 
Parents will be given 
a six week 
assessment to help 
them determine 
areas that their child 
needs support with 
and provide them 
with after-school 
additional support 
opportunities. 

 
AIS in Social Studies 
is being implemented 
in several different 
ways: In school 
Intervention services 
are provided daily in 
small groups with 
teachers. Five-week 

1) Small group 
support 

2) One-to-one 
instructional tutoring 

3) Tutoring and 
enrichment group 
instruction 

4) iReady 

 

Small group support 
is provided 
Wednesday and 
Thursday from 2:40-
5:40pm One-to-one 
instructional tutoring 
is provided as a pull 
out service during 
lunch, before and 
after school. Tutoring 
and enrichment 
group instruction is 
provided during the 
renewal hour from 
3:00-4:00pm 

 

1) Small group 
support 

2) One-to-one 
instructional tutoring 

Small group support 
is provided 
Wednesday and 
Thursday from 2:40-
5:40pm One-to-one 
instructional tutoring 
is provided as a pull 
out service during 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          62 

 

At-risk services (e.g. 
provided by the 
Guidance Counselor, 
School Psychologist, 
Social Worker, etc.) 

Students that have 
not achieved a level 
2.5 or better on state 
–wide examinations 

 

3) Tutoring and 
enrichment group 
instruction 

4) iReady 

 

lunch, before and 
after school. Tutoring 
and enrichment 
group instruction is 
provided during the 
renewal hour from 
3:00-4:00pm 

 

1) Small group 
support 

2) One-to-one 
instructional tutoring 

3) Tutoring and 
enrichment group 
instruction 

4) iReady 

 

Small group support 
is provided 
Wednesday and 
Thursday from 2:40-
5:40pm One-to-one 
instructional tutoring 
is provided as a pull 
out service during 
lunch, before and 
after school. Tutoring 
and enrichment 
group instruction is 
provided during the 
renewal hour from 
3:00-4:00pm 

 

assessments are 
given to ensure 
students’ 
performance is 
aligned with the state 
scope and sequence. 
Small group tutoring 
is provided during 
lunch, before and 
after school. Parents 
are provided 
Progress Reports to 
ensure early 
notification of on-
going instructional 
needs. The Achieve 
Now Program 
provides additional 
support and credit 
recovery for students 
as well. 

 
AIS at-risk is being 
implemented in 
several different 
ways: support is 
differentiated by 
group size, learning 
styles and 
assessment analysis. 
A special ELL’s 
intervention is also 
provided to students 
who receive these 
mandated services. 
The Wilson system is 
also provided for AIS 
students. 

Holt mathematics 
and intervention 
programs are used 
for assessment, 
remediation, 
preparation and 
general instruction. 
Both plans include 
weekly tracking 
software, virtual 
instruction for 
individual student 
remediation, online 
assessment and 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          63 

 

 
 

analysis and high-
interest teacher 
instructional 
materials. 

 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          64 

 

Section 9: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH)  

 

Directions: 
-  All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. 
-  All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. 
 
Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) 
As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the 
federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and 
report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support 
your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: 
http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf   

 

Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 

1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your 
school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE 
systems and may change over the course of the year.) 

8 

 

2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. 

For STH we offer social emotional support as well as additional academic enrichment. We have extended our school 
day until 5:48 four days a week. Then we run a variety of programs during the week ends and after school. 
Additionally, we provide each student with two free uniforms and a full backpack filled with school supplies.  

 

Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 

1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school 
(please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 

NA 

 

2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          65 

 

NA 

 

3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary 
housing.  If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation 
Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question.  If your school did not receive an allocation 
and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. 

NA 

 

  

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          66 

 

 

Section 10: Title I Program Information 

Directions: 
  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1 
  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2 
  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3 
  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  
 

If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can 
be found 

  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage 
 
Part 1: Title I Status 

Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. 

X 

Schoolwide Program (SWP) 

 

Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools  

 

Non-Title I 

 
Part 2: All Title I Schools 

2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) 

Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support 
including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. 
School administration with work with DSR to ensure that all teachers are highly qualified, form partnerships with local 
colleges to identify new staff and attend Central borough wide hiring fairs.The school principal will meet weekly with 
new staff to ensure they are properly supported in their first year s as a teacher.  

 

 
2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development 

Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and 
paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS).  
● Promote and facilitate CCLS aligned student work that reflects the implementation of current system-wide reform 
initiatives 

● Integrate professional development for monolingual and bilingual/ESL staff into the ongoing instructional activities 
of the school, for example, through multidisciplinary planning, common preparation periods, and locally designed 
professional support 

● Involve parents in their children's education through greater collaboration with teachers and other school staff, and 
increased engagement in the school's education program 

 

 
Part 3: TA Schools Only 

3a. Use of Program Resources 

Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 
TAs work with students in ELT on the web based iready program. Additionally, the TAs collaborate with the regular 
RSA staff to ensure develop an understanding of each students strengths and weaknesses. Finally, the TAs conduct 
push-ins top core content classes everyday. This will impact our students to have a smaller class size and the amount 
of time the students receive instruction everyday. Additionally, the TAs will participate in all of our teacher team 
meetings too. This will allow our entire staff to have seamless communication.  

 

 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          67 

 
3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program 

Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., 
providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from 
the regular classroom during regular school day). 
Providing ELT, pushing-in to core content classes to reduce class size, coordinating book clubs for students, developing 
appropriate social emotional opportunities for RSA students. The TAs will be coordinated by the Citizen Schools site 
supervisor who will be part of the instructional cabinet.  

 

 
Part 4: SWP Schools Only 

4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only)  

Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary 
school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, 
early intervention services, etc.). 
NA 

 

 
4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments 

Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate 
multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to 
improve instruction.    
Teachers on the MOSL team have worked collaboratively to determine the selection of appropriate multiple 
assessment measures, professional development has been provided to the entire staff. 

 

 
4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools 

Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and 
Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible 
for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its 
Schoolwide plan (R-CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program 
contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the 
intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, 
State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the 
amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met 
the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. 
Program Name 

Fund Source 
(i.e. Federal, 
State or Local) 

Funding Amount 
Indicate the amount 
contributed to 
Schoolwide pool. 
(Refer to Galaxy for 
school allocation 
amounts) 

Place an (X) in Column A below to verify 
that the school has met the intent and 
purposes of each program whose funds are 
consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section 
references where a related program activity 
has been described in this plan. 

Column A 

Verify with an (X) 

X 

 

0 

 

Column B 

Section Reference(s) 
p.15,p.18,p.20,p.21, 

p.24 

 
0 

 

154,242.00 
 

Title I Part A (Basic) 

Federal 

Title I School Improvement 
1003(a) 

Federal 

0 

 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          68 

 

Title I Priority and Focus 
School Improvement Funds 

Title II, Part A 

Title III, Part A 

Title III, Immigrant 

Federal 

Federal 

Federal 

Federal 

0 

 
0  

0  

0  

Tax Levy (FSF) 

Local 

1,529,888.00 
 

0 

 
0 

 
0 

 
0 

 
X 

 

0 

 
0 

 
0 

 
0 

 
p.15,p.18,p.20,p.21, 

p.24 

 

 
1Explanation/Background: 
Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and 
programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and 
advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools 
may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, 
State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This 
gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students.   
 
Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a 
single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual 
identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool 
to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds 
used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from 
which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to 
combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used 
conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the 
dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds.  
 
Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages: 

  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program 

separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different 
sources when accounting for their use. 

  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the 

statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., 
semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent 
and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended 
beneficiaries are met. 

 
2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as 
follows: 

  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to 
improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes 
provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH). 

  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified 

through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with 
district oversight and included in the DCIP/R-CEP.  

  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement 

plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          69 

 

  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in 

grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not 
available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional 
program. 

  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, 
develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and 
achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another 
purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-
quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in 
effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the 
participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language 
instruction programs. 

  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of 

English language acquisition and content area achievement. 

 
Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated: 

  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and 
programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent 
representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities 
funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with 
student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. 

  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and 

 

more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. 
IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education 
designed to meet their individual needs. 

  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be 

used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          70 

 

Section 11: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 

  

 (Required for All Title I Schools) 

 

Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and 
representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will 
participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I 
program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson 
that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the 
parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school 
will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic 
achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family 
Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. 
 
The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current 
R-CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent 
Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent 
involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen 
family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy.  
 
Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample 
Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) 
as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. 
 
 

Parent and Family Engagement Policy 

Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. 
The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of 
parents and community in the school. Renaissance School of the Arts in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, 
Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement 
policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The 
school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in 
support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership 
Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school 
community. 

 

Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students 

. Renaissance School of the Arts will support parents and families of Title I students by: 

 

● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., 
literacy, math and use of technology; 

● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision 
making in support of the education of their children; 

● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor 
their child’s progress; 

● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          71 

 

● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in 
languages that parents can understand; 

● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve 
outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other 
members of the school community; 

The school’s Parent Involvement  

 

Parental Involvement and School Quality 

The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all 
parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The 
school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement 
policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school 
surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and 
enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school.  

 

In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the 
school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership 
Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for 
additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: 

● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I 
program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title 
I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; 

● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated 
directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; 

● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as 
described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; 

● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent 
Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support 
and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills;  

● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. 
The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the 
parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and 
inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents 
each month and file a report with the central office.; 

● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability 
grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and 
technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home;  

● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State 
accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, 
Learning Environment Survey Report; 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          72 

 

● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of 
children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 
the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable 
sections under theEvery Student Succeeds Act; 

● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning 
or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and 
allow parents to provide suggestions; 

● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed;  

● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and 
workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; 

 

 

The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: 

Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement 

 

● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; 

● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; 

● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher 
Association) and Title I Parent Committee; 

● supporting or hosting Family Day events; 

● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; 

● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; 

● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their 
children’s progress; 

● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school 
activities and student progress; 

● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, 
and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand 

 

 

School-Parent Compact (SPC)  

 

School-Parent Compact (SPC) 

Renaissance School of the Arts in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds 
Act (, is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          73 

 

between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by 
Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 
improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure 
that all children achieve State Standards and Assessments. 

 

 

I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum 

Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to 
meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: 

 

● using academic learning time efficiently; 

● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; 

● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; 

● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; 

● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the 
Every Student Succeeds Act (; 

 

 

I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships 

Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: 

 

● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be 
discussed as well as how this Compact is related; 

● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students 
participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to 
be involved; 

● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds 
are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; 

● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation 
services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education;  

● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of 
participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; 

● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent 
Involvement Policy and this Compact; 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          74 

 

● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results 
for each child and other pertinent individual school information;  

● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents 
each year; 

 

 

Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: 

I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff 

 

● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited 
English speaking parents;  

● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff 
member; 

● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to 
observe classroom activities; 

● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences;  

 

 

Provide general support to parents by: 

 

 

● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment 
for parents and guardians; 

● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their 
child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of 
parents can attend); 

● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all 
members of the school community; 

● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents;  

● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in 
this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; 

● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and 
consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; 

 

 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          75 

 

 

II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 

● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate 
procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; 

● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and 
his/her age; 

● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; 

● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes);  

● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; 

● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports 
and/or quality family time; 

● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; 

● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; 

● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education;  

● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by 
prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; 

● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; 

● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy 
and this Compact; 

● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn 
more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; 

● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on 
advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams;  

● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; 

 

 

Student Responsibilities: 

 

III. Student Responsibilities 

● attend school regularly and arrive on time; 

● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          76 

 

 

 

● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; 

● show respect for myself, other people and property; 

● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; 

● always try my best to learn. 

●  

 

 

 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          77 

 

DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT 

GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY 

SUBMISSION FORM 

2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR 

 

DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information 

necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English 

language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a 

part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the 

services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should 

be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily 

available on file in the school.  When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces.  For 

additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. 

Part I: School ELL Profile 

 

 

 
 

A. School Information 

District  04 
School Name   Renaissance School of the Arts 

Borough  Manhattan 

School Number   377 

 
B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant 

principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. 
 

Principal   Brian Bradley 
Coach  Elizabeth Fitzmaurice 
ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher  
 Elpida Diamantatos 
Teacher/Subject Area Ligia Maldonado 
Teacher/Subject Area Karla Reyes 
Related-Service Provider Robyn Geller 
Superintendent Alexandra Estrella 

 

Assistant Principal  NA 
Coach Victoria Kaminsky 
School Counselor  
Ronald Murray 
Parent  Lashauna Cain 
Parent Coordinator Amanda Nater 
Field Support Center Staff Member type here  
Other (Name and Title) type here 

C. Teacher Qualifications  
Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section.  Press TAB after each number entered to calculate 
sums and percentages.  
     
Number of certified 
ENL teachers currently teaching in the 
ENL program 

Number of teachers who hold both content 
area/common branch and TESOL certification 

0 

1 

0 

Number of certified 
bilingual teachers not currently 
teaching in a bilingual program  
Number of certified foreign 
language/world language teachers 
providing home language arts 
(HLA) to students in bilingual 
programs [applicable to grades 7–
12] 
Number of teachers currently 
teaching a self-contained ENL class 
who hold both a common branch 
license and TESOL certification 
[applicable to grades K–6] 

0 

0 

Number of teachers who hold both a 
bilingual extension and TESOL 
certification 

Number of special education teachers 
with bilingual extensions 

0 

1 

Number of certified 
bilingual teachers currently 
teaching in a bilingual program 

Number of certified ENL teachers 
not currently  teaching in the ENL 
program  

 

0 

0 

D. Student Demographics  
Total number of students in 
school (excluding pre-K) 

142 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          78 

Total number of ELLs 

11 

ELLs as share of total student population 
(%) 

7.75% 

 
 
 
 
Part II: ELL Demographics 
 
 
 
 
 
A. ELL Programs 

This school serves the following grades (includes 
ELLs and non-ELLs) 
Check all that apply 

 
 
This school offers (check all that apply): 

K

    1

    2

     3

     4

     5

 

6

   7

     8

    9

     10

     11

    12

 

Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) 

Yes

             No

Dual language program (DL) 

Freestanding ENL 

Yes

             No

Yes

             No

 

 

 

If yes, indicate language(s):            

If yes, indicate language(s):            

 

 
Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a 
separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. 
 

Bilingual Program Breakdown 

School 
Year 

Lang. 

Opened 
(e.g., 2013-14) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

K 

 
 

1 

 
 

4 

 
 

3 

 
 

2 

 
 

         

       

       

         

         

         

         

         

Program 
TBE 
TBE 
TBE 
DL 
DL 
DL 
Total 
 
 
 
Part III: Assessment Analysis 
 
 

 
 
0 

 
 
0 

 
 
0 

 
 
0 

       

       

5 

         

 
 

6 

 
 
 

7 

 
 
 

8 

 
 
 

9 

10 

11 

12 

         

         

         

         

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

       

       

       

       

       

       

       

       

 
 
0 

 
 
0 

 
 
0 

 
 
0 

 
 
0 

 
 
0 

 
 
0 

 
 
0 

Tot # 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 

 
 
0 

After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 

1.  What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, 

teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? 
We use the Degrees of Reading Power and Achieve 3000 to determine the reading level of our ELLs. Degrees of Power allows 
us to measure a student's comprehension of text passages. Achieve 3000 is used to determine a student's reading level and 
precise lexile score. Each child is tested within the first three weeks of school. This data is used by teachers to differentiate 
instruction, provide scaffolding, and form guided reading groups. 
 

2.  What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 

We have strategic reading periods and AIS classes in which ELLs are grouped based on reading level. ELLs are given extra 
support through scaffolding and one-on-one assistance from the teacher. The teacher makes reading goals with the students 
at the beginning of the year and measures their growth based on their reading level at the end of the year.  
 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          79 

 

 

3.  What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL 

Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? 
We would define success by meeting AYP. The NYSESAT is used to identify which modalities ELLs struggle with and which 
modalities they excel in. Next year we want to begin using the ELL Periodic Assessment to further measure the progress of our 
ELLs. 
 

4.  What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered?  

Once the summative data has been gathered our team meets in order to discuss findings and develop action plans in order to 
address areas of need.  
 

5.  How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-
5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.]  
We have a strategic reading period where students are grouped based on the Degrees of Reading Power. Our ELL students 
receive RTI instruction based on their reading levels as determined by the DRP tests. 
 

6.  What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? 

([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS].  
NYSESLAT data allows us to see year to year growth in our ELLs. It shows us which modalities students struggle with and which 
modalities students excel in. It also shows us how many minutes of services each student needs per week according to their 
level. ELA and Math data are also used to evaluate our students. The EDAT tool allows us to see which students are at risk of 
being long-term ELLs based on performances on outcome assessments.  
 

7.  What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? 

Our team meets on a monthly basis to discuss findings, come up with action plans, and reflect on our program.  

 
 
 
Part IV: ELL Programming 
 

Programming and Scheduling Information 

1.  How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented 
as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students 
regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in 
one class]).  

a.  Freestanding ENL program. 

Our ELLs receive two types of servicing. Our students receive both integrated and stand alone services. Our ENL 
teacher provides integrated services for the transitioning and expanding students in math and ELA classrooms. Stand 
alone services are also provided to our entering and emerging students as per CR Part 154.2. Our students are 
heterogeneously grouped as they travel in blocks.  

b.  TBE program.  If applicable.   

 

c.  DL program.  If applicable.    

 

 

2.  How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each 

program model? 

a.  How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 

below)? 

We examined each student's proficiency level and schedule to ensure that each child is receiving the adequate number of 
minutes.    

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          80 

 

 

3.  Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and 

methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core 
Learning Standards.  
We have purchased texts in multiple languages for our students. Additionally, we have regular PD for our entire faculty around 
best practices for servicing ELL students. Finally, our ENL teacher created a survey to identify teachers' questions and struggles 
when working with ELL students. The results of that survey helped her to create a packet of resources and materials that she 
then shared with the teachers when meeting with them one-on-one. A post-meeting survey showed that teachers felt more 
comfortable and confident after this process.  
All teachers scaffold materials for ELL students through the use of graphic organizers, visuals, and sentence starters. 
 

4.  How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? 

We evaluate our ELL students using the home language survey conducted on a one on one basis with our ESL teacher who then 
meets with the team to discuss. To ensure that our ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages, our newcomer 
ELLs are given translated versions of content area assessments because we order alternative language editions for state tests. 
We administer the Spanish Lab for any newcomer who speaks Spanish at home. Translators along with bilingual glossaries are 
provided when needed. 
 

5.  How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? 

SIFE   

a. 
b.  Newcomer  
c.  Developing   
d. 
e. 

Long Term 
Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status  

Differentiated instruction is always planned for to ensure student success. We use a variety of instructional techniques to 
differentiate for our diverse students. Some of these techniques include graphic organizers, visual aids, audio aids and 
modified texts. SIFE ELLs receive differentiation through visuals, language prompts, and sentence starters. We also provide a 
positive and supportive learning environment in order to lower the affective filter since students who are SIFE may have never 
had formal schooling before. Newcomer ELLs are homogeneously grouped together and receive the mandated minutes of 
services based on their NYSITELL score and proficiency level. Instruction is differentiated based on the modalities they struggle 
with. Scaffolding techniques such as gesturing and teacher modeling are used. Developing, long term, and former ELLs are 
grouped heterogeneously and are given integrated teaching services. Teachers aim at building background knowledge in order 
to ensure understanding. For these types of students, instruction is focused on cognitive academic language proficiency 
(CALP). Students are challenged through high order thinking questions. Former ELLs are monitored even after they are tested 
out and receive 90 minutes of integrated instruction per week, where the ENL teacher provides differentiation through 
grouping and modified texts. 
 

6.  What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic 

content areas and accelerate English language development?  
In order to provide access to academic content areas and accelerate Engish language development for ELL-SWDs, teachers use 
Wilson program, Achieve 3000, Just Words, Socratic seminar, station teaching, parrellel teaching. ENL rooms have print-rich 
environments that provide students with various visuals. 
 

7.  How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and 

attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? 
Each curriculum guide lists the different possible modifications that could be used in each unit. Additionally, our teachers have 
a plethora of materials designed to provide access to the content for our ELL students.  
 

8.  Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups 

targeted).  List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which 
they are offered. 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          81 

 

We offer pull-out intervention in both mathematics and ELA. Additionally, we have strategic push-in periods for our ELL 
students.  Our targeted interventions focus on vocabulary. Vocabulary is pre-taught to ELLs to ensure that they understand the 
necessary words to meet the lesson objectives.  
 

9.  Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year?    

Based on data and trends, we want to focus on providing ESL instruction during our ELT program. RSA is looking to expand 
coteaching classrooms and ameliorate the planning and collaboration of the ENL teacher with the classroom teachers. We also 
want to start thinking about a Title III program for the future if the number of ELLs enrolled increases.  
 

10.  If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? 

None. This is the second year that we have a full ESL program. Hence we cannot drop any programs because they have not 
been in existence long enough to determine if they are failing.  We hope that the budget and a higher number of ELLs allow us 
to open new ENL programs. 
 

11.  How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs?  Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in 

your building. 
All of our ELL students are fully integrated to the school. They receive all of the mandated services that they are entitled to. ELL 
students are part of the Citizens School after-school program, where they receive extended instruction and participate 
in academic activities that focus on math and literacy skills.  
 

12.  What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language 

materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. 
We use iPads, laptops, and we use two blended learning programs to enhance ELL student outcomes. Teachers of ELLs all have 
smart boards in their classroom. Examples of technological tools and instructional materials used are: Kahoot, NY ELLs, Getting 
ready for the NYSESLAT and beyond, Reading A-Z, Writing A-Z, and BrainPOP. 
 

13.  How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? 

 -A minimum of 2 content-area courses/subjects in the home language and English at the entering and emerging levels  
-A home language arts component designed to develop skills in listening, speaking, reading, and writing in the students’ home 
language while cultivating an appreciation of their history and culture  
-Most of the students in a TBE program share the same home language and are grouped homogeneously.  
  
 

14.  Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels.  

Half of our ESL program depends on a push-in model which corresponds to regular instruction that is delivered at the students 
grade level.   
 

15.  If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the 

ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met?   
Renaissance School of the Arts collaborates with PS155 as we are in the same building. We share best practices and resources 
through informal and formal meetings of our ENL teachers.  
 

16.  Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for 

new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, 
parent coordinator).  
The school counselor reaches out to the families of ELL students that are new arrivals to our school prior to the beginning of 
the school year. Then our ESL teacher conducts interviews with our newly admitted ELL students to find out their needs and 
their experiences. The ELLs and their families are invited to orientation to learn about our school and our expectations. They 
are given material to prepare for the school year. 
 

17.  What language electives are offered to ELLs?  

NA   

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          82 

 

 

 

18.  For schools with dual language programs: 

a.  What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day 

(percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. 
In which language(s) is each core content area taught? 

b. 
c.  How is each language separated for instruction? 
d. 

Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same 
time (simultaneous)? 

 
 

Professional Development and Support for School Staff 

1.  Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic 

staff.)  What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs 
as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? 
Our ESL teacher receives regular PD through the Department of English Language Learners and Student Support. Additionally 
the ESL teacher regularly attends district wide PD for ESL teachers every six weeks or as needed. Our ESL teacher then brings 
back what she learned  either by facilitating a PD session to non-ELL teachers or by providing them with material either 
through a handout or conference.  
 
 

2.  Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all 
teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include 
how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance).  Refer to ELL Policy and Reference 
Guide, Professional Development section. 
Our Guidance Counselor collaborates with our ESL teacher to work with students that are transitioning to High School. We 
have regular PD on Monday and Tuesday mornings at 8:00AM.  15% of the Tuesday PD sessions are committed to  ELL student 
professional development.  
 
 

 

Parental Involvement 

1.  How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language 
development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? 
Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent 
orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences?  
We schedule student led confeences for all of our studnets three times a year.    

2.  Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. 

Last year we offered ESL classes for Parents as well as a variety of other workshops designed to engage ELL parents such as a 
NYSESLAT information night. The ESL teacher makes weekly phone calls to parents to discuss student performance and to 
inform them of any upcoming events.  
 

 

 

Additional Information 

Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for 
ELLs.  You may attach/submit charts.   This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted.   
Paste response here:    
 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          83 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          84 

Part V: ELL Identification Attestation 

Principal Certification 

2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 
6. 

7. 

8. 

9. 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL 
Policy and Reference Guide, I, Brian Bradley, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered 
to and staff are trained on the following: 
 
1. 

The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for 
students entering with IEPs). 
Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined 
a. 

If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status 
relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level.  

The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue.   
a.  The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services 
are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality 
translation service.   

Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined.   
a. 

If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility 
to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. 

Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible.   
Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language.  
a.  Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. 
If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish 
LAB.  
Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources 
available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-
education-sife.  
If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting.  
a.  Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent 

video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask 
questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided 
throughout the meeting. 

10.  ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected.  

a. 

b. 

If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program 
in accordance with DOE transfer policies. 
If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent 
choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice.   

11.  Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process).  
12.  If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose 

ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 
 

 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          85 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

Part VI: LAP Assurances 

School Name:   Renaissance School of the Arts                                                                              School DBN: 04M377 
Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate.  Names listed in Part A, should align with this 
section.  

Name (PRINT) 

Brian Bradley 

Title 

Principal 

NA 

Assistant Principal 

Leo Benavides 

Parent Coordinator 

Elphida Vlahos 

ENL/Bilingual Teacher 

Yvette page 

Pilar wilkins 

Karla Reyes 

Parent 

Teacher/Subject Area 

Teacher/Subject Area 

Elizabeth Fitzmaurice 

Victoria Kaminsky 

Coach 

Coach 

Ronald Murray 

School Counselor 

Alexa Estrella 

           

           

           

           

Superintendent 
 
Field Support Center Staff 
Member 
               

Other            

Other            

Other            

 

Signature 

Date (mm/dd/yy) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

10/15/15 

1/1/01 

10/15/15 

10/15/15 

10/15/15 

10/15/15 

10/15/15 

10/15/15 

10/15/15 

10/15/15 

10/15/15 

1/1/01 

1/1/01 

1/1/01 

1/1/01 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          86 

 

 
 

2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS 

Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools 

 

DBN: 

04M377 
 

School 
Name: 

Renaissance School of the Arts 
 

Superintendent: 

Alexa Estrella 
 

 
The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. 
If there is more than one LAC, list all. 
 

First Name  

Last Name  

Title  

Has the LAC attended a 

2018-19 training 

The LAC was involved in 
the development of this 

conducted by the Field 

plan? Yes/No  

 

 

Language Access 

Coordinator? Yes/No  

 

(*Primary) 

 

   

 
* The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs 
on translation,  
interpretation, compliance and budget.  
 

School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful 
opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's 
Regulation A-663).  
 
By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and 
interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). 
 
Part A:  Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 
 
1.  Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written 

and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from: 

  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS) 
  Automate The System (ATS) reports 
  Student Emergency Contact cards 
  Surveys conducted by your school. 

 

Parents of all incoming students are asked to complete the New York City Department of Education “Parent / 
Guardian Home Language Identification Survey”. Using the information gathered from the language survey and 
parent interviews, the school determines individual written translation and oral interpretation needs to ensure 
that all family members of the school community are provided with appropriate and timely information in a 
language that they can understand. There is a bilingual (Spanish) Community Associate here at Renaissance school 
of the Arts (RSA) who provides translation support, as necessary, for students and parents. The school social 
worker also provides translation support (Spanish) to families throughout the school year. In addition, there are 
several parent volunteers who help to facilitate communication with parents and family members who require 
translation or clarification. The major findings of the needs of parents within the RSA community with regard to 
the school's written translation and oral interpretation is that a majority of parents feel that our English/Spanish 
translations of newsletters, parent-teacher letters and parent reports provide appropriate opportunity for parents 
to keep informed about school curriculum, instruction, assessment and special programs. In addition, we provide 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          87 

 

translations in several different languages, as needed, with our changing enrollment. The school has several staff 
members who join conferences, meetings and orientation programs to ensure that all parents and visitors can 
understand and participate. For example, during the grade six orientations held at RSA, the ESL teacher served as 
a guide for parents and was available to answer questions. Parent feedback, as per the Learning Environment 
Survey, each year indicate that parents are highly satisfied with all aspects of their child's educational program 
and feel that the school communicates frequently with them.  
 

 
 
2.  List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, 

which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language 
Report (RCPL) ATS report. 
 

Written Preferred  

Percent Written  

 

 

Oral Preferred  

Percent Oral  

 

 

Language  

Spanish, Hatian Creole, 
and English  

   

 

3.  From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at 

least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, 
French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. 
 

 

 
 
Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 
 
1.  List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be 

distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents.  
 

Document Name  

Month/Frequency Distributed to 

How do you plan to translate? 

Families  

Include procedures to ensure timely 
provision of translated documents 

 

to parents.  

 

At RSA parents are provided with a 
Parent Handbook which includes their 
rights regarding translation and 
interpretation services. Parents also 
receive a copy of the RSA Parent 
Involvement Policy and the School 
Parent Compact. Written translation 
services in the primary language(s) are 
provided to parents for a variety of 
purposes throughout the school year. 
Important communications from the 
school,district, city and state are 
translated into Spanish prior to being 
sent home. The communications are 
also translated into several other 
languages as appropriate to our 
student population. The ESL Teacher, 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          88 

 
Assistant Principal and Family Assistant 
are available to provide ongoing 
written bilingual translation services for 
parents. The school social worker, 
guidance counselors and foreign 
language Spanish teacher also provide 
support and translation services to 
families throughout the year. The 
availability of interpretation services 
are posted in the main office, and on 
several bulletin boards near the 
entrance to the school. The School 
Safety Plan contains procedures for 
ensuring that parents in need of 
language access services are aware of 
and provided for in accordance with 
the Chancellor's regulations. The 
outside contractor, Legal Interpretation 
Services is also accessible in advance if 
needed.  

   

 

2.  List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as 

parent-teacher  
conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings.  
   

Meeting Name  

Month/Frequency of Meetings  

How does your school plan to provide 

interpretation service(s)?  

 

 

We have regular meetings with all of 
our families. Obviously we have the 
four parent teacher conferences that 
we are required to have, we meet 
with parents during our parental 
engagement time on Thursday 
mornings, and our dean regualrly 
calls and interfaces with families too.  

   

 

3.  Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of 

a school emergency.  
 

 
 

 
 
Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure

 

 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          89 

 
Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and 
what resources are available to meet compliance.  
 

 

 
 
Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services 
 
Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive 
information. Include any: 

  Translated signage 
  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents 
  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) 

 

RSA believes in the importance of ensuring that all Limited English Speaking parents are provided with a meaningful 
opportunity to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education as described 
by the Department of Education. In this regard, the school determines the primary language spoken by the parent of 
each student enrolled in the school and whether the parent requires language assistance within the required time 
frame of thirty days. As described, the school provides interpretation services for parents at group and one-on-one 
meetings such as parent conferences upon request to ensure that parents communicate effectively with the school 
regarding critical information about their child’s education.  
 

 
 
Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services 
Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the 
language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services?   
 

RSA has two methods in which we collect qualitative data to gather feedback from parents about the efficacy of our 
translations program.The first is a RSA translation feedback form which surveys to the parents and allow them to 
complete it at their own pace, asking clarifying questions if they arise. This method is more appropriate in a situation 
where respondents are concerned about the confidentiality of their responses and do not want to be overheard 
expressing their opinions. 

The second is questioning protocol we have established when parenst come in for parent meetings. Parents are asked 
question by an office staff member.  
 

 

2018-19 CEP-RISE                                                                                                                                                                                          90 

