 
 

 

 
 

  

 
 
 
 
 
 

2018-19 

RENEWAL SCHOOL 

COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN 

(RSCEP) 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 

DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 

03M415 

School Name: 

WADLEIGH SECONDARY SCHOOL FOR THE PERFORMING & VISUAL ARTS 

Principal: 

KYLEEMA NORMAN 

 
 

2018-19 RSCEP-R                                                                                                                                         

 

 

 1 

 
 

Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP) Outline  

 
 
Section 1: School Information Page 
 
 
Section 2: Executive Summary and Organizing Principles 
 
 
Section 3: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page 
 
 
Section 4: Renewal School Narrative 
 
 
Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  

  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction 
  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment 
  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers 
  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership 
  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties  

 
 
Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) 
 
 
Section 7: Community School Description 
 
 
Section 8: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) 
 
 
Section 9: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH)  
 
 
Section 10: Title I Program Information  
 
 
Section 11: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)  
 

 

2018-19 RSCEP-R                                                                                                                                                                                          2 

 

 

Section 1: School Information Page 

School Information 

 

 
School Name: 

BEDS Code: 

Grades Served: 

School Address:  

Wadleigh Secondary School for the 
performing and visual arts 

 
310300011415 

 
6 – 12 

School Number (DBN): 

 

03M415 

 
215 West 114 thStreet, New York New York 10026 
 
212-749-5800 

212-749-6463 

Phone Number: 

 

Fax: 

 

KyleemaA. Norman 

knorman3@schools.nyc.gov 

School Contact Person:  
 
Community School CBO: 

 

Principal: 

Community School Director: 

UFT Chapter Leader: 

Parents’ Association President: 

Teachers College REACH 

Email Address: 

 

 
KyleemaA. Norman 

 
Kimberly Downing 

 
Loretta Lewis 

 
Gigs Taylor-Stephenson 

 
Sheila Thomas-Lewis 

SLT Chairperson: 

 

Title I Parent Representative (or 
Parent Advisory Council 
Chairperson): 

Student Representative(s): 

 
 

NakichaBeard 

 
ChanteJohnson 

 
TBD 

 

 

District Information 

 

District 3 

Richard Cintron 

Geographical District: 

 

Superintendent’s Office Address: 

Superintendent: 
335 Adams street Brooklyn 

 

 
rcintro@schools.nyc.gov 

Superintendent’s Email Address: 

 

718-923-5175 

Phone Number: 

 

718-923-5124 

Fax: 

 

 
 

Field Support Center (FSC)  

2018-19 RSCEP-R                                                                                                                                                                                          3 

 

Manhattan 

 

FSC: 
Executive Director’s Office 
Address: 

 

 

Yuet Chu 

Executive 
Director: 
333 7 th Avenue New York, New York 
 
YChu@schools.nyc.gov 

Executive Director’s Email Address: 
917-705-5856 

 

Phone Number: 

 

917-705-5856 

Fax: 

 

2018-19 RSCEP-R                                                                                                                                                                                          4 

 

Section 2: Executive Summary and Organizing Principles 

 
The Objective 
The intent of this Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP) is to continue to frame a three-year process 
for each Renewal school and design a comprehensive plan that outlines a strategic path to a paradigm shift in each 
school at every level. The motivation driving this work is our commitment to providing every child with a school that 
meets their academic and social-emotional needs. Closely accompanying this imperative is our belief that every school 
can be renewed and foster a community based culture of learning. The job of the district is to use our position to 
provide the systemic vision, strategies, and resources to facilitate school renewal through a collaborative effort including 
all stakeholders.  
 
The core values held as essential for the success of the School Renewal Program: 

  A “learning stance” must be held by all community members (district leaders, school leaders, school staff, 

community-based partners, students and families). The work should be approached with humility and integrity. 
We must all be willing learners. 

  A “theory of action” must guide the work to ensure clarity and coherence. 
  Authentic teams that collaborate in the spirit of trust, within and across the various levels of the school 

community, are prerequisites for successful school renewal 

  Schools will be places of robust engagement, anchored in positive youth development, ensuring that the school 

environment is welcoming and empowering for students, families and community members. 

  Strong professional development/learning is a fundamental part of our work. 
  The school renewal implementation must be simultaneously dynamic and responsive as well as sustained over 

the three year period of renewal. 

 
The organizing Theory of Action that guides the School Renewal Program strategy: 

By using the Six Elements of the Framework for Great schools as our improvement structure, we seek to align 
instructional coaching and leadership development with structural supports in order to build staff capacity.  
Using schools  instructional foci, school leaders  and staff will implement changes  in curriculum,  instruction, 
school  culture  and  structures  so  that  there  are  sustainable  improvements  in  student  outcomes  and  school 
culture. 

 
The arc of the School Renewal Program strategy: 
In order to attain high levels of achievement for all students in Renewal  schools we must build capacity to increase 
student achievement through the adoption of new attitudes and behaviors, research based strategies that improve 
teacher practice, coupled with the use of clear data driven supports for building students’ skills in the content areas and 
increasing student engagement. We are particularly prioritizing reading and writing across the curricula.  The use of 
student learning data will drive instruction through strong teacher teams; onsite, job embedded professional learning 
and problem solving, and accountability at all levels of the system:  central, district and school - for results. Renewal 
schools are provided with intensive training, leadership and pedagogical coaching, and structural supports, monitoring 
of implementation and ongoing feedback and revisions as needed. Further, each Renewal school will become a 
Community School and strategically partner with community based organizations (CBO) to integrate social services and 
expanded learning time into the fabric of the school to help them better serve the needs of students.  These schools will 
stand as centers of opportunities where families can get the supports they need to make sure students come to school 
ready and able to learn. 
 
Structure of the Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP) 

The Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP) will serve as the organizing and overarching document for 
each Renewal school and will be directly aligned and developed around the elements of the Framework for Great 
Schools, New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, and Strong Schools, 
Strong Communities, including the following: 

  Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks: Demonstrable improvement benchmarks located in the 2018-19 

RSCEP, in the Data and Accountability Snapshot page.  Receivership benchmarks have been closely aligned with 

2018-19 RSCEP-R                                                                                                                                                                                          5 

 

the Renewal benchmarks so that schools will have one coherent set of improvement benchmarks to meet.  All 
Receivership Benchmarks are a subset of Renewal Benchmarks. While the targets for these overlapping 
benchmarks are not always identical, the Receivership Benchmark targets are always equal to or lower that the 
Renewal Benchmarks targets. That means that any school that meets its Renewal Benchmarks targets have by 
definition also met its Receivership Benchmarks targets. For additional information on Receivership 
demonstrable improvement benchmarks go here.  

  Establishing an overarching summative vision aligned with elements of the Framework for Great Schools and 

documenting key areas of celebration and renewal through analysis of assessments and by envisioning what the 
desired outcome for each school will be at the end of the School Renewal process.  

  Setting interim assessment benchmarks that create the path for improvement by focusing on desired outcomes 

and goals. In this way, the plan will be mapped to the overarching summative vision. In addition to the five 
discrete goals formed around the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, each school will create an 
action plan. 

  Transformation into a community school in order to increase student and family access to physical and mental 

health services and other social-emotional supports made available in or near the school. 

  Expanded learning opportunities for all students, including additional instruction provided during afterschool 

 

and/or summer programming provided in collaboration with community partners. 
Intensive professional development for all staff to ensure effective implementation of curriculum and 
instruction aligned to the Common Core State Standards (CCSS) and to support staff in effectively responding 
to the differentiated academic and social-emotional needs of all students. 
  Additional, focused strategies to increase parent and family engagement. 

 

Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools 

The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect 
the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms 
where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity 
and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and 
classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more 
attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and 
Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our 
families and students. 

Information on the Framework for Great Schools and the DTSDE 

Strong Schools, Strong Communities  

The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, 
educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school 
prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult.  

The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers 
and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools 
centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school 
leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. 
Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to 
Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students.  

The Framework for Great Schools and RSCEP Development 

2018-19 RSCEP-R                                                                                                                                                                                          6 

 

The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and 
external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase 
learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently 
ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive 
Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for 
continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing 
review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement 
activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. 
 

 
Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase 
student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework 
for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members 
concrete ways to improve. 
 
In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in 
consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to 
participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a 
comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with 
the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all 
the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements 
work together to support student achievement. 
 
 

The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools  

Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards 
are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical 
thinking skills. 
Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, 
and challenged by their teachers and peers. 
Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. 
They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous 
improvement. 
Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, 
developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. 
Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by 
welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. 
Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school 
and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value 
each other. 

 
Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools 

In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in 
improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for 
School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets,  the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other 
quantitative and qualitative data tools. 
 
NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets 

To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the 
current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple 
instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent 
statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure 
2018-19 RSCEP-R                                                                                                                                                                                          7 

 
how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district 
will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus 
Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and 
Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool.  
 
The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an 
effective school and school district across the following six tenets: 

1.  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity 
2.  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions 
3.  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support 
4.  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions 
5.  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and 
6.  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement 
 
NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) 

The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by 
coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality 
Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 
2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below:  
Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) 

I. 
II.  School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) 
III.  Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and 
Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) 
 

Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 

a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; 
a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) 

Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, 
professional development, and parent and family engagement. 
 
To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in 
improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will 
serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the 
administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish: 
 
 
 
It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School 
Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the 
joint development of the RSCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 
1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% 
budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent 
and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the RSCEP. For additional guidance 
on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. 
 

Next Steps for RSCEP Development 

School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  

  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists in every Renewal school 

and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655. 

  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the American Institute of Research (AIR) needs 

assessment, the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative 
data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year. 

2018-19 RSCEP-R                                                                                                                                                                                          8 

 

  Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE 

Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) 
School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not 
undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most 
recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.   

  Step 4: Create a summative vision for the elements of the Framework for Great Schools. 

  Step 5: Revisit your school’s current goals, and strategically create new goals informed by the needs 

assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, 
Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor 
progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you have identified, and will let your school 
community know when you have reached your goal.   

  Step 6: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action 
plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement. 

  Step 7: Update your school’s AIS section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement 

Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). 

  Step 8: Complete the Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and the Community School sections. 

  Step 9: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall 

cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether strategies and activities outlined in the action 
plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. 

 
Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust practices along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful 
implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to 
accomplishing desired results. 

2018-19 RSCEP-R                                                                                                                                                                                          9 

 

Section 3: Community Engagement Team and School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page 

  

Directions: All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this 
Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP). SLT members’ signatures indicates that they have been 
consulted with and given the opportunity to provide feedback on the plan and the plan’s alignment with the school-
based budget to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic 
Intervention Services (AIS), Expanded Learning Time, Community School initiative, Parent and Family Engagement 
Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a 
minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the 
New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. 
 
On the chart below: 

1.  List the names of each SLT member in the second column.  
2. 
3. 

In the first column, indicate using an “X” if the person is an SLT member. 
In the third column, record the position and constituent group represented such as staff, parent, student, 
Community Based Organization (CBO), or other contributor. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an 
asterisk*.   

4.  SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does 

not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be 
maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates 
participation in the development of the RSCEP, not approval. 

5.  The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the 

principal’s office and be made available upon written request. 

Signature 
(Blue Ink) 

 

Check 
if SLT 

x 

 
x 

 
x 

 
x 

 
X 

 

X 

 
x 

 

x 

 

Name 

Position and Constituent Group 

KyleemaA. Norman 

 
Loretta Lewis 

 
Gigs Taylor-Stephenson 

 
Denise Faust 

 
NakichaBeard 

 

Kimberly Downing 

 
ChanteMoore 

 

ChanteJohnson 

 

Represented 

*Principal or Designee 

*UFT Chapter Leader or Designee 

*PA/PTA President or Designated 
Co-President 

DC 37 Representative (staff), if 
applicable 

Title I Parent Representative or 
Parent Advisory Council 
Chairperson 

Community School Director (staff) 

Student Representative  
(optional for elementary and 
middle schools; a minimum of two 
members required for high 
schools) 

Student Representative  
(optional for elementary and 
middle schools; a minimum of two 
members required for high 
schools) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2018-19 RSCEP-R                                                                                                                                                                                          10 

 

Check 
if SLT 

Name 

Position and Constituent Group 

Represented 

Signature 
(Blue Ink) 

Sheila Thomas-Lewis 

 
Sharlotte Williams 

 
Marcea Daiter 

 
JalelahGraham 

 
AldonaWynn 

 
Ethel Campbell 

 
Leela O'Connor 

 
 

Kathy Benejan 

 
ShavonGlover 

 

Catherine Hogg 

 

 

x 

 
x 

 
x 

 
x 

 
X 

 
x 

 
x 

 
x 

 
 

 

 

 

 

Teacher 

 
Teacher 

 
Teacher 

 
Parent 

 
Parent 

 
Parent 

 
Parent 

 
Parent 

 
CBO-Beacon Program 

 
CB0- First Corinthian Baptist 
Church 

 
Lead CBO - Teachers College 
REACH 

 
Staff/Parent/Other Contributor 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2018-19 RSCEP-R                                                                                                                                                                                          11 

 

Section 4: Renewal School Narrative 

 

In a brief narrative, describe the current state of the Renewal school addressing the following:  

1.  Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, 

including your school’s mission statement and a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or 
special initiatives being implemented.  

2.  What are the school’s beliefs about student learning? 
3. 
4.  Describe your school’s approach to family engagement and progress made with establishing families as 

Identify any special student populations that the school has and what their specific needs are. 

partners in furthering student achievement  

5.  Describe how your school is leveraging community school partnerships to support progress in elements of the 

Framework for Great Schools and indicate where this has been a challenge. 

6.  Summarize the Expanded Learning Time (ELT) opportunities that have been offered to your students this year. 
1. Wadleigh Secondary School for the Performing and Visual Arts is small school with approximately two hundred and 
fifty students, located in Central Harlem. The school was established in 1902 and has evolved over the years from the 
first all-girls school to its current status of a secondary art school. A performing and visual arts themed school, we 
offer instrumental music, vocal music, theater, dance and fine arts partnered with a standard driven curriculum. 
Additionally, we offer culinary arts courses and photography. We intend for our students to be prepared to attain the 
highest level of academic success and artistic proficiency to be prepared for college and career by instilling the Habits 
of Mind, Work, and Heart.  

What is unique about our school is that we are the only secondary arts school in New York City that offers six different 
art courses every day to all of our middle school students. We have a very robust art program and many of our 
students were finalist and winners of significant art competitions. Two years ago, we had three students who won the 
MOMA award for art and photography. Our choir participates in annual performance at established art institutions 
such as Carnegie Hall and the National Choral festival. 

In addition, we utilize a unique scheduling system by which teachers engage in daily common planning and have 
differentiated extended professional development once a week after school. In terms of the school’s strengths, the 
school day has been restructured to ensure that subject and grade teams meet once a week. Subject and grade team 
leaders comprise the school’s Academic Task Force. Our school’s greatest accomplishments have been that the school 
has shown a steady increase in graduation rate. 

2. We believe that students learn best when they are invited to wonder, to question, to inquire and explore in a 
collaborative learning environment (ample student-to-student dialogue and accountable talk); with creative, inquiry 
or/and discussion based lessons; ample opportunities to capture and refine their thoughts in writing designed to be 
inquiry based; where students and teachers engage in authentic discussions and meaningful experiences. To that end, 
we are working to improve teacher pedagogy in questioning and discussion and lesson planning through professional 
development and coaching (if funding allows). 

3. The school has a large population of low income and students and disabilities. According to our 2017-18 school 
register, we were listed with 24.23% special education students. All of our students qualify for free lunch through the 
Title 1 program. Some of our students have limited resources at home to help them succeed within the academic day. 
Additionally, some of our students who are in temporary housing or foster care, have significant social-emotional 
needs that we work as a school to address.  

4. Rigorous Instruction : The school’s most recent 2017-18 Quality Review describes school pedagogy as 
“developing”. Through professional development and classroom observation, teachers continue to refine their skills. 
The school has spent a significant amount of time and resources over the year for curriculum development and 
providing professional development on rigorous instruction. Students are at the developing stage of being actively 
engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills, as stated in the school’s most recent 
Quality Review.  In the high school, English Language Arts and social studies lesson plans and unit plans are currently 
aligned with Writing Is Thinking through strategic inquiry (WITsi). This writing strategy provides scaffolds to engage a 

2018-19 RSCEP-R                                                                                                                                                                                          12 

 

variety of learners. The school needs to deepen the protocols and monitoring system for reviewing unit and lesson 
plans, formative and summative assessments, student work, and rubric to assure alignment with the common core 
learning standards (CCLS). The school uses a variety of coaching and professional development resources to support 
teacher training including: TC REACH, the TC Writing Project, and Field Support Office coaches. 

Supportive Environment : Wadleigh strives to respond to the needs of our adolescent learners using the Pedagogy of 
Love from an academic, emotional, and social perspective. The Pedagogy of Love means strong academics with strong 
social emotional supports. As a Community School, our CBO partner, TC REACH, has connected our students with 
therapeutic and social services from NY Foundling and Beacon. The school establishes a classroom and school culture 
where students feel safe as evidenced by the School Quality Snapshot from 2016-17 which indicates that 95% of our 
students feel safe in their classes. The historical data from previous years progress reports show a steady increase in 
both parents and students indicating that the school provides a supportive environment. An area of growth is to 
strengthen our referral system and strengthen our crisis intervention procedures so that we increase the use of 
community mental health resources by our students. 

Collaborative Teachers: The school’s most recent quality review indicated that the school is “proficient” in the area of 
teacher team, and distributive leadership. The majority of teachers are engaged in structured, inquiry-based 
professional collaboration. Distributive leadership structures are in place so that teachers have a voice in key school-
level decisions. Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. Using the 
School Base option, teachers are given the opportunity to participate in professional development and common 
planning every Wednesday. Distributive leadership structures and teacher collaboration is resulting in improved 
student outcomes. Department meetings are scheduled twice a week, on Wednesdays teachers engage in 
professional learning around student centered practice called the 5-30-10, mindfulness, and/or grade team inquiry 
around literacy using student work. 

The school needs to deepen the development and implementation of protocols for analyzing individual and group 
data to help inform planning, and provide targeted and actionable feedback to students. The school needs to have 
more targeted support dedicated to students with disabilities, English Language Learners and students in the lowest 
third percentile. 

Effective School Leadership: The school was rated “effective” in school leadership. In order to be rated “highly 
effective” we need to continue to expand a prioritized schedule of targeted and frequent cycle of observations that 
provides constructive, instructive and actionable feedback coupled by meaningful and sustained professional 
development based on the identified needs for continuous improvement that is aligned with the school’s instructional 
goals, resulting in improved instruction that engages all students in challenging academic tasks. 

5. Our students in the Arts programs participate in several community events including the Choir singing at the winter 
show at the Harlem State office building and Carnegie Hall, open art display for the community at the school and State 
office building, Poetry book party at the Harlem State office building and Schomburg Public Library; Art works display 
in Colgate central office and the State building. Our dance program partner with Arts Achieve collaborates with 
Wadleigh to provide feedback and professional development for the DOE Art initiative to improve state mandated 
arts programming. We have an active five year partnership with the Apollo Theatre “Oral History Project”. We have 
partnered with CEFS (College for Every Student) for more than a decade. The CFES members in the high school are 
now participate in peer mentoring for both high school and middle school students. We partnered with Children Aid 
Society to offer our students their own College Fair/College Week once every semester. Implemented into the 
teachers' schedule are coaching around lesson planning and implementation. We hired a literacy coach, Dr. Maria 
Akinyele from the Agiri company to work with history and Arts teachers to infuse literacy strategies in their 
curriculum. Assistant Principal Bacchus works with the science department as a co-planner and facilitator of best 
literacy practices as she teaches and uses her classroom to model instruction. ELA teachers benefit from having Ms. 
DesMangles as their PCT AP For All funded teacher as well as the school funded PCT teacher Ms. Denerstein. Middle 
school curriculum for ELA is McGraw Hill's Study Sync. High school is using New Visions. Both teachers collaborate to 
provide one on one lesson planning and coaching. They also co-plan department meetings that Ms. Denerstein leads 
and the AP meetings that Ms. DesMangles lead. For mathematics, the teachers who teach math and the Special 

2018-19 RSCEP-R                                                                                                                                                                                          13 

 

 

Education teachers who teach math are receiving one to one coaching. Middle School teachers are using the National 
Training Network and their coach, Ms. Robin Posner. High School is using New Visions curriculum with a coach 
recommended from New Visions, Ms. Terri Germain. 

6. Wadleigh Secondary has created a scholar schedule that builds Expanded Learning Time (ELT), by way of increased 
time on task and direct instruction, into the regular part of the school day. A longer school day provides scholars with 
additional time on task and creates the classroom time needed for teachers to strategically address student skill gaps. 
ELT is built into students' schedules. Academic Intervention Services, ELTs, are provided to all middle school students 
and high school students up to the 10th grade. 11th and 12th graders receive senior leadership classes. 

 

 

 

2018-19 RSCEP-R                                                                                                                                                                                          14 

 

 

School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 03M415 

School Configuration (2018-19) 

Grade Configuration 

06,07,08,09,10,11,1
2 

Total Enrollment (2017-
18) 
English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 

278 

SIG Recipient (Y/N) 

Transitional Bilingual 

N/A 

Dual Language 

N/A 

Self-Contained English as a Second 
Language 

Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) 

# Special Classes (ELA) 
# Special Classes (Math) 

# Visual Arts 
# Foreign Language 

% Title I Population 
% Free Lunch 
% Limited English Proficient 

58 
47 

14 
8 

% American Indian or Alaska Native 
% Hispanic or Latino 
% White 

# SETSS (ELA) 
# SETSS (Math) 
Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) 
# Music 
# Drama 
# CTE 
# Dance 

67 
58 

26 
5 

# Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) 
# Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) 

School Composition (2017-18) 

81.0%  % Attendance Rate 
79.1%  % Reduced Lunch 
3.2% 

% Students with Disabilities 

Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) 

% Black or African American 

1.4% 
39.2%  % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 
2.9% 

% Multi-Racial 

Personnel (2015-16) 

Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) 
% of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate 
% Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 

0.16 
0% 
9% 

# of Assistant Principals (2016-17) 
% Teaching Out of Certification 
Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) 

Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) 

ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 

29.8%  Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 

Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 

N/A 

Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-
17) 

Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) 

ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 
Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 
4 Year Graduation Rate 

Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 

83% 
64% 
72.5% 

0.0% 

Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 
US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 
6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) 
% ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures 
(2015-16) 

Reward 
In Good Standing 
Focus District 

Priority School 

Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) 

No 
Yes 
Yes 

Recognition 
Local Assistance Plan 
Focus School Identified by a Focus District 

No 

Focus Subgroups 

N/A 

Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) 

Elementary/Middle School 

Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) 

American Indian or Alaska Native 
Hispanic or Latino 
White 
Students with Disabilities 
Economically Disadvantaged 

American Indian or Alaska Native 
Hispanic or Latino 
White 
Students with Disabilities 
Economically Disadvantaged 

American Indian or Alaska Native 
Hispanic or Latino 
White 
Students with Disabilities 
Economically Disadvantaged 

American Indian or Alaska Native 
Hispanic or Latino 
White 
Students with Disabilities 
Economically Disadvantaged 

American Indian or Alaska Native 
Hispanic or Latino 
White 
Students with Disabilities 
Economically Disadvantaged 

American Indian or Alaska Native 
Hispanic or Latino 
White 
Students with Disabilities 
Economically Disadvantaged 

N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 

Black or African American 
Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander 
Multi-Racial 
Limited English Proficient 
ALL STUDENTS 

Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) 
Black or African American 
Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander 
Multi-Racial 
Limited English Proficient 
ALL STUDENTS 

N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 

Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) 

N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
High School 

Black or African American 
Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander 
Multi-Racial 
Limited English Proficient 
ALL STUDENTS 

Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) 

N/A 
YES 
N/A 
N/A 
YES 

Black or African American 
Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander 
Multi-Racial 
Limited English Proficient 
ALL STUDENTS 

Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) 
Black or African American 
Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander 
Multi-Racial 
Limited English Proficient 
ALL STUDENTS 

N/A 
NO 
N/A 
N/A 
YSH 

Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) 
Black or African American 
Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander 
Multi-Racial 
Limited English Proficient 
ALL STUDENTS 

N/A 
YES 
N/A 
N/A 
YES 

No 

N/A 

23 
30 

4 
 

88.2% 
1.1% 
25.5% 

54.0% 
0.7% 
3.2% 

2 
26% 
6 

17.5% 

56% 

74% 
70% 
78.6% 

9% 

N/A 
No 
No 

N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
YES 

N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
NO 

N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 

YES 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
YSH 

YSH 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
NO 

YES 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
YES 

2018-19 RSCEP-R                                                                                                                                                                                          15 

 

 

 

 

2018-19 RSCEP-R                                                                                                                                                                                          16 

 

Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  

 

Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, 
and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious 
intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) 
 
Part 1 – Needs Assessment   

Part 1a.  Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice 
Tenet 3 Statement of Practice  
Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one.  Place an “X” in the 
appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 
3.2 

The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of 
rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning 
Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. 
Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction 
(DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and 
address student achievement needs. 
The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner 
within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the 
arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. 
Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative 
assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student 
reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 

3.3 

3.4 

3.5 

SOP(s) 

Addressed 

X 

x 

x 

X 

 

 

 

 

Part 1b.  Needs/Areas of Focus: 

1.  Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs 

selected above. 

2.  Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs 

selected above. 
Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 

3. 
4.  What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, 

Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? 

Strengths 

  This year, we offer seven AP courses for our 10th, 11th and 12th graders (Lang, Lit, World History, Spanish, 

Studio Art, Statistics, and Biology. We also have Pre AP ELA for 9th grade students and our 9th grade scholars 
took the ELA exam in January 2017. 83% of our 9th graders passed the ELA exam. These 9th graders will move 
on to take AP Literature in the fall 2018.  

  We have departmental meetings twice a week where teachers are focused on lesson planning to include 

reading, writing and discussion. Math teachers and Special Education teachers who teach math have one to one 
coaching. We have two PCT Teachers. One who focuses on department meetings and the other who works with 
all my AP teachers to increase literacy.  

  The High School Arts Department (Visual and Performing Arts) receive high quality arts instruction, yielding 

students who are highly skilled and often celebrated in Painting, Drawing, Photography, Singing, Chorus, Dance 
and Culinary Arts. The school organizes regular performances and exhibitions at community venues, 
government offices, etc. This builds a College and Career Readiness culture with its students by exposing them 
to internships with Cooper Union and Colgate Palmolive. We have been selected to become an accredited arts 
school. 

  82% of our scholars graduated from our school; exceeding our renewal graduation rate benchmark. 
  We exceeded our attendance rate benchmark for the high school.  

Areas in Need of Improvement 

2018-19 RSCEP-R                                                                                                                                                                                          17 

 

 

 

  As noted in the 2016-2017 Quality Review and superintendent's suggestions, the school needs to improve 

 

teacher pedagogy in its core subjects (ELA, Math, Science, Social Studies). To achieve this the school will require 
a math coach, additional resources for professional development (consultants, per-session, per diem).  
Improved ELA and Math progress for the NYS exams. Students currently do not perform at grade level 
proficiency in math and although their has been noted increases, 30% of our middle school scholars are at level 
3/4 for ELA and 17% of our scholars are at levels 3/4 in math. 

  We need to increase the percentage of scholars passing the regents exams in social studies, science, and math. 

 
Part 2 – Summative Vision for Rigorous Instruction 

What is your school’s instructional focus? What is your vision for promoting the instructional focus consistently across 
classrooms?   
The vision for the implementation of our curricula and the learning experiences for our students is manifested in our 
Instructional Focus, “When teachers include reading, writing and discussion in all content areas, students will be able to 
explain their thinking, advocate for their needs and analyze information.” We will use the pedagogy of love to 
implement our instructional focus, meaning students will receive strong academic support coupled with strong 
emotional strategies to optimize learning for each child. 

The following supports will be implemented to actualize our instructional vision:  

Instruction Supports 

  Research based curriculum for all content areas: Studysync for ELA middle school, National Training Network 

(NTN) for middle school math, New visions for high school content areas. 

  Personalized coaching for every subject area teacher.  
  2 Peer Collaborative Teachers in English 
  Common planning time for departments and grade team with a focus on instructional alignment, inquiry work 

to engage in horizontal and vertical data analysis.  

  Weekly instructional professional learning by content specialists and teachers.  
  Use of New Visions portal  
  Transcript and Skedula review to assess student improvement 
 

 

Social emotional Supports:  

  Weekly mentorship groups for targeted students 
  Mindfulness training for educators and students  
  Girl scouts to promote leadership among girls 
  Harlem MagicMentors for boys.  
  New York Foundling and Beacon: Mental Health organizations, individual, group and family counseling.  
  Principal townhouse meetings: bullying, sexual reproductive health,  
 

Student government elections and governance to include student voice.  

 

 

 

2018-19 RSCEP-R                                                                                                                                                                                          18 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

What is your vision for the implementation of CCLS-aligned curricula that meets the needs of your diverse learners, 
personally, academically, and culturally?  
Teachers will implement the 5-30-10 instructional model that focuses on student centered instruction and requires 
students to think at higher order thinking levels. Instructional tasks will have multiple entry points to provide access for 
all learners. Tasks will require students to make their thinking visible in writing, utilizing writing scaffolds as necessary. 
Where possible, our teachers will design contextually anchored tasks and projects through which students can develop 
subject specific skills as well as developing an understanding of other perspectives and cultures. 

 
 

 

 

What is your vision for diverse program offerings that allow students to develop skills, habits, and behaviors to be 
career and college ready? How are instructional shifts embedded in this vision? 
Wadleigh's unique arts programs provide students with professional level instruction in the visual, performing, and 
culinary arts that prepare them for college and careers right after graduation. Teachers embed reading and writing 
about the arts into their instruction. This strengthens our students' academic and social skills. Moreover, our approach 
to instruction requires teachers to involve themselves in the posing of the problem and not just the assignment of the 
problem; to become agents in the posing of that problem and the development of its question; to slow down the 
problem before jumping to an algorithm for paragraph construction, for example; to draw thoughtful and evidence-
based conclusions from students when arguing for understanding. Finally, we place a premium on our Pedagogy of Love 
which promotes  

With the support of professional development partners, teachers will continue to develop standards based aligned tasks 
with writing. Units and lessons, infuse multiple entry points to address the need of all learners, and raise the cognitive 
complexity demands of all tasks, such that all students graduate having had experienced and persevered through deeply 
intellectual activities. Where possible, our teachers will design contextually anchored tasks and projects through which 
students can develop subject specific skills as well as developing an understanding of other perspectives and cultures. 

 

 

What do you envision the delivery of instruction to look like so that all students are set up for success?  
Teachers will utilize a 5-30-10 student centered instructional model. That is, a teacher will pose a question or task that 
forces students to engage with concept, provide time for students to collaboratively construct their own understandings 
of concepts using AVID strategies and allow student groups to refine ideas. Teachers will then engage students in a 
larger group discussion to promote a coherent collective understanding of a disciplinary concept, theme, or problem 
and assess students’ understanding with a standards-aligned task.  

 

 

2018-19 RSCEP-R                                                                                                                                                                                          19 

 

How do you envision teachers using multiple entry points to ensure the success of every child? 
Our teachers will use AVID strategies which provides a variety of learning tools such as graphic organizers, visuals, 
sentence starters, and accountable talk stems so that students will have access into the content. Last year, about 50% of 
our teachers were using multiple entry points such as questioning, and Wit strategies and using various graphic 
organizers. This year, teachers will use In addition to the strategies mentioned before, AVID strategies and literacy 
strategies that will have students reading, writing and discussing in all classes. 

 

 

What is your vision for the use of a comprehensive assessment strategy (diagnostic, formative, benchmark, and 
summative) to drive curricular, instructional, and organizational decisions that impact student outcomes? 
Comprehensive assessment strategy, when used effectively, is an on-going method of monitoring student gaps and 
misconceptions. We intend to engage all of our students in cycles of assessment and feedback with shorter unit lengths. 
Addressing those gaps with immediate feedback and revising curricula decisions. The focus will be the Academic 
Intervention classes where teachers who teach the students in the subject content classes with have weekly 
conversations with the AIS teacher to inform the work the student is completing. The AIS curriculum will start with a 
iReady baseline in middle school in high school, teachers will use the Gates McGinitie as well as short responses from 
the state and regents exams in ELA. In mathematics, all students will use ALEKS. 

 

 

Please indicate below the specific assessments that you are implementing and their purpose for each grade. 

Assessment Name 

Assessment Type 

Grades Implemented 

Purpose 

(diagnostic, formative, 
benchmark, summative) 

MOSL 

Diagnostic 

6-12 

Measure student learning growth at end 
of year 

 

 

iReady 

Diag., Form, Summative 

6-8 

 

Diag, Form. Summative 

6-8 

Analyze growth in math and ELA 

Monitor student mastery baseline and 

StudySync, open 
resoponses from state 
and regents exams 

ALEKS (math) 

Diagnostic 

6-12 

Determine vocabulary growth 

  
Part 3 – Annual Goal 

Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this 
element of the Framework for Great Schools – Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be consistent with the 
expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – 
Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact 
meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. 
By June 2019, there will be 7% increase in all state exams. For middle school, the 7% increase will be in the number of 
level 3 and level 4's combined. In high school. the 7% increase will be in all regents' exams. 

 

 

Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Rigorous Instruction Annual Goal: 
Which Renewal benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Rigorous Instruction Annual Goal? 

2018-19 RSCEP-R                                                                                                                                                                                          20 

List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve 

Regents completion rate 

Framework: Collaborative Teachers: 3.0 

Framework: Rigorous Instruction: 3.0 

 

  

2018-19 RSCEP-R                                                                                                                                                                                          21 

 
Part 4 – Action Plan 

Key Initiatives: 
Concisely indicate the 
key initiatives (up to 
five) that your school 
will implement to 
achieve the identified 
goal for this 
Framework for Great 
Schools element. 

Target 
Group(s) 
Who will be 
targeted? 

Which Benchmark(s) 
indicated above does 
this initiative target? 

Timeline 
What is the 
start and 
end date? 

Key Personnel 
Who is responsible for 
implementing and 
overseeing the 
activity/strategy? 
(include school, 
educational consultants 
and/or CBO staff) 

Weekly team meeting 
with Principal, common 
planning, lesson plans, 
curriculum review 

All teachers 

Rigorous Instruction 

September 

Teachers 

Collaborative 

Students 

Collaborative 
teachers 

2018 
through 
June 2019 

Administration, PCT 
teachers, department 
leads and grade team 
leads 

Graduation rate 

Teachers will use the 
common planning time 
to co-plan lessons, 
analyze lesson plans, 
student work and data 
from classroom 
assessments, state test 
data to make the 
necessary adjustments 
in the curriculum in 

Art teachers 
and our 
assistant 
principal of 
mathematics 

Rigorous 
Instruction 

 

Rigorous Instruction 

Collaborative 
Teachers 

Weekly, 
September 
2018 
through 
June 2019 

Administration and 
Subject Area Teachers 

NTM, New Visions and 
Agiri Learning Consultant 
Coaches 

How will you 
assess the 
interim 
progress of the 
initiative?(ex. 
decrease in 
serious 
incidents, 
increase in 
students 
participating 
Big Sibs 
program) 

Weekly 
performance 
reviews of 
available data 
points for 
target students 
(on the 
margin) 
including: 

i-Ready results 

Review of 
effective AIS 
services. 

Assessments 

Review of 
interim mock 
state regents 
assessments 

Scholarship 
data.  

Teacher 
observation 

Lesson plans 
reflect this 
alignment 
effort 

Observe and 
monitor team 
progress 
during months.  

2018-19 RSCEP-R                                                                                                                                                                                          22 

 

order to develop 
instructional strategy 
to improve student 
performance. 
Department meetings 
will take place twice a 
week. Grade team 
meetings twice per 
month. AP teacher 
meetings will take 
place twice per month. 
Personalized coaching 
for all teachers in math. 

Guidance counselors 
will meet weekly with 
admin to make sure 
students are on track , 
they will meet with 
teachers. make sure 
programmed correctly. 

Special Education 
teachers will twice 
weekly for IEP writing 
review workshops, 
review of co-teaching 
techniques 

Math teachers will 
meet weekly with 
instructional coaches 
from NTN or New 
Visions for lesson plan 
development and 
implementation 

Principal, along with 
the GC, will host 
meetings with parents 
of target student 
population to raise 
level of investment and 
awareness and home 
support 

Collaborative 

Teachers 

graduation 

Graduation rate 

September 
2018 to 
June 2019 

Assistant Principal 

Department head 

credit 
accumulation 

January and 
June regents 
results 

Rigorous 
instruction 

Graduation 

September 
2018 to 
June 2019 

Assistant Principal 

Quality of IEP 

Principal 

Demonstrated 
progress 
towards 
meeting or 
mastering 
teacher 
identified skill 
sets, concepts 
and math 
processes 

Parent sign in 
sheets, 
meeting 
minutes, 
agenda 

Math teachers, 
our NTN for 
middle school 
and New 
Visions for high 
school math 
coaches, 
principal and 
our assistant 
principal of 

Principal, art 
teachers, 
assistant 
principal of the 
arts, parent 
coordinator 

Rigorous Instruction 

September 
2018 to 
June 2019 

Administrators and 
Instructional Cabinet 

Administration and GC 

Monthly, 
October 
2018 
through 
June 2019 

 

Rigorous Instruction 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2018-19 RSCEP-R                                                                                                                                                                                          23 

 

Weekly mindfulness 
sessions for students to 
improve their social 
emotional intelligence 

Monthly parent 
workshops 

Providing professional 
development around 
the student centered 
instruction 

Instructional Cabinet 
meeting Personalized 
Coaching 

NY Foundling 
will create a 
curriculum for 
mindfulness to 
share with our 
other 
Guidance 
Counselors, 
Beacon 
counselors to 
conduct 
weekly 
mindfulness 
workshops 
with our 
students 

Parent 
Coordinator 
will create 
monthly 
workshops to 
engage parents 
in their 
students 
academics and 
social 
emotional 
growth with 
their students 
and for 
themselves 

LINC, a 
Blended 
Learning 
vendor, will 
provide weekly 
instructional 
coaching to aid 
in the 
differentiation 
of student 
instruction 

Cabinet 
meetings with 
take place 
informally and 
formally 
weekly to 
discuss 
instruction, 
data, parent 
involvement 

Graduation rate 

Sept 2018 -
June 2019 

Admin 

Graduation Rate 

Sept 2018 - 
June 2018 

Admin 

reduction in 
behavioral 
incidents with 
the dean, 
counselors and 
reporting in 
OORS 

improvement 
in parent 
workshops 
attendance 
and 
participation in 
school-wide 
events 

Rigorous Instruction 

Graduation rate 

September 
2018 
through 
June 2019 

Admin 

MOTP 

Lead teachers 

NTM, New Visions and 
Agiri Learning Consultant 
Coaches 

Rigorous Instruction 

 

Admin 

September 
2018 
through 
June 2019 

MOTP, 
scholarship 
reports, credit 
accumulation, 
attendance 
rates 

2018-19 RSCEP-R                                                                                                                                                                                          24 

 
  

 
4b – Parent and Family Engagement 

How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York 
State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible 
for implementation and oversight. 
We will have graduation workshops, workshop on how to math and reading/writing in the home. 
 

 
Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment 

Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including 
human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, lead CBO’s community school budget, etc. 
Provide per session for teachers to work on curriculum after school. 

Per Diem for teacher coverage for off-site workshops 

Hire a math coach or math coaches for the middle and high school  

Per session for Saturday Academy academic tutoring and courses in the Arts 

Per Session for after School Tutoring 

Common planning time for middle and high school teachers. 

Teachers will create data binders and provide electronic copies in Google drive. 

Principal and assistant principal will schedule informal and formal observations with a main focus on component 3c 
engaging students in learning (learning tasks are designed to challenge student thinking and make their thinking 
visible). 

Advance to track observation feedback (priority focus) 

Personalized Coaching from NTN, New Visions, Agiri, AVID, McGraw Hil and Learning Consultants 

 
Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 

X 

Tax Levy 

X 

Title I 
SWP 

 

Title I 
1003(a) 

 

Title III 

 

 

Title I TA 

PTA 

Funded 

 

 

P/F Set-
aside 

SIG 
Grant 

 

 

21st Century 

School 

Achievement 

Funding 

X 

 

C4E 

Other 

 
Part 6 – Progress Monitoring  

Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement 
planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 
Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and 
Time-bound. 
 

2018-19 RSCEP-R                                                                                                                                                                                          25 

 

 

By February 2019, there will be a minimum of 3% increase in interim assessments using Iready, Regents and ALEKS, 
study sync , and according to the rubric for open written responses for state and regents exams. 

 

 
Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 
 

Classroom observation ratings will be used to measure progress along with interim assessment data, and scholarship 
rates. The administration team and team leaders will review the lesson plans and conduct observations. The AIS data 
will serve as the interim assessment data and STARS will provide the information for the scholarship rates.  

 
Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action 
plan, if applicable. 

2018-19 RSCEP-R                                                                                                                                                                                          26 

 

Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans 

 
Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and 
school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 
5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) 

Part 1 – Needs Assessment   

Part 1a.  Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice 
Tenet 5 Statement of Practice 
Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one.  Place an “X” in the 
appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 
5.2  The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and 

sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 

5.3  The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional 

developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning 
experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students.  

5.4  All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance 

of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and 
fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health 
supports tied to the school’s vision. 

5.5  The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish 

structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional 
developmental health needs.  

x 

x 

x 

x 

Part 1b.  Needs/Areas of Focus: 

SOP(s) 

Addressed 

 

 

 

 

1.  Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs 

selected above. 

2.  Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs 

selected above. 
Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 

3. 
4.  What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? 
5.  What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, 

Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? 

Strengths 

  The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social-emotional development that provides the 
students with safe and healthy school environment. This is done during town hall meetings, advisory and parent 
workshops. Teachers are provided with professional development on social-emotional intelligence (5.2) 
  The school programs every student for a weekly advisory that serves as a forum for, among other things, 

cultivating student voice; developing students’ socio-emotional capacities; engaging students in community 
service work; developing students college and career readiness skills; and cultivating the non-cognitive skills 
vital to students’ academic success (time management; study skill; organizational skills etc.). Additionally, 
teachers are provided with professional development on topics related to students’ social-emotional 
development (5.5) 

  The school utilizes the grade team meeting structure to engage a multidisciplinary team of adults in 

conversations and action planning in support of the socio-emotional needs of students. Grade Team Leaders are 
charged with facilitating bi-weekly data-driven Kid-Talk meetings to analyze student data to determine how 
does their students learn best. . (5.3, 5.5) 

  The administration works collaboratively with lead teachers (academic taskforce)and members of the Student 

Support Team (CBO social workers, mental health therapists, school social workers, and guidance counselors) to 
develop and monitor plans to support students’ social-emotional development health needs. The goal is to help 
prepare students to become academically and socially successful in the global market place.  

2018-19 RSCEP-R                                                                                                                                                                                          27 

 

  The school leaders ensure that all stakeholders strategically identify areas of need, and cultivate purposeful 

partnerships (i.e., Apollo, College For Every Student, First Corinthian Church, Leadership program, Carnegie Hall, 
etc.) to promote, support and sustain our students’ social-emotional, health and academic achievement. 

  With a tiered and intentional plan to address attendance concerns, we’ve seen an improvement in our annual 

 

 

attendance rate. Our attendance rate for the school was 78% in 2015-16; as of June 2018, our overall 
attendance rate year to date for the high school is 87% and 90.2 for the middle school. 
 

Areas in need of improvement 

In focus groups with high school students from May 2018, students expressed a desire for stronger connections 
with adults in the building. Students who were on-track were more likely to say that they had at least one adult 
in the building with whom they had a trusting relationship. Off-track students shared that while they had strong 
relationships with peers which kept them coming to school, they were struggling to find adults in the building 
who showed an interest in their lives.  

  While we had an overall improvement in our attendance rates for 2017-18, our chronic absenteeism rates in the 

middle school increased from 30% in 2016-17 to 38% in 2017-18. In the focus groups, students indicated a 
desire to have more positive incentives for attendance including material rewards and more public 
announcements as we had in prior years. 

  While we have designed a system of referrals and crisis intervention plans with our CBO social workers, we 

continue to struggle with ensuring all staff members are aware of and accountable for properly referring 
students, resulting in underutilization of these services. We would like to work collaboratively with the student 
support team and administration to regularly monitor and review this process on an ongoing basis so that we 
can strengthen mental health utilization by students. We recognize the need to continue staff and parent 
training around “wellness” that includes physical and mental health in our ongoing efforts to de-stigmatize 
mental health care. 

 

 
Part 2 – Summative Vision for Supportive Environment 

What is your vision for a supportive school environment? How will you in partnership with each CBO and families 
enact your vision? 
 

All stakeholders should describe the school as a nurturing environment for students as well as staff. Wadleigh is a place 
where all stakeholders are valued and students are encouraged to realize their full potential. Students understand and 
value the importance of coming to school on a daily basis. For the 2018-19 school year, we would like to focus on: 
strengthening our universal positive school climate initiatives, such as restorative practices, mindfulness group 
relaxation training to refine our use of data to target the most at-risk students for attendance or socio-emotional 
interventions, and implementing more routine social emotional learning in the classroom through an expanded 
advisory program using AVID.  

UNIVERSAL SCHOOL CLIMATE 

 

 

Incoming 9th grade students will be invited to participate in a summer program coordinated by TC REACH and 
delivered by Practice Makes Perfect. The program will focus on literacy work and strengthening student reading 
skills in the hopes that students will enter the school year on grade level. In addition, students will have an 
opportunity to build community, address anxiety and impart study skills. In addition, The Parent Coordinator 
will continue to engage in parent outreach to update parents on attendance and academic growth, as well as to 
establish a positive relationship with the school.  
In the fall, socio-emotional learning and community building will be kicked off with mindfulness curriculum 
written by NY Foundling.  

2018-19 RSCEP-R                                                                                                                                                                                          28 

  Throughout the year, we will increase the number of positive celebrations around student achievement and 
attendance achievements. TC REACH will work with school leadership to identify attendance incentives, and 
the school will use town hall meetings and weekly announcements to highlight and celebrate improvement and 
growth in attendance. TC REACH will work with the school to incorporate additional clubs and activities into the 
TC REACH winter showcase of student work. The school will work with parents to calendar and develop 
additional showcases of student work that highlight achievements in the classroom. 

  We will provide more opportunities for student voice by strengthening the student government. Student 

government representatives will be charged with speaking for their peers. In addition to voicing the concerns of 
the student body, the student council will be charged with helping to recognize and support our Habits of 
Mind, Heart, and Work amongst their peers. For instance, they will be asked to nominate and celebrate 
students who exhibit these values at town halls; they will be asked to document through photographs or 
artwork examples of students displaying our values 

 

 

TARGETED INTERVENTIONS THROUGH DATA 

 

 

 

In addition to enhancing socio-emotional development through universal, school-wide programs, we will also 
systematize our referral program for attendance and mental health supports. We will use the existing student 
support team and attendance teams to identify a menu of available supports and more faithfully implement 
referral systems that incorporate the routine use of data to match the right interventions to the right students 
at the right time.  
In the case of attendance, we will continue implementation of work that we started this year, where the 
attendance team will focus on the most severe cases, and grade teams will be responsible for monitoring 
students who are in the 70 percent to 90 percent range and provide peer mentoring. At risk students will 
require counselor intervention and partnership with Beacon and NY Foundling to address attendance issues. 
The counselors for these students will take part in the attendance meeting. Interventions will be documented 
in the Attendance Heat Map track provided by the Community School Director. 

  The Community Director of TC REACH will create a school-wide Attendance Intervention plan and work with 

school leadership and the guidance team to develop a work plan with clear deliverables, time lines, and targets, 
mapped across the school’s SY 2018/19 calendar to help support stronger implementation of the school’s 
attendance intervention plan.  

  The CSD will also utilize the school’s Advisory structure to facilitate the implementation of best practice 

routines and practices around the school’s attendance mentorship initiative (CHICO--Check In Check Out) so 
that there is consistency and coherence in mentorship practices that result in measurable impacts on students 
attendance.  

  TC REACH will leverage its partnership with Kinvolved, and ongoing collaboration with the school's Family 

worker and Parent Coordinators to develop the school’s capacity to leverage parent-engagement and home 
visiting as essential components of an Attendance Improvement strategy. 

  The CSD will also lead a re-engagement initiative that aims at identifying and supporting the academic and 

socio-emotional re-engagement of students flagged as at-risk for school drop-out or disengagement based on a 
combination of Success Highways data, academic records as well as attendance patterns. 

  Each guidance counselor will be responsible for specific grade bands, and utilize Kinvolved, parent 

conferencing, and weekly grade level team meetings as a vehicle for keeping parents and teachers abreast of 
students' progress and challenges. The guidance team and administrative team will analyze data such as the 
OORs report, attendance data, and the progress students are doing academically to determine if students who 
have social emotional needs are succeeding. We will also review the I-Log reports to analyze how often 
students are being counseled by the guidance team. In addition, the guidance counselors will meet in grade 
level teams to discuss the social-emotional needs of students who might not be excelling in a timely fashion.  
  TC REACH will work with NY Foundling and Beacon to collect data that will be used to target students who are 

at-risk for socio-emotional supports and their families for wrap around services. 

2018-19 RSCEP-R                                                                                                                                                                                          29 

  The student support team and crisis management team will work collaboratively with NY Foundling and Beacon 

to continually review the referral process and troubleshoot the process to improve mental health usage. The 
principal and administration will take a greater role in holding team members and staff accountable for 
following these referral systems with fidelity. For their part, mental health clinicians will be more visible in the 
school community to help build relationships with students and staff in an effort to de-stigmatize mental health 
supports.  

  The attendance, student support, and administrative teams will develop a calendar of parent workshops 

around the importance of attendance and wellness on academic success.  

 

 

EXPANDED ADVISORY PROGRAM 

  Throughout the school year, socio-emotional learning will be integrated with classroom learning through the 

implementation of our school-wide mindfulness curriculum one day per week will focus on student goal 
setting, action planning, and developing the socio-emotional skills needed for success, such as positive peer-
peer connections, resiliency, and motivation. Student government representatives can also suggest topics that 
should be addressed.  

  College Access For All College for Every Student: Brilliant Pathways initiatives that will help prepare students for 

their post-secondary goals in grades 11 and 12. In the middle school, the goal will be to expose students to a 
college-going culture. At the high school level, students will have opportunities to explore college and career 
plans and resources that will help them support these plans. In addition, they will be given guidance on 
monitoring their high school academic programs – for instance, understanding which credits they still need to 
earn, which Regents exams they need to pass, and what scores they should be aiming for on the Regents exams 
to be CUNY ready.  

  The Community School Director for TC REACH will also design and partner with school leadership and select 

school based staff to continue an academic resiliency initiative (Flagged For Success) that provides targeted and 
individualized prevention supports to groups of 9th and 10th grade students such that it a keeps them on-track 
to graduate on time by supporting timely credit accumulation, and decreasing the number of attempts needed 
to pass their regents exam. 

  Parent workshops for the middle school will focus on planning for high school and exposure to college 

opportunities. At the high school, workshops for parents will focus on the transition to college or career, 
financial aid, and other college entrance logistics. 

 
  

 

Who are your CBO partners? How will each CBO sustain and support the social-emotional and academic growth of 
your students? 

CBO Partner 

Teachers College 
REACH (Raising 
Educational 
Achievement Coalition 
Harlem) 

CBO Focus 

The REACH initiative focuses on school leadership, pedagogical practices, expanded learning 
experiences, physical and mental health, and family engagement. TC REACH will implement a set 
of coherent and strategic actions across these areas at Wadleigh. TC REACH will support the 
implementation of expanded learning opportunities to increase the diversity of opportunities to 
make school a more engaging place, and provide opportunities for community building (e.g., 
Ramapo for Children trips; clubs; student groups). The TC REACH CSD will have direct roles in the 
attendance and “Flagged for Success” initiatives, and supporting roles in ensuring the mental 
health, physical health, and ELO work is effectively coordinated and monitored. 

2018-19 RSCEP-R                                                                                                                                                                                          30 

 

  
 

NY Foundling 

TC REACH in partnership with NY Foundling, will maintain a full time mental health clinician, one 
family advocate, and one social work intern on-site at Wadleigh to provide for the social and 
mental health needs of Wadleigh students and families. 

TC REACH in partnership with Achievement Initiative (AI) of Columbia University's School of 
Social work, will maintain one full time mental health clinician and one social work intern on-site 
at Wadleigh to provide for the social and mental health needs of Wadleigh students and 
families. Additionally, TC REACH, through AI will support with the implementation of an advisory 
curriculum that focuses on Socio-emotional learning, Academic Skill Building, and College and 
Career Readiness skills. 

How will you in partnership with your CBO will create a supportive environment and engagement for your students’ 
families? 
 

Under the Family Support and Engagement strand of the community school model, TC REACH has aimed to cultivate the 
knowledge, skills, and confidence of families to engage with the school so that their efforts to support their children’s 
academic and social development are consistent, coordinated, and meaningful.  

 

For families of students who need the most targeted interventions, the school will make regular attempts to contact 
parents to determine what additional supports are needed to improve student attendance or academic achievements. 
This will include outreach from the guidance counselors or attendance team members as determined by the data. TC 
REACH will continue to support teacher and staff use of Kinvolved in order to maintain regular communication with 
families about individual student attendance or academic progress, and broader school-wide events or updates. 

 

Through partnership with NY Foundling, TC REACH maintains a family advocate who can connect families with mental 
health resources in the community; NY Foundling can also refer families for mental health counseling in conjunction 
with counseling for the student.  

 

TC REACH will continue to provide capacity building opportunities to Wadleigh families through referrals to community 
agencies such as the Manhattan Educational Opportunity Center (MEOC), and Parent JobNet. These resources can help 
parents in their own career and college trajectories.  

 

Working with the PTA president and Parent Coordinator, TC REACH will also help the school to plan workshops that 
support the development of parental role conception and self-efficacy as it relates to supporting the academic success 
of their children. The CSD will identify additional parent workshops in connection to the advisory program around SEL or 
college access that will help parents identify resources to support their students’ preparation for post-secondary 
careers. 

 

 

 
Part 3 – Annual Goal 

2018-19 RSCEP-R                                                                                                                                                                                          31 

 

Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this 
element of the Framework for Great Schools – Supportive Environment. Your goal must be consistent with the 
expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – 
Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact 
meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. 
By June 2019, our efforts at improving school culture, advisory supports, and social emotional data for targeted 
interventions will result in 3% increase in attendance school-wide. 

 

 

Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Supportive Environment Annual Goal: 
Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your 
Supportive Environment Annual Goal? 

List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve are attendance benchmark and graduation bench mark.l 

attendance benchmark 

graduation rate 

. 

  

2018-19 RSCEP-R                                                                                                                                                                                          32 

 
Part 4 – Action Plan 

Key Initiatives: 
Concisely indicate the 
key initiatives (up to 
five) that your school 
will implement to 
achieve the identified 
goal for this 
Framework for Great 
Schools element. 

 

Barclays incentives 

Target 
Group(s) 
Who will be 
targeted? 

Which Benchmark(s) 
indicated above does 
this initiative target? 

Timeline 
What is the 
start and 
end date? 

Key Personnel 
Who is responsible for 
implementing and 
overseeing the 
activity/strategy? 
(include school, 
educational consultants 
and/or CBO staff) 

Sept 2018-
June 2019 

CSD, AI Social Worker, 
NYF Clinician, NYF Family 
Advocate, Guidance 
Team 

Students who 
scored in the 
risk category 
for 
connections, 
well being, 
confidence 
and 
motivation 
on the 
success 
highways 
assessment 

Attendance 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Credit Accumulation 
& 4-year graduation 
rate 

Oct 2018 - 
June 2019 

CSD, Student Support 
Team, Grade level Team 
Leads 

Flagged For Success: 
The guidance 
counselors will identify 
current 10th graders 
who did not earn at 
least 10 credits, 
current 11th graders 
who did not earn 20 
credits (and earned 4 
credits i 

10th graders 
who earned 
below 10 
credits in 9th 
grade; 9th 
graders who 
failed 2+ 
courses in 
Term 1 MP1 
of SY 18/19 

How will you 
assess the 
interim 
progress of the 
initiative?(ex. 
decrease in 
serious 
incidents, 
increase in 
students 
participating 
Big Sibs 
program) 

85% of targeted 
students 
connected to 
appropriate 
Mental health, 
Social, and ELO 
services by 
January 
20182019. At 
least 50% of 
targeted 
students 
making “High 
Improvements” 
in their Gains 
scores across 
the 4 target 
Success 
Highways 
domains at the 
midpoint of the 
school year 
(February 26th 
2018February 1, 
2019) 

85% of target 
students will 
pass all their 
classes by the 
end of Term 1. 

AVID Advisory: 
Wadleigh students will 
be assigned to an 

All students  Attendance, Credit 

Accumulation 

September 
2018-June 
2019 

School Leadership, 
Programmer, Guidance 

85% of students 
will report 
positive 

2018-19 RSCEP-R                                                                                                                                                                                          33 

 

advisory that meets 
twice per week and 
serves as a forum for 
addressing: Socio 
emotional 
development; college 
and career readiness 
skills development; 
academic Skill building; 
and cultivating student 
voice 

Attendance Mentoring: 
100% of students with 
between 70% and 90% 
attendance will be 
connected to an 
attendance mentor. 

SBMH Team: 
Achievement Initiative 
will maintain a 
caseload of 130 
students during the 
course of the school 
year. 

There will be a 10% 
increase in number of 
appropriate referrals 
made to NY Foundling 
and Achievement 
Initiative 

Parent Engagement: 
85% Kinvolved usage 
rate by teachers for 
attendance taking and 
communication 
purposes. 

 

Parent Conferencing: 
100% of students, and 
parents of students 
with attendance at or 
below 75% at any point 
in the school year will 
meet with their 
guidance counselor for 
at least 2 conferences 

Counselors, AI Social 
Worker, Advisors 

experiences of 
their advisory 
by February 
2019 

Attendance 

All students 
with 
attendance 
between 75% 
and 85% 

October 
2018-June 
2019 

CSD, Advisors, 
Attendance Mentors, 
Guidance, 

Attendance 

September 
2018-June 
2019 

AI Social Worker and 
Counseling interns, NY 
Foundling Clinicians 

All students 
identified as 
requiring 
counseling 
services that 
meet AI's 
service 
criteria 

All teachers 
and Advisors 

Attendance 

September 
2018-June 
2019 

All teachers, Advisors, 
Parent Coordinator, 
Family Worker, School 
Aides, CSD, School 
leaders 

Attendance, Credit 
Accumulation 

October 
2018-June 
2019 

Guidance Counselors, 
Parent Coordinator, 
Family Worker 

Students with 
less than or 
equal to 75% 
attendance; 
Students who 
fail 2+ 
courses 

All instructional 
and non-
instructional 
staff will be 
trained in the 
proper referral 
processes and 
protocols by 
December 2018 

All instructional 
and non-
instructional 
staff will be 
trained in the 
proper referral 
processes and 
protocols by 
December 2018 

All teachers 
would have 
activated their 
Kinvolved 
accounts and be 
fully trained in 
its usage by 
October 2018. 

50% of students 
flagged for 
attendance or 
course failure 
would have met 
with their GCs 
to create action 
plans before 
Winter break. 

2018-19 RSCEP-R                                                                                                                                                                                          34 

 

to action plan to follow 
up on the plan to 
address their 
attendance. 

100% of students who 
fail 2+ Courses during 
any MP will conference 
with their guidance 
counselor to create an 
academic intervention 
plan that addresses 
their academic 
challenges. 

  
 
4b – Parent and Family Engagement 

How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to 
support  the  whole  child?  Include  the  timeline  and  identify  key  personnel  and  stakeholders  responsible  for 
implementation and oversight. 
We will continue to use the Kinvolved app to communicate with parents about their child's attendance during the 
school day. For CA and severely CA students, home visits will be conducted to determine what additional supports 
parents need to ensure their student is able to regularly attend school. Parents will be invited to celebrate in 
successes around attendance. Based on parent preferences, we may also offer workshops for families about wellness 
resources in the community that can help students come to school prepared to learn. 
 

 
Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment 

Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including 
human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 
Attendance team and guidance counselors will be compensated for meeting with parents according to the parents’ 
schedule. SBO provides teachers and guidance counselors’ time to contact parents to convey concerns and progress. 
Outreach must be logged and submitted weekly so that the school cabinet, Academic Task Force, CBO, attendance 
team and guidance can reference the logged data when monitoring student progress. 

 

Guidance counselors will support Wadleigh Scholars and meet with parents after school or meet with individual 
scholars to counsel scholars. Guidance Counselors are the first line for support to students and their families. 

 

 
Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 

X 

Tax Levy 

X 

Title I 
SWP 

 

Title I 
1003(a) 

 

Title III 

 

 

Title I TA 

PTA 

Funded 

 

 

P/F Set-
aside 

SIG 
Grant 

X 

 

21st Century 

School 

Achievement 

Funding 

 

 

C4E 

Other 

 
Part 6 – Progress Monitoring  

2018-19 RSCEP-R                                                                                                                                                                                          35 

 

Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement 
planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 
Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and 
Time-bound. 
  By February of 2019, there will be a minimum of 1% increase in overall school attendance based on the provision of 
additional supports for our chronically absent students. 

 
Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 
We will review the list of interventions listed in the attendance heat map and student sorter to ensure all CA and 
severely CA students have an intervention. 

 
Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action 
plan, if applicable. 

2018-19 RSCEP-R                                                                                                                                                                                          36 

 

Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans 

Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success 
and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional 
development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices 
and Decisions) 
 
Part 1 – Needs Assessment   

Part 1a.  Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice 
Tenet 4 Statement of Practice 
Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one.  Place an “X” in the 
appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 
4.2  School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized 

around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 

4.3  Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards 

(CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 

4.4  Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning 

environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths 
and needs of all students. 

4.5  Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by 

using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, 
and progress monitoring). 
Part 1b.  Needs/Areas of Focus: 

SOP(s) 

Addressed 

x 

x 

N/A 

n/A 

 

 

 

 

1.  Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs 

selected above. 

2.  Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs 

selected above. 
Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 

3. 
4.  What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, 

Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? 

Strengths: 

  80% of students graduated with a Regents or Local Diploma.  
  High school students by June 2018 ended with a 87.56% attendance rate and middle schoolers had a 93.8% 

 

 

attendance rate. 
In September 2017, we created two AP ELA classes for 10/11th graders and 12th graders and Pre AP for 
accelerated 9th graders who passed the ELA regents. 
January 2018, 83% of our 9th graders passed the ELA exam, of which 65% achieved college readiness in their 
first semester of high school. 

 

Areas in need of improvement: 

  As evidenced in the Quality Reviewer's verbal feedback of the May 2018 Quality Review, an inquiry based 

approach was not consistently evident across teams. 

  As evidenced in the Quality Reviewer's verbal feedback of the May 2018 Quality Review, across classrooms 

teaching strategies inconsistently provide multiple entry points into curricula to engage scholars in higher levels 
of discussion. 

  As evidenced in the June 2018 regents results, we need to alter the instruction for the 2018-19 school year to 

ensure that we have better regents results. 

 

2018-19 RSCEP-R                                                                                                                                                                                          37 

 
 
Part 2 – Summative Vision for Collaborative Teachers 

What is your vision for collaborative teaching?   

Subject teams will regularly engage in an inquiry based cycle to improve student outcomes. Subject teams will engage in 
professional learning that is student centered. Sept- Oct the teams will analyze lesson plans and standards based tasks 
that include reading, writing and discussion. In Nov through Jan teams will gather data from mock testing that will have 
teams now look at plans using the data gathered from mock assessment to analyze for reading, writing and discussion, 
but now implementing writing prompts, reading prompts and discussion prompts. Data is now going to inform the 
instruction and the process for Sept through Oct will repeat for Feb through March. In April through June, we will review 
lessons using the data from the mock assessments to inform instruction. 

Subject teams will meet to discuss and align pedagogical practices to assure consistency in routines and common 
practices, such as board usage, agendas, instructional objectives, types of binders and notebooks to be used, portfolio 
system selection, common lesson and unit planning approaches, and the application of a uniform assessment system 
tied directly to the binder/portfolio system.  

Scholars will demonstrate mastery of ‘competencies’ necessary for career and college to be determined by the 
educators at Wadleigh Secondary School for the Performing and Visual Arts. 

Pedagogical practice will be anchored in research-based protocols driven based on student centered practices, in part, 
by inquiry (AIW) and will create the structures necessary to support all learners. The expectation is that specific 
practices will be evident in ALL classrooms, including non-core subjects. 

To closely monitor student needs, inquiry teams will follow a protocol to monitor students’ progress and gather 
evidence of student learning. Teachers will review state test data, homework, class work, and common formative 
assessments to track student progress. Teachers will collaborate to analyze student work to evaluate the impact of their 
instruction and make adjustments to their curricula.  

Those practices include, but are not limited to: 

Lesson plans grounded from curriculum, which will include essential understandings using the “swat” frame; essential 
questions drawn from available common core materials; and, performance tasks that target all three Authentic 
Intellectual Work (AIW) domains; 

Triangulation between learning activities and state standards 

Reading and writing that is integrated into all classes along with discussion 

Inquiry as the major vehicle of learning across classrooms and all school constructions 

Classes will be print rich: literature to support the essential ideas being taught will be provided to supplement the 
curriculum, interactive word-walls will support retention of academic vocabulary, and provide multiple entry points and 
student work will be displayed and celebrated. 

Teachers will use technology to support and enhance instruction and increase multiple entry points to engage learners. 
Technology, therefore,, can be used as a multiple entry point.  

Teachers will use a student-centered approach to instruction that provides students with opportunities to interact 
directly with the new learning, so scholars are engaged in academic discourse. 

2018-19 RSCEP-R                                                                                                                                                                                          38 

 

Teachers will use daily checks for understanding and formative assessments to inform and modify their instruction and 
provide consistent and timely feedback to students in forms that clearly outline actions they can take to make further 
learning progress. 

Students should be able to articulate their ideas about complex texts and transfer those ideas into their writing in a 
coherent manner. Appropriate writing strategies will be incorporated when necessary.  

Additional AP courses will be offered and opportunities to take College Now courses.  

This year, the school will create a schedule to ensure that subject content teams will have time to plan collaboratively, 
twice a week. Teacher leaders will attend professional development sessions to build their capacity and, in turn, share 
new learning and strategies with their teams. Teachers will continue to use Understanding by Design Framework to 
refine and revise unit plans. The units, lesson plans, common assessments will be aligned to CCLS.  

TC REACH- community based organization will continue to support our school with professional development and also 
provide our students with activities that will enrich their academic skills and promote academic and attendance 
improvement. 

 

 

 

 
 

How do you envision collaboration amongst your School Instructional Cabinet to improve teacher practices and 
student learning? 
We have a School Instructional Cabinet-- composed of teacher team leaders. We use this as a platform to demonstrate 
and model, discuss lesson planning, data analysis, looking at student and teacher work. Team leaders will then turnkey 
these practices in their respective meetings. 

 

 

How do you envision collaboration within teacher teams to improve teacher practices and student learning?  
Members of the executive cabinet will attend all team meetings in addition to meeting with teacher leaders at least 
twice a month to monitor how teachers practices are aligned with student learning. Teacher teams will review lesson 
plans and student work to identify areas of strength and need to help increase student achievement. 

 

 

How do you envision collaboration across teacher teams to improve teacher practices and student learning?  
In addition to having subject level team meetings, we will also meet in grade level teams and we will use the 80 minute 
PD block once a week to share out best practices twice a month..  

 
What data will teachers and the School Instructional Cabinet regularly review to ensure that they are reflecting upon 
their teaching practices and meeting individual student learning needs?  What is the intent for reviewing each piece of 
data? (ex. Teachers will regularly review student IEPs when developing lessons in order to ensure that tasks are 
appropriately scaffolded.) 

Data Reviewed 

The New Visions Data 
Portal 

Together with administration, counselors and Lead teachers will regularly review the New 
Visions Data Portal to ensure that students gaps are identified and addressed and used to 
inform teaching strategies, curriculum implementation and assessment. 

Intent 

Student work 

--Teacher teams will review student work using AIW and/or other protocols to determine if 
writing strategies are having impact on students' writing skills. 

2018-19 RSCEP-R                                                                                                                                                                                          39 

 

End of Unit 
Assessments 

-Every 5 to 6 weeks, teachers will administer and analyze end of unit assessments. 

Common Periodic 
Assessments 

Scholars will be assessed at the beginning of the year utilizing common periodic assessments in 
core subject areas to ensure that they get the appropriate instructional support and courses. 

Common assessments aligned to the CCLS will be given at the end of every marking period and 
data analysis will be facilitated in content and grade teams 

Common End of 
Marking Period 
Assessments 

  
Part 3 – Annual Goal 

Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this 
element of the Framework for Great Schools – Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be consistent with the 
expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – 
Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact 
meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. 
By June 2019, all teachers will be trained in student centered pedagogy, (5/30/10), and infusing reading, writing and 
discussion into all math lessons resulting in a 7% increase in state math results in middle school and a 5% increase in 
regents completion rate in math. 

 

 

Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Collaborative Teachers Annual Goal: 
Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your 
Collaborative Teaching Annual Goal? 

List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve: 

Increase in regents completion rate 

  

2018-19 RSCEP-R                                                                                                                                                                                          40 

 
Part 4 – Action Plan 

Key Initiatives: 
Concisely indicate the 
key initiatives (up to 
five) that your school 
will implement to 
achieve the identified 
goal for this Framework 
for Great Schools 
element. 

Target 
Group(s) 
Who will 
be 
targeted? 

Which Benchmark(s) 
indicated above does 
this initiative target? 

Timeline 
What is the 
start and 
end date? 

Key Personnel 
Who is responsible for 
implementing and 
overseeing the 
activity/strategy? 
(include school, 
educational consultants 
and/or CBO staff) 

How will you 
assess the 
interim 
progress of the 
initiative?(ex. 
decrease in 
serious 
incidents, 
increase in 
students 
participating 
Big Sibs 
program) 

Professional 
development 
will be 
monitored 
regularly using 
feedback 
sheets. 
Additionally 
the PD 
committee will 
assess and 
revise the PD 
plan as needed 
to adapt it to 
the needs of 
scholars and 
teachers.. 

Faculty 

All 

All Teachers, ORS, and 
administrators 

September 
2018-June 
2019 

Common 
Planning 

Administrative 
team will 
review unit 
plans and 
lessons to 
ensure that 

2018-19 RSCEP-R                                                                                                                                                                                          41 

Professional 
Development Plan: 

Faculty 

September 
2018-June 
2019 

Assistant Principal, 
Principal and coaches 
and/or consultants 

Progress Towards 
meeting the 10% 
increase in regents 
results for social 
studies, living 
environment, and 
earth science regents 
exams. 

The school will execute 
a systematic PD plan 
that consists of group 
learning activities and 
individual coaching. 

The Professional 
Learning Committee 
(consisting of UFT 
members, ORS coaches, 
and School leaders) will 
provide oversight and 
support to this ongoing 
work. 

Group Learning 
Activities:  

1. Summer PD - 
Curricula Introduction 
and Unpacking 
(developed by school 
leaders in conjunction 
with ORS coaches) New 
Visions, National 
Training Network, 
McGraw Hill. Agiri, And 
AVID, SS, Advisory, CTE, 
etc 

Professional 
Development Plan: 

The school will execute 
a systematic PD plan 
that consists of group 

Time, After 
school 
and/or 
Saturdays. 

multiple entry 
points are 
incorporated in 
unit 
plans/lesson 
plans. 

Professional 
development 
will be 
monitored 
monthly using 
feedback 
sheets. 
Additionally 
the PD 
committee will 
assess and 
revise the PD 
plan as needed 
to adapt it to 
the needs of 
scholars and 
teachers. 

 

learning activities and 
individual coaching. 

The Professional 
Learning Committee 
(consisting of UFT 
members, ORS coaches, 
and School leaders) will 
provide oversight and 
support to this ongoing 
work. 

Group Learning 
Activities:  

1. Summer PD - 
Curricula Introduction 
and Unpacking 
(developed by school 
leaders in conjunction 
with ORS coaches) New 
Visions, National 
Training Network, 
McGraw Hill. Agiri, And 
AVID, SS, Advisory, CTE, 
etc 

2. September – 
Implementation of 
personalized coaching 
for all math teachers, 
ELA teachers history 
teachers, science AVID 
advisory teachers and 
Academic Intervention 
Service teachers 

3. Ongoing cycles of 
reviewing and analyzing 
formative and 
summative assessments 
with coaches and 
teacher leaders 

4. Revise instruction if 
interventions are not 
supporting our scholars 
to achieve the common 
assessment benchmarks 
for core subjects. 

4. Use the Quality 
Review Rubric as an 

2018-19 RSCEP-R                                                                                                                                                                                          42 

 

assessment tool for our 
teachers in 1.1, 1.2, and 
2.2. 

6. Consultants to 
provide support in the 
core subjects. 

7. Recurring LASW 
(including assessments) 
and inquiry protocols in 
the teacher team 
context throughout the 
year for the purpose of 
curricula and/or 
pedagogical 
modifications 

8. All subject team 
leaders will participate 
in professional 
development provided 
by Teachers College-
REACH to strengthen 
their practice with 
Understanding by 
Design (Wiggins last 
year). The professional 
development will 
include follow up that 
demonstrates for the 
staff how to implement 
changes based on 
student feedback. 

Subject teams will meet 
once a week to review 
curriculum and develop 
lesson plans that are 
rigorous and provide 
multiple entry points. 

Teachers will ... 

Faculty 

All 

MODIFY existing units 
and develop 
corresponding lesson 
plans to include... 
multiple entry points, 
employ strategies, high 
Depth of Knowledge 
questioning and 
discussion points, and 

All Teachers, ORS, and 
administrators 

September 
2018-June 
2019 

Common 
Planning 
Time, After 
school 
and/or 
Saturdays. 

Administrative 
team will 
review unit 
plans and 
lessons to 
ensure that 
multiple entry 
points are 
incorporated in 
unit 

2018-19 RSCEP-R                                                                                                                                                                                          43 

 

the Pedagogy of Love 
which entails having 
strong academics and 
strong social emotional 
supports 

Teachers will use 
Skedula as a tool to 
input grades, 
assignments so scholars 
can monitor their 
progress. 

Subject teacher teams 
will conduct peer 
reviews of shared plans 
with a particular eye 
towards making 
instruction accessible to 
all learners (multiple 
entry point design) 

Create norms to ensure 
positive collaboration, 
reflection and harmony. 
Examples may include: 
Methods of debriefing, 
ensuring non-judgement 
and creating a safe 
space for sharing, 
reflection and growth, 
defining roles of 
alternating teacher 
team meeting leads.  

Establish procedures to 
communicate findings 
and best practices of 
respective teams to the 
larger Wadleigh 
community. 

Provide weekly 
opportunities for staff to 
engage in sharing, 
collaborating and 
demonstrating best 
practices. 

The special education 
teachers, ENL teacher 
and administrative team 
will participate on 

plans/lesson 
plans. 

Professional 
development 
will be 
monitored 
monthly using 
feedback 
sheets. 
Additionally 
the PD 
committee will 
assess and 
revise the PD 
plan as needed 
to adapt it to 
the needs of 
scholars and 
teachers. 

All faculty  All 

September 
2018-June 
2019 

Administrators, School 
Implementation Team 

Review 
strategies, use 
of graphic 
organizers, and 

2018-19 RSCEP-R                                                                                                                                                                                          44 

 

regularly scheduled 
common planning and 
inquiry team meetings 
to ensure that the needs 
of English Language 
Learners, Students with 
Disabilities, and other 
high need student 
groups are being 
addresses with 
appropriately scaffolded 
strategies and multiple 
entry point designs. 

The parent coordinator 
will work with 
counselors to schedule 
meetings with parents 
of priority students. 
Parents will receive 
feedback on classroom 
progress, credit 
accumulation, progress 
toward graduation and 
upcoming common 
assessments and 
Regents exams. 

Through our partnership 
with TC-REACH, parents 
and teachers will be 
provided training with 
(1) Skedula, (2) ways to 
use the tool to (a) 
monitor student 
progress and (b) ways to 
appropriately act on 
that data.. 

All 

All Parents 
with an 
emphasis 
on parents 
of students 
who are 
struggling 

October 
2018-June 
2019 

AP guidance, Parent 
Coordinator, Parent 
Association, Guidance 
Counselors, TC REACH, 
representative teachers 

other UDL 
strategies that 
support diverse 
learners in the 
classroom will 
be evident in 
lesson designs 
and student 
work products. 

Administrative 
team will 
review the logs 
of the guidance 
team to ensure 
that parents 
are meeting 
with guidance 
team. 

Academic 
progress will be 
reviewed by 
advisors and 
goal setting 
sessions will 
produce 
specific and 
achievable next 
steps. 

  
 
4b – Parent and Family Engagement 

How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies 
to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and 
identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 
We will provide a workshop for parents and conduct a fishbowl session so parents can observe how teachers assess 
student work to improve instruction. We will also have skedula workshops with teachers and parents.  
 

 
Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment 

Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including 
human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 

2018-19 RSCEP-R                                                                                                                                                                                          45 

 

● Skedula so scholars and parents can monitor progress 

● Professional development: Dr. Maria Akinyele – Agiri for literacy based strategies in student centered learning along 
with AVID training, StudySync, ALEKS, iRea 

● Use of grading platforms, inquiry driven instruction, backward planning, multiple entry points, AIW, iReady, ALEKS, 
StudySync 

● ORS content coaches, specifically, ELA , mathematics, science, and special education; 

● Staggered teacher schedule; 

● Pro-rata funding; 

● Per Session for Office Hours and After School and Saturday Academy Teachers; 

 
Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 

X 

Tax Levy 

X 

Title I 
SWP 

 

Title I 
1003(a) 

 

Title III 

 

 

Title I TA 

PTA 

Funded 

 

 

P/F Set-
aside 

SIG 
Grant 

 

 

21st Century 

School 

Achievement 

Funding 

X 

 

C4E 

Other 

 
Part 6 – Progress Monitoring  

Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement 
planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 
Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and 
Time-bound. 
 

By February 2019, our interim iReady data will demonstrate a minimum of 3% increase in math proficiency for 
students in grades 6-8; and January Regents scores will reflect a minimum of 2% completion rate.  

 

 

 
Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 
School Scholarship reports and mock regents exams 

 

Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action 
plan, if applicable. 

 

2018-19 RSCEP-R                                                                                                                                                                                          46 

 

Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans 

 

Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and 
nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional 
support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) 
 
Part 1 – Needs Assessment   

Part 1a.  Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice 
Tenet 2 Statement of Practice 
Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one.  Place an “X” in the 
appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 
2.2  The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, 

SOP(s) 

Addressed 

Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive 
of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational 
Plan (RSCEP). 
Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital 
resources. 

2.3 

2.4  The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual 

Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and 
track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 

2.5  Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical 
individual and school-wide practices as defined in the RSCEP (student achievement, curriculum 
and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student 
social and emotional developmental health). 

x 

N/A 

x 

N/A 

 

 

 

 

Part 1b.  Needs/Areas of Focus: 

1.  Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs 

selected above. 

2.  Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs 

selected above. 
Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 

3. 
4.  What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, 

Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? 

Strengths: 

  The school's mission and school goals were articulated and supported by all stakeholders. The goals are 

uniformly known and discussed across the entire school community. As evidenced in the Quality Review 2016-
17, the school leaders consistently communicate high expectations to all staff that is aligned to the Danielson 
Framework for Teaching.  

  The school leader, in collaboration with the programmer, made strategic decisions which enabled teachers to 

collaborate in grade level teams and subject teams, use partnerships such as the Apollo Theater, College For 
Every Students, and Columbia University to support student achievement. As evidenced in the Quality Review 
2016-17, a system of accountability and the use of student data allows the school community and parents kept 
abreast of student progress. 

Areas in need of improvement: 

  The school needs to continue using data to improve students achievement and teacher practices. After 

analyzing the 2016-2017 Advance MOTP teacher observation data, the lowest rated component continues to be 
3b, questioning and discussion techniques. The school needs to improve teacher practice around questioning 
and discussion techniques in order to engage students in meaningful, high level discussions. 

2018-19 RSCEP-R                                                                                                                                                                                          47 

  According to the Progress Monitoring Dashboard report, we need to improve our pedagogy. According to the 

Quality Review 2017-18, our teachers continue to struggle with questioning and discussion. 

 

 
 

 

 
Part 2 – Summative Vision for Effective School Leadership 

What is your vision for effective school leadership at your school? 

Central to our work this year will be our commitment to a restorative school culture that promotes positively, 
scholarship, personal success, accountability, and a safe environment for all. 

 

Our approach to teaching and learning is aligned to the COMMON CORE standards and benchmarks and the Framework 
for Effective Schools and is based on the NYC DoE’s, Handbook for Professional Learning (HPL). The HPL framework 
includes peer collaboration, researched-based instructional practices, modeling, observation, and personal 
accountability. The goal of the HPL is to provide teachers with high-quality, differentiated professional development that 
will positively affect student achievement. Our professional development goals and focus are determined by our data. 
Each spring, our staff analyzes our data from throughout the year and develops building goals aligned to our district 
goals. Our professional development is delivered on Wednesdays and in bi-weekly (2X per week) team meetings, 
throughout the year. Professional development initiatives are determined, planned, and delivered cooperatively by 
teachers and administrators. Given various student needs, constant policy changes, and multiple developments in 
pedagogy, we have made a conscious effort to avoid fragmented initiatives that result in shallow learning. We are 
committed to align efforts to a single focus for three to five years. During the 2017-2018 school year, we were directed 
to use DataWise as the tool for analyzing student work. However, after an end of year review with our Academic Task 
Force, we as a school community opted to revert to the use of AIW (Authentic Intellectual Work) as we believe this will 
improve teacher practice and result in increased student achievement.  

 

We will use AIW to improve student achievement through teacher collaboration (within and across departments) to 
improve student tasks, teacher instruction, and the quality of student work. AIW rubrics will be used to guide teams as 
they discuss classroom practice and provide quality feedback to teachers.  

 

During faculty, department, and team meetings, the school leaders will spend time reinforcing the shared vision of the 
school community. The Principal in collaboration with the Director of TC-REACH will develop accountable benchmarks 
that are aligned with the school’s goals and RSCEP. The principal will meet monthly with TC REACH to monitor the 
progress of the goals. TC REACH will participate in the inquiry team, attendance team, professional development, ELT 
and planning session with staff. TC REACH will develop a strategic advisory curriculum with the staff to address the 
student SEL. The reinforcement of language will be deliberate and meaningful as it relates to the benchmark goals.  

 

Communication and Accountability are the Keys. The school leader’s first path of communication is through the weekly 
cabinet meetings. Members of the cabinet are responsible for overseeing different areas of the school structures and 
will be responsible for articulating the progress that they are meeting toward the specific benchmarks. The instructional 
members of the AIW team will lead inter-visitation rounds with the goal of providing their peers with authentic 
feedback to improve teacher practice. Feedback will be timely and actionable. In addition, Assistant Principal will help 

2018-19 RSCEP-R                                                                                                                                                                                          48 

 

teachers to improve pedagogy and implement the feedback. We will provide professional development to support 
teachers with questioning and discussion. Because stakeholders are on more than one team, communication will be 
improved. In an effort to promote transparency and trust, all minutes from teams (attendance, guidance, academic task 
force, etc.) will be shared and accessible to all staff. We will continue to improve by the process to use the G-Drive as a 
primary vehicle for school-wide communication. 

In collaboration with the administration team, DSR, CSD, and programmer, we are working to ensure that students will 
get the classes needed to prepare for college and career using the New Visions Data Portal. In addition, through 
Extended Learning Time (ELT), our students will have opportunities after school to improve their scholastic aptitudes.  

Getting on the Same Page. The administration will conduct rounds of informal observations to calibrate classroom 
observations. Schedules will be created to ensure that observations are done in a timely manner and that actionable 
feedback is given in a timely manner. The administration team will review the observation reports to strategically 
determine which teachers need additional support in Domain 3. Teachers will be provided with a tools that can support 
them in improving their pedagogical skills as well as providing professional development. 

The school leader in collaboration with the administrative team, the Academic Task Force, Guidance Team, TC Reach 
partnership will develop benchmarks so that we can monitor the progress of the school. The progress will be shared in 
teacher team meetings and through parent engagement so that all stakeholders are hold a common set of expectations 
for and of our students. Our school data specialist will gather data from various sources such as attendance, formative 
and summative assessments, scholarship reports, and OORs reports which will enable the Academic Task force and 
Guidance team to strategically make adjustments to improve instruction, attendance, behavior and address the needs 
of Scholars. 

The school leader will provide a matrix of responsibilities to the administrative team and to the Community Director 
which are aligned to the school goals. The Cabinet which includes the Community Director and we will meet once a 
week to track the progress of their responsibilities which are aligned to the school goals. 

 
 

 

 

 

 
 

On which aspects of your own leadership do you plan to focus for the upcoming school year? 
I will be using the text, Commitment to having difficult conversations in respectful ways: Douglas Stone is author of 
Difficult Conversations: I will direct my focus to the following elements: 

1. Begin from a place of curiosity and respect, and stop worrying about being liked 

2. Focus on what you’re hearing, not what you’re saying - note the issue and ask why 

3. Be direct- Get to the point and have frank, respectful conversations 

4. Don’t put it off. 

5. Expect a positive outcome. 

 

2018-19 RSCEP-R                                                                                                                                                                                          49 

 
 

What is your vision for ensuring that everyone in your schools has a normed and shared understanding of the school’s 
vision, mission, and instructional focus?  
September orientation and January Reflections - Twice next year, our entire school will engage in visioning exercises 
such that Wadleigh begins to know itself as a visual and performing arts school with a strong academic program. Our 
vision for ourselves will be captured in "the Wadleigh Teacher Profile," a tool we will use for on boarding new staff, 
moving forward. 

 

 
 

What is your vision for developing differentiated leadership throughout your school? How will you utilize teacher 
leaders to build broad capacity within your school?  
Wadleigh develops differentiated leadership by utilizing all stakeholders and garnering input from all constituency 
groups. Teacher leaders are represented in all major content areas and provide support to administration through 
collaboration with colleagues as: 

 
· Mentors 
· instructional Models 
· Curriculum Facilitators 
· Professional Development Facilitators  

 

 

How will the leader foster collaborative school governance processes, and ensure full family participation together 
with other stakeholders? 
Leadership will foster school governance through the following teams: 

 
· Cabinet Level Inquiry 
· Instructional Leadership Team  
· School Leadership Team 
· Community Engagement Team (COSA, PC, CSD, CBO) 

 
All of the aforementioned teams will target varying specific needs of the school learning community through 
collaboration and shared decision making. All teams will utilize open and reciprocal communication. 

 

 

How often will the school leader conduct observations?  How quickly will school leader share actionable feedback with 
teachers? How will school leader ensure accuracy and provide support to teachers based on observation feedback?  
Frequency 

Feedback Turnaround 

Accuracy 

Mandated 4x a year 

Within one week 

 

 

 

Follow-up with teachers to gauge how well they are 
incorporated the actionable feedback provided. 

 

What kind of evidence based systems would a school leader put in place to ensure that the school and individuals 
continues to improve? What kind of supports? Who would he/she collaborate with? 

2018-19 RSCEP-R                                                                                                                                                                                          50 

 

Evidence-Based System 

Support(s) 

Collaborator(s) 

Teachers will use assessments to 
determine if students are achieving 
academic progress. 

Teachers will revise curriculum, review 
IEPs, and adjust lesson plans to 
support student's learning. 

Teacher Teams 

Teachers will review, implement, and 
revise (as necessary) IEPs 

inter-visitations, coaches, 

admin, DSR, co-teachers, renewal 
coaches 

  
How will you organize student and teacher programs to ensure students’ needs are met? Fiscal capital?  

We will program students in the appropriate classes and provide ELT and Teacher Hours when necessary for additional 
academic support. Programs for teachers will allow teachers to meet in both grade level and subject teams.  

 

 
Part 3 – Annual Goal 

Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this 
element of the Framework for Great Schools – Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be consistent with the 
expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – 
Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact 
meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. 
By June 2019, there will be an Instructional Leadership Team that will engage twice a month in professional learning 
around student centered instruction that will govern departmental meetings, instruction and student work products 
leading to an 5% increase in regents completion rate. 

 

 

Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Effective School Leadership Annual Goal: 
Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Effective 
School Leadership Annual Goal? 

List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve 

Rigorous Instruction: 3.0 

Collaborative Teachers: 3.0 

Increase the level of students being promoted in year 2 and year 3 

  

2018-19 RSCEP-R                                                                                                                                                                                          51 

 
Part 4 – Action Plan 

Key Initiatives: 
Concisely indicate the 
key initiatives (up to 
five) that your school 
will implement to 
achieve the identified 
goal for this 
Framework for Great 
Schools element. 

All teachers will 
receive targeted 
feedback in order to 
improve pedagogy in 
questioning and 
discussion, 
engagement, and 
assessment. However, 
teachers who have a 
TIP and are 
consistently rated 
ineffective and 
developing will meet 
with their instructional 
assistant principal and 
principal to target 
areas of concern. 

Teachers who have 
TIPs will be given 
outside PD 
opportunities and/or 
on site support in 
order to strengthen 
their teacher practice 
to support student 
learning. 

Administrators will 
also provide teacher 
coverage so 
ineffective and/or or 
developing teachers 
can visit other classes 
of teachers who are 
effective or highly 
effective. The 

How will you 
assess the 
interim 
progress of 
the 
initiative?(ex. 
decrease in 
serious 
incidents, 
increase in 
students 
participating 
Big Sibs 
program) 

-Improved 
teacher 
ratings on 
Danielson 3b, 
questioning 
and discussion 
techniques, 3c 
Engagement, 
or 3b 
Assessment 

Target 
Group(s) 
Who will be 
targeted? 

Which Benchmark(s) 
indicated above 
does this initiative 
target? 

Timeline 
What is the start 
and end date? 

Key Personnel 
Who is responsible for 
implementing and 
overseeing the 
activity/strategy? 
(include school, 
educational consultants 
and/or CBO staff) 

 

 

 

 

September 2018-
June 2019. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Ongoing, all year 

Principal, Assistant 
Principals 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Staff with 
TIP and/or 
consistent 
ineffective 
and 
developing 
ratings and 
teachers 
with 
effective or 
highly 
effective 
rating in 3B, 
3c, or 3d, 
and lead 
teachers 
who will be 
able to 
support 
their 
colleagues 

 

All 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Collaborative 
Teachers 

2018-19 RSCEP-R                                                                                                                                                                                          52 

 

effective/highly 
effective teachers will 
visit their colleagues' 
classes to determine if 
they are implementing 
what they learned in 
their colleagues' 
classrooms. This will 
ensure accountability 
in order to improve 
teacher pedagogy. 

The school will provide 
professional 
development in 
Domain 3. For 
example, for 
Questioning and 
Discussion we will 
provide tools, books 
(Quality Questioning 
by Jackie Acree), 
articles to support 
teachers with 
questioning and 
discussion. In addition, 
teachers who are 
consistently effective 
in questioning and 
discussion will be 
targeted for classroom 
inter-visitations to 
support teachers who 
are developing and/or 
ineffective. We will 
also provide tools for 
teachers to assess 
students in the 
classroom. 

 

The school will 
continue to use The 
Critical Thinking 
Wheels to support 
students with 
disabilities, English 
Language Learners as 
well as students who 
are high achievers. 
The Critical Thinking 
Wheels will provide 

Students 

Rigorous instruction  Ongoing, 

Teachers 

September 2018-
June 2019 

-Teacher 
feedback, 
scholarship 
reports, 
inquiry team 
findings. 

2018-19 RSCEP-R                                                                                                                                                                                          53 

 

- 

 

September2018–
June 2019 

- 

 

teachers with the 
tools to help students 
become better with 
questioning and 
discussion. 

Administration will 
monitor teacher 
growth in this area 
through Advance to 
determine the degree 
to which the goal is 
being met. 

By the completion of 
the fall semester, the 
cabinet will reassess 
to ensure that 
teachers are making 
positive growth within 
this element of the 
Danielson framework. 
Teachers who are not, 
will be given more 
intensive supports 
through the CBO for 
the spring semester. 

All observations 
completed will have 
actionable feedback 
and next steps, with a 
particular focus on this 
Danielson element. 

  
 
4b – Parent and Family Engagement 

How  will  your  school  engage  parents/families  and  support  their  understanding  of  Effective  School  Leadership  and 
strategies  to  promote  parent  leadership  and  engagement  in  order  to  support  their  children  at  home?  Include  the 
timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 
We will have workshops four times a year with parents and teachers to discuss academic achievement.  
 

 
Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment 

Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including 
human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 
Teachers' schedules will be adjusted to allow teachers to participate in common planning, professional development 
and meet after school and on Saturday. 

● School net will be used to monitor observation data from Advance (priority focus) 

 
Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 

2018-19 RSCEP-R                                                                                                                                                                                          54 

 

X 

Tax Levy 

X 

Title I 
SWP 

 

Title I 
1003(a) 

 

Title III 

 

 

Title I TA 

PTA 

Funded 

 

 

P/F Set-
aside 

SIG 
Grant 

 

 

21st Century 

School 

Achievement 

Funding 

X 

 

C4E 

Other 

 
Part 6 – Progress Monitoring  

Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement 
planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 
Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and 
Time-bound. 
By February 2019, we will review the scholarship report to determine if there is an increase in the number of 10th 
and 11th graders earning credits for the fall term 2018. 

 
Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 
Danielson Frameworks observation reports and ADVANCE data and scholarship reports and interim progress reports 
to ensure that we are on target in meeting our goal for June 2019. 

 
Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action 
plan, if applicable. 

2018-19 RSCEP-R                                                                                                                                                                                          55 

 

Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans 

 
Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a 
welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. 
(Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) 
 
Part 1 – Needs Assessment   

Part 1a.  Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice 
Tenet 6 Statement of Practice 
Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one.  Place an “X” in the 
appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 
6.2  The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their 

high expectations for student academic achievement.  

6.3  The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and 
community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to 
augment learning. 

6.4  The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and 

provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to 
support student success. 

6.5  The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school 

community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and 
empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services 
for their children. 

Part 1b.  Needs/Areas of Focus: 

SOP(s) 

Addressed 

x 

N/A 

N/A 

x 

 

 

 

 

1.  Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs 

selected above. 

2.  Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs 

selected above. 
Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 

3. 
4.  What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, 

Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? 

Strengths:  

● The school leader and teachers regularly communicate to parents and students the school’s priority and plans for 
college and career. The school community proactively develops opportunities to engage students, families and 
community in conversations regarding high academic expectation.  

● As evidenced in the 2017-2018 data, credit accumulation is at 94.2% for history, 88.4% for science, 87% for math and 
89.9% for ELA. 

As evidenced In the 2017-2018 Quality Review Report, parents shared that the school uses Skedula, Kinvolved, and 
parent newsletters, to communicate with families about school issues and events along with personal phone calls to the 
home.. The staff communicates regularly with parents concerning student progress, achievements and needs.  

 

Areas in need of improvement: 

●Despite of our current efforts to bring parents into our school during official parent-teacher conferences, last school 
year we had approximately 210 parent contacts during our those times. This includes multiple visits by some parents. 

2018-19 RSCEP-R                                                                                                                                                                                          56 

 

Anecdotal data from parents indicate that they would be interested in strengthening the partnerships that they have 
with the school. Communication needs to be consistent, structured, and timely.  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Part 2 – Summative Vision for Strong Family and Community Ties 

What is your vision for having strong family and community ties at your school? 

We will increase the number of parents participating in student-led parent-teacher conferences by at least 10% in 
comparison to 2017-2018 school year. This endeavor will build on our culture of shared responsibility and accountability 
while creating a space to support student success.  

 

• During Advisory sessions, students will be provided with the tools to assist them in leading conversations with their 
parents/guardians regarding their academic strengths/challenges and their progress. Students will be able to outline 
their plans for making continued progress.  

 

• The Wadleigh School community will continue to develop a culture of academic partnership with organizations by 
focusing on access to parents resources. The school, in addition to Teacher’s College REACH program, will provide 
activities and workshops for parents that impact students’ achievement. The school will continue to use Skedula and 
Kinvolved, as tools for communicating data with parents and students about students' academic progress and 
attendance status. The data in Skedula will be shared with families regularly during each marking period in a productive, 
proactive way that focus on the students’ strengths and areas which need to be improved. 

 

• The school will conduct two parent orientation workshops for new and returning parents as part of our efforts to 
provide a welcoming and inclusive environment. In the beginning of the school year, parents will be invited to meet 
teachers and support staff in an informal/social setting. We will outline opportunities that exist or are being created for 
parents to become or continue to be full partners with the school. 

• Teachers will be encouraged to make positive outreach to parents. Guidance Counselors, the school’s Community 
School Director, as well as NY Foundling Clinicians will also work to develop partnerships with parents that will help 
them to support students’ social-emotional and academic needs.  

 

• The advisors, guidance counselors, parent coordinator and Wadleigh’s Community School Director will collaborate 
with the PTA president, Community Coordinator and other school staff to engage families in activities that develop their 

2018-19 RSCEP-R                                                                                                                                                                                          57 

 

capacity to support their children’s academic progress. Parents will be surveyed to source interest. Based on this data, 
the school will partner with the necessary individuals and/or organizations to execute these activities.  

 

• Families will be encouraged to participate in family Events that bridge school and family communities. Events may 
include Assembly Awards Ceremony to recognize academic achievement and attendance, family art workshops, 
theatre/dance/ music performances, academic & celebratory carnivals, or cultural excursions.  

 

• The Parent Coordinator along with the Community Director will distribute a survey to determine the types of adult 
programs that could be offered through the various partnerships we have at Wadleigh. 

 

• The Community School Director will offer parent workshops to explain the system used to communicate student data 
and progress. The parents have access to Skedula/PupilPath, and will be able to communicate with their child’s teacher, 
advisor, and/or guidance counselor. 

 

 

Within the Community School model, how will families be welcomed into the school and made a part of the school 
community?  What support will administrators, teachers, school staff and school safety officers be given to help create 
a welcoming environment?   Will there be a dedicated space for families in the school? 
 
At Wadleigh we create a welcoming school environment by offering new parents and students an opportunity to visit 
our school during the spring term. We will identify Scholar Ambassadors that will assist with tours, letter writing to new 
students, and other necessary community building activities.  

We also offer a new parent/student orientation during the summer where they will be provided with a Parent/Scholar 
Handbook. As soon as the family member enters our school community, school safety and staff members greet them 
warmly. Students will be matched with a Scholar Buddy to help navigate the first few weeks of school. 

We also hold a curriculum night in September so parents can meet with their child’s academic teachers and advisors; 
demonstrating a supportive learning environment.  

 

 

 How will the school identify and develop families to take leadership roles in school decision making/school 
governance structures? 
The school has established a Community School Team comprised of a group of Wadleigh parents that will work closely 
with the CSD and other organizations to improvement family support and involvement. 

The community will also assist in decision making and support of the school through the Wadleigh Advisory Board. The 
Advisory Board will be comprised of various stakeholders form a variety of constituencies.  

 

 
 

How will the school engage the community and families? How will they ensure that teachers are able to learn from 
families about the children being taught? 

2018-19 RSCEP-R                                                                                                                                                                                          58 

 

The school will schedule, as in the previous year, Parent Town Halls and Community School Forums. These gatherings 
will give parents the opportunity to share their ideas about school improvement as it relates to the school culture, 
student attendance, physical and mental health, curriculum enrichment, community partnerships, and family 
engagement. TC REACH in partnership with Kinvolved, NY Foundling, and Beacon will also facilitate professional 
development sessions for school-based staff with specific focus on family engagement and socio-emotional 
development. 

 

 

What types of supports does the school provide to families to encourage them to take an active role in what their 
child is learning? 

Type of Support 

Rationale 

Open school night, parent workshops, student-led 
parent/teacher conferences. 

Communicating to parents on a regular basis will result in 
parents being more involved in their child’s education and 
overall well being. 

- 

- 

  
 

- 

- 

How do families partner with the school and CBO to support student success?  Will there be dedicated space for 
families?   
Family partnerships with 
school: 

Our families partner with our guidance team. 

 

Family partnerships with CBO: 

Our family also partners with the NY Foundling, Beacon and TC-Reach. They offer 
additional support for students who have social emotional issues. 

Is there dedicated space for 
these partnerships? 

 

Yes, we have provided a space for our community partner. 

 

 

 

What is your vision for the role the school will take in providing access adult education classes within the community? 

We will provide resources for parents if they are interested in learning about adult education classes in the community. 

 

What data and student progress feedback loops will be present at the school to ensure that families knowledgeable of 
their children’s scholastic success? 
We will use Skedula to determine the percentage of parents that have access to their child’s progress. School leadership 
will insist that teachers and staff communicate grades and student progress on a regular basis. Alerts will be sent when 
the student’s performance is below grade level prior to the end of the marking period.  

Hard copies of progress reports will be forwarded to parents after every marking period to ensure that parents are kept 
abreast of their child’s grades. In addition, KINVOLVED will be used as a vehicle to monitor attendance and share data 
with parents.  

Monthly attendance reports will be sent home to all parents so they are aware of the number of times their child has 
been absent and/or late to school.  

 

 
Part 3 – Annual Goal 

2018-19 RSCEP-R                                                                                                                                                                                          59 

 

Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this 
element of the Framework for Great Schools – Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be consistent with 
the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – 
Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact 
meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. 
By June 2019, we will decrease school-wide suspensions by 5% using the NY Foundling's mindfulness curriculum which 
will address the social emotional needs of our students in weekly sessions that teach our children relaxation techniques 
through breathing and self reflection exercises. 

 

 

Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Strong Family and Community Ties Annual Goal: 
Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Strong 
Family and Community Ties Annual Goal? 

Increase in attendance. 

Improved progress toward graduation. 

Confirmed college, career, and civic readiness. 

  

2018-19 RSCEP-R                                                                                                                                                                                          60 

Target 
Group(s) 
Who will be 
targeted? 

Which Benchmark(s) 
indicated above does 
this initiative target? 

Timeline 
What is the 
start and 
end date? 

Key Personnel 
Who is responsible for 
implementing and 
overseeing the 
activity/strategy? 
(include school, 
educational consultants 
and/or CBO staff) 

Parents and 
community 

attendance and 
graduation rate 

September 
2018 – June 
2019 

TC REACH CSD and 
Community Coordinator 

Parents and 
families 

All 

September 
2018 – June 
2019 

TC REACH CSD and 
Community Coordinator 
ESL coordinator, 

How will you 
assess the 
interim 
progress of the 
initiative?(ex. 
decrease in 
serious 
incidents, 
increase in 
students 
participating 
Big Sibs 
program) 

By January 
2019, parent 
participation 
will improve by 
10% as 
measured by an 
increase in 
attendance at 
back to school 
night, student-
led 
parent/teacher 
conferences 
and other 
parent focused 
activities 

By June 2019, 
parent 
participation 
will improve by 
10% as 
measured by an 
increase in 
attendance at 
parent 
meetings, 
conferences, 
and activities. 

 
Part 4 – Action Plan 

Key Initiatives: 
Concisely indicate the 
key initiatives (up to 
five) that your school 
will implement to 
achieve the identified 
goal for this 
Framework for Great 
Schools element. 

● Strengthening 
Intentional 
Communication for 
Parent Engagement – in 
conjunction with 
Achievement Initiative, 
provide workshops or 
group conversations 
around inviting parents 
and helping parent’s 
with tools to assist their 
child in succeeding at 
school. Topics could 
include: reflective 
listening, parent 
invitations, and conflict 
resolution. 

●Supporting Academic 
Growth Workshops that 
assist parents to learn 
how to use Skedula in 
order to monitor their 
child's progress. 
College, Career, and 
Civic Readiness – 
workshops around 
helping parents 
understand and then 
prepare their students 
with planning and 
actions to support their 
children in order to gain 
access to higher 
education. 
Strengthening the 
Family – in conjunction 
with Beacon, provide 
workshops to help 

2018-19 RSCEP-R                                                                                                                                                                                          61 

Parents and 
families 

Strong Family and 
Community Ties 

September 
2018 – June 
2019 

REACH – CBO 

Community school 
director/Parent 
Coordinator 

Increased score 
on the 2017 LES 
results in this 
particular area 
by no fewer 
than 5 points 

 

parents understand 
their family’s 
communication styles, 
individual contributions 
and overall family 
dynamics to help foster 
healthy family 
relationships. 

A deep dive into the 
school’s learning 
environment survey 
revealed that our 
lowest scoring area was 
the one concerning 
parental participation 
in preparing school-
wide events and 
volunteering. 
Therefore, we will offer 
workshops and events 
for parent coordinators 
to support their design 
and implementation of 
intentional family 
engagement in current 
and future plans to 
create sustainable 
relationships between 
the school, the student, 
the family and their 
community. 
Workshops, events, and 
supportive structures 
for parent leaders will 
be co-facilitated by 
parent volunteers and 
will serve to further 
enable the social 
networking of parents 
in, increase parent-
parent relations, and 
promote a sense of 
belonging and 
ownership of the 
school. in order to 
strengthen family 
engagement. family’s 
communication styles, 
individual contributions 
and overall family 
dynamics to help foster 
healthy family 
relationships, and 

2018-19 RSCEP-R                                                                                                                                                                                          62 

 

promote a sense of 
belonging and 
ownership of the 
school. in order to 
strengthen family 
engagement. 

The community 
coordinator in 
collaboration with TC 
REACH will develop 
workshops and events 
to support the design 
and implementation of 
intentional family 
engagement in current 
and future plans to 
create sustainable 
relationships between 
the school, the student, 
the family and their 
community. These 
workshops will focus on 
topics such as ESL, SEL, 
strengthening the 
family, college, career, 
and civic readiness and 
providing them with 
copies of tools we have 
given students to 
support their learning. 

Increase the number of 
parent volunteers to 
shadow our children in 
classes and provide 
feedback on instruction 
using the "parent 
friendly" danielson 
rubric 

Parents and 
families 

Strong Family and 
Community Ties- 

September 
2018 – June 
2019 

Community Coordinator, 
TC REACH, Community 
Director, Parent-Teacher 
Association 

Increase in 
Parent 
participation 
rates 

Parents and 
families 

All 

Sept - June  Admin and faculty 

increase parent 
participation 
rate  

  

 
Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment 

Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including 
human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 
Renewal funds and PTA funds will be set aside for workshops and supplies to facilitate workshops. 

 

Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 

X 

Tax Levy 

X 

Title I 
SWP 

 

Title I 
1003(a) 

 

Title III 

 

 

Title I TA 

PTA 

Funded 

 

 

P/F Set-
aside 

SIG 
Grant 

 

 

21st Century 

School 

Achievement 

Funding 

X 

 

C4E 

Other 

2018-19 RSCEP-R                                                                                                                                                                                          63 

 
 
 
Part 6 – Progress Monitoring  

Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement 
planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 
Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and 
Time-bound. 
 

By January 2019, suspensions will decrease by a minimum of 2.5%. 

 
Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 
We will review the number of events we offered to parents and review the attendance sheets to determine if we 
made progress towards our goal. 

 
Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action 
plan, if applicable. 

2018-19 RSCEP-R                                                                                                                                                                                          64 

 

Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Program Description 

 

Directions: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) activities are directly aligned to the elements of the Framework for Great 
Schools, Rigorous Instruction, Supportive Environments, and Strong Family and Community Ties. ELT provides enriching 
educational experiences that happen outside of the traditional school day and blend skill acquisition, relationship-
building and fun to foster academic and social-emotional growth. Summer learning, afterschool programming, and 
extended-day ELT models, when well-implemented, play a critical role in supporting students in all grades and ensuring 
that they graduate from high school, college and career ready. SED requires that Priority schools offer a minimum of 200 
additional student contact hours as Expanded Learning Time in addition to the current mandated length of 900 hours of 
instruction per year (25 hours per week) in grades K-6 and 990 hours of instruction per year (27.5 hours per week) in 
grades 7-12. Effective ELT models will blend school staff with community partners, and will provide a balanced 
curriculum that can include ELA, math, STEM, arts, physical activity, and leadership development. Complete the sections 
on this page to demonstrate how the school will meet these requirements.  
 
Part 1 – ELT Program Goal(s) 

Describe the summative goal(s) of the ELT program for the 2018-19 school year. Goals for ELT should align to the 
Renewal Benchmarks.  How will the school will ensure that all students’ individual needs are served during the 
Renewal ELT and how the school’s vision for ELT will impact both academic achievement and social emotional 
growth? Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound.   
January of 2019 - through the design, implementation, and monitoring of a comprehensive ELT program that includes 
opportunities for academic remediation and arts-based programming - we intend to increase student participation in 
Saturday programming by at least 25% as measured by attendance records.  

 

 
Part 2 – ELT Program Type 

Is the ELT program voluntary or compulsory? 

X 

Voluntary 

 

Compulsory 

Renewal ELT – Describe what accountability structures the school will employ to ensure participation of all students, 
including special populations, will participate fully in Renewal ELT. 
Additional ELT - If there is a voluntary ELT program in addition to the compulsory Renewal ELT, indicate how you will 
actively encourage the participation of all students, with the goal of serving at least 50% of students. 
Students who have completed course work but have not pass the NYS Regents will be programmed for tutoring 
session  

Students who have failed courses in math, ELA, science, and social studies will be programmed for PM School 

All ninth grade students will be required to take their art classes at 9 th period 

Middle school and high school students will have the opportunity to take extracurricular classes  

Middle school students with a grade lower than level 3 on the NYS MS assessment will participate in remediation for 
ELA and math 

Students will be offered the possibility to register for Saturday school 

Students on track will audition for fall musical, or participate in arts enrichment with teacher recommendations 

 

 
Part 3 – ELT Program Description 

Target Population: The ELT program for a Renewal School will be offered to all students in the school. 

Describe how the school will meet the following SED requirements for an ELT program: 

2018-19 RSCEP-R                                                                                                                                                                                          65 

 

How will the school integrate academics, enrichment, and skill development through hands-on experiences that make 
learning relevant and engaging?   
How will CBO staff and the school’s teachers be integrated to provide a seamless learning day? 

  Offer a range of activities that capture student interest and strengthen student engagement in learning so as 

to promote higher attendance, reduces risk for retention or drop out, and increases the likelihood of 
graduation. 

  Actively address the unique learning needs and interests of all types of students, especially those who may 

benefit from approaches and experiences not offered in the traditional classroom setting. 

  What new content areas and opportunities will be offered to students? How will the school ensure all IEP and 

language mandates are met during ELT? 

  Contain components designed to improve student academic, social, and emotional outcomes, including 

opportunities for enrichment programs such as in music and art. 

  Ensure instruction in any core academic subject offered in the program will be delivered under the 

supervision of a teacher who is NYS certified in that particular content area. 

  How will community educators receive professional development?  Are there plans to provide joint PD to 

school faculty and community partner staff? 

  What content will be led by pedagogical staff and what content will be led by CBO partners? 
  How will the school best utilize CBO partners to impact student achievement? 
  How will effective outreach be conducted to families? 
  How will programming be made easily accessible to students and families in order to encourage 

participation? 

Using priority focus and Extended Learning Time funding sources, the school will provide credit recovery for all core 
subjects (math, ELA, social studies and science) using PLATO. The ELT classes will be offered throughout the day, after 
school and Saturday. We will offer Saturday Academy for regents prep and offer prep classes and enrichment for 
Middle School students. Students will participate in enrichment/socio-emotional support activities such as arts 
production (musical, visual art club, cooking club, and drama club ), and the oral history project. TC REACH will 
provide additional ELT services such as data-driven tutoring interventions, enrichment through CBOs such as Chess 
Kids and ScriptEd, summer bridge for incoming 9 th graders and college essay preparation. REACH and the 
administration will collaborate on designing professional development for teachers and community partners. Parent 
outreach will be done by teachers, guidance counselors, parent coordinator, community school director and 
volunteer parents. 

 

 
Part 4 – ELT Program Implementation and Oversight 

Part 4a. Who will implement the ELT program? Who will oversee the program? 
1. 

Indicate the key personnel that will be responsible for implementing and overseeing the ELT program, 
including school-based staff and any high-quality community partners that will be involved. 
If applicable, describe the scope of involvement of all community partners and how the joint ELT program is 
structured. 
How will the school assess the impact of ELT on individual student achievement and social emotional 
development?   

2. 

3. 

Key personnel responsible for the implementation and overseeing the ELT program will be school administration and 
site coordinator. 

Students’ progress will be assessed using the mid-year and end of year benchmarks in the RSCEP. We will also do a 
mid-year review of enrollment and attendance in ELT programming. 

 
Part 4b. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. 
The Summer Bridge program will be implemented July – August. 

 

 

2018-19 RSCEP-R                                                                                                                                                                                          66 

 
Part 5 – ELT Budget and Resource Alignment 

Part 5a. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to 
implement the ELT program. 
Using the compensation time posting we will post ELT positions for math, ELA, science and social studies in the high 
school. Posting in the middle school will be for math and ELA (guided reading). TC REACH will provide graduate 
students to implement some programming, and will support subcontracts with other CBOs to provide Regents Prep 
and MS Saturday academy (Follow Us to Success), plus enrichment (ScriptEd, RoboFun, YANY). 

 
Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support the ELT Program.  
Note: If the program is funded by 21st Century Community Center Learning Funds, it must be offered in conjunction 
with a high quality, high capacity community partner.   

 

 

21st 

Century 

Title I 
1003(a) 

X 

Tax 
Levy 

 

Title III 

 

 

Title I 
SWP 

PTA 

Funded 

 

 

Title I TA 

X 

P/F Set-aside 

SIG 
Grant 

School 

 

Achievement 

Funding 

X 

X 

C4E 

Other 

 
Part 6 – ELT Progress Monitoring  

Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement 
planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 
Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and 
Time-bound and aligned to the school’s Renewal Benchmarks 
By February 2019, there will be an minimum of 12% increase in the number of students attending Saturday academic 
programs. 

 
Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 
We will measure these goals using the student sorter to check for credit accumulation and Regents rates, and 
Kinvolved to check for attendance rates. 

 
  
Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action 
plan, if applicable. 

 

2018-19 RSCEP-R                                                                                                                                                                                          67 

 

Section 7: Community School Description  

Directions: The Community School program is directly aligned to the Framework for Great Schools element – Strong 
Family and Community Ties. 
 
Part 1 – The Community School Program Goal(s) 

Indicate the summative goal(s) of the Community School program for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct 
the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound.  Meeting your SMART goal 
should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement 
Benchmarks. 
By June 2019, teachers, students, and parents will be provided with a range of activities (i.e. professional 
development for teachers, expanded learning opportunities & programming for physical and mental wellness for 
students, and workshops for to support students' academic and social-emotional needs) that will result in a 5% 
improvement in chronic absenteeism at the middle school and high school, a 5% improvement in graduation rates, 
and a 5% improvement in ELA and math outcomes in grades 6 - 8. 

 

 

Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Community School Program Annual Goal: 
Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your 
Community School Program Annual Goal? 

List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve 

Performance Index Ela 

Graduation rate 

Attendance rate 

  
Part 2 – Community School Program Description 

Part 2a. Identify the CBO partnerships that you will develop, their target student population(s), and scope of the 
services provided. As well as supporting schools’ supportive environment and attendance work, CBO’s should be 
helping to support your school’s instructional focus. 

CBO Partnership 

Target Population 

Scope of Service 

TC REACH 

Whole school 

NY Foundling 

130 Students 

Beacon/SCAN 

Whole school 

The REACH initiative focuses on school 
leadership, pedagogical practices, 
expanded learning experiences, 
physical and mental health, and family 
engagement. REACH subcontracts with 
other CBOs (e.g., NY Foundling, Follow 
Us to Success) to help support these 
areas of work. The CSD will participate 
directly in initiatives for attendance, 
credit accumulation and graduation 
benchmarks, and coordinate the other 
community school efforts. 

AI, working with NY Foundling and TC 
REACH, will provide mental health 
workers, and support an advisory 
program that focuses on academic skill 
building, SEL, and college/career prep. 

Beacon/SCAN, through DYCD, will 
provide additional after school and 

2018-19 RSCEP-R                                                                                                                                                                                          68 

 

- 

  

- 

- 

school day ELO/ELT opportunities for 
students. 

Part 2b. Describe how the school will meet the NYCDOE requirements for a Community School in the School Renewal 
program. 
1. 

Renewal Schools are expected to partner with a community-based partner organization (CBO) and together 
with members of the School Leadership Team, hire a Community School Director. The Director will lead 
implementation of the asset and needs  assessment process, and other critically important coordinating 
activities. Indicate how you will leverage this aspect of the work. 
Renewal Schools are expected to personalize the needs of all students, through strategic programming and 
services, as determined by the asset and needs  assessment, and must also offer Expanded Learning Time 
(ELT) and mental health programming. In completing this section, ensure that you think about how: (1) the 
right services are provided to the right students and families at the right time; and (2) how you will seamlessly 
coordinate services with instructional programming happening throughout and outside of the school day. 
Indicate how you will implement this work, and describe other programming you anticipate to be in place to 
strengthen this initiative. 
Renewal Schools are expected to emerge as Partnership Schools, which are places where parents and families 
feel welcome,  actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of their 
schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. Monthly meetings and Community 
School Forums engaging families and community stakeholders will be a critical part of this  family 
engagement strategy. Describe how you will implement this aspect of the work. 
Renewal School Principals are expected to meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, 
select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual 
students. Data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter - and training will be available for schools to use. 
Indicate how you will implement this aspect of the work. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

Wadleigh and REACH will continuously collaborate to ensure that the Community School program activities meet the 
NYC DOE requirements for a Community School. In Spring 2015, Wadleigh selected Teachers College, Columbia 
University’s REACH initiative as its lead CBO under the School Renewal program. REACH subsequently recruited and 
hired Mr. Habib Bangura as the school’s Community School Director and in 2018-19, Ms. Kimberly Downing will 
assume this role. As part of the REACH model, Wadleigh has engaged in an annual school improvement planning 
process that includes a needs and asset assessment accomplished through the REACH compilation of the annual data-
based school case study that reflects information across the five key areas to identifyy assets, challenges and trends 
that is used to inform school planning efforts. The entire REACH team, including the Community School Director, and 
the school’s leadership team are involved in this process.  

 

The school’s ELT program has been structured to provide an array of academic offerings that primarily align to 
remediation, credit recovery, Regents preparation, and college readiness. These ELT strands were established by the 
school leaders in response to an examination of the student data that illustrated these areas as students’ greatest 
needs in terms of making progress to graduation. Students were subsequently assigned to the different offerings 
based on a review of their NYSED 2017 exam outcomes at the middle school level and their transcript outcomes (i.e. 
missing credits and Regents pass rates) at the high school level. The school subsequently collaborated with REACH to 
provide expanded learning activities after the mandated ELT to ensure that all students continue to have access to 
other programming, particularly activities that emphasize the arts so that the school can continue to strengthen this 
key focus of its mission and vision. 

The school has incorporated the Community School Director into its School Leadership Team. The REACH Family 
Engagement Coordinator and Community School Director work together to develop and administer surveys to 
parents to begin to obtain their input around the different topics. REACH will facilitate an annual parent focus group 
forum in Spring 2019, which is a key element of its model to provide parents with another opportunity to provide 

2018-19 RSCEP-R                                                                                                                                                                                          69 

 

feedback. Additionally, the REACH Family Engagement Coordinator and Community School Director work with the 
Parent Association Leadership and the Parent Coordinator as well as its key partners to develop, implement, and 
monitor a family engagement calendar of activities that reflect REACH’s four pillars for engagement: parents as 
partners; educators as partners; adult education; and celebrations. At each of the planned activities, participants are 
surveyed about their needs, interests, and perspectives on the Community School programming as well as their 
interest and availability to volunteer in support of different aspects of the work. It is anticipated that as the number of 
participants as family engagement events increases, the REACH Family Engagement Coordinator and Community 
School Director will be able to expand the network of individuals engaged in the development, implementation, and 
monitoring of the family engagement calendar of activities from primarily the Parent Association Leadership and the 
Parent Coordinator. The intention is to ensure that the programming not only facilitates strong family and community 
ties but meaningful ones as well. 

REACH and Wadleigh have established several layers of data-driven interfaces around the Community School 
program. The principal and Community School Director have a weekly standing meeting wherein the Community 
School Director provides the principal with current and available data around key indicators, primarily excerpted from 
the Student Sorter and Kinvolved, to strategize short-term and long-term plan adjustments. In addition to these 
meetings, the REACH Director has separate routine meetings with the Community School Director and the principal to 
address concerns and to ensure that the work of the initiative continues to be responsive to students’ needs and 
aligned to the school’s goals. These meetings also leverage data from the Student Sorter, Kinvolved, and NYSED Item 
Analysis. The principal and Community School Director also meet with other members of the REACH team (i.e. 
Expanded Learning Opportunities Specialist; Instructional Specialist; Family Engagement Coordinator) to review and 
troubleshoot activities that reflect their specific areas of programming and will use a variety of data sources that may 
include parent survey data, teacher outcomes on PD checks for understandings and feedback surveys, teachers’ 
instructional artifacts, and student work artifacts from EL0/ELT. There also are the bi-annual data dialogues with 
REACH, the school’s leadership and key partners; and the annual school improvement retreat. 

 

 
 
Part 3 – Community School Program Implementation and Oversight 

Part 3a. Key Staff and Partners 
1.  Name and describe the scope of involvement of all community partners working in the school (include partners 

supporting ELT, counseling, enrichment, etc.) 

2.  Name the members of your Community School Team and how meetings will be organized and structured to 

engage all stakeholders and be focused on results. 

3.  Explain data strategies including the use of the data sorter, and steps that the school will take to ensure that the 

appropriate interventions are provided to the right students 

There are several REACH key personnel and partners that will be responsible for the design, implementation, 
monitoring, and refinement of the Community School program activities at Wadleigh. The REACH key personnel 
include: Catherine Hogg who is the REACH Director and supervises the entire university-assisted, community school 
initiative for Teachers College, Columbia University; Kyle Hagenburger who is the Expanded Learning Opportunities 
Specialist and manages all aspects of the extended leaning time, after-school and summer programs; Danielle Proscia 
who is the Instructional Specialists and is responsible for the design and delivery of all teacher professional 
development activities; and Kimberly Downing who is the Community School Director at Wadleigh and provides 
school-based leadership. Helen Keller International and Smile Programs provide programming around physical health 
development; Kinvolved to support activities to improve the school’s attendance improvement activities; TC graduate 
students, Follow Us to Success, Ramapo for Children, RoboFun, NY  

ScriptEd, and ExpandEd enhance the ELT/ELO and after-school programming. In addition to these key personnel and 
partners, Wadleigh also leverages the Superintendent and Director of School Renewal for Community School District 
3 to also support the design, implementation, and oversight of the Community School program at Wadleigh. There 
are several school-based staff who are involved in the Community School programming at Wadleigh and they include: 
Teacher who assists with coordinating the extended learning time/expanded learning opportunities; Guidance 

2018-19 RSCEP-R                                                                                                                                                                                          70 

 

 

counselors who are working with NY Foundling and Beacon to strengthen a student support team that provides 
students with appropriate and timely social emotional and mental health supports;  

The Extended Learning Time (ELT) is scheduled five days per week and consists of programming that is academically 
focused to help middle school students strengthen their literacy and math skills so they are better prepared for the 
NYSED assessments; and to help the high school students with credit recovery, Regents preparation, and college 
readiness in terms of SAT preparation as well as college essay writing. The ELT program is primarily staffed by 
Wadleigh teachers as they responded to the job posting and consequently are entitled to those positions based on 
the UFT contract.  

REACH and Wadleigh leadership will continuously collect, analyze, and reflect on data across the five key areas to 
evaluate the program and assess the impact of activities on student achievement in order to make appropriate and 
timely adjustments. Qualitative (i.e. primarily focus group and survey data from different stakeholders) and 
quantitative data (i.e. primarily student attendance and behavioral incidents; promotion and assessment data such as 
NYSED ELA and math exams for grades 3-8; Regents exams and attempts, credit accumulation, and graduation rates 
for high school students) is used to monitor and evaluate the work both to inform decisions on how specific 
interventions might be improved (ongoing formative evaluation) and to measure progress toward final outcomes 
(annual summative evaluation). In addition to reviewing the school’s annual data published through NYSED and NYC 
DOE, REACH will collaborate with the school staff to gather and analyze data specific to the five key areas. For 
instance, the Expanded Learning Opportunities Associate utilized the NYSAN Quality Self-Assessment Tool to monitor 
all ELT and ELO activities in addition to tracking attendance through Kinvolved as well as conducting routine reviews 
of student work for targeted sample of students. The Family Engagement Coordinator collects attendance and 
feedback data from parent participants at each event. The Community School Director collects data on student 
attendance through Kinvolved as well as from key partners to include the information in the school’s Student Sorter 
so that there is a comprehensive data set for each student (demographics, outcomes, and interventions). The data 
collected and documented through the Student Sorter data are shared with the Data Specialist who will conduct a set 
of analyses as determined by questions posed by REACH and Wadleigh; and the analyses are reviewed for 
action/program adjustments. While the data is analyzed, shared with the school, and used by the REACH team 
throughout the year, twice per year, REACH, its partners and Wadleigh leadership meet for a data dialogue so that 
they have dedicated time to collectively review the information and make decisions about any adjustments that may 
be needed. 

 

 
Part 3b. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to 
implement the Community School program. 
Human resources needed to support this work include: REACH staff, parent coordinator, attendance team members, 
student support team members, other partner CBO staff (NY Foundling counselors and family coordinator; ; CBO staff 
from Script Ed, ExpandEd, etc.). Instructional resources needed include access to the school's curriculum so it can be 
used to support PD and ELO experiences. We will need access to and opportunities to meet with teachers during 
professional development to monitor our efforts and communicate about the programs. 

 
Part 3c. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. 
REACH activities for 2018-19 will begin in summer 2018 and will continue throughout the entire academic year (June 
2019).  

 
Part 3d. Mental Health Work Plan 

Separate from this RSCEP, schools will complete a Mental Health Work Plan that will become an addendum to this 
document. 

2018-19 RSCEP-R                                                                                                                                                                                          71 

 

Section 8: Academic Intervention Services (AIS)  

(Required for All Schools) 

 

Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services 
(AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records 
need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area 
listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. 
 

Type of Academic 
Intervention Service 
(AIS) 

English Language 
Arts (ELA) 

Criteria for 
determining AIS 
services (For 
additional guidance, 
refer to NYSED’s 
memo.) 
Lowest third, 
overage, under 
credited, ESL or SWD 

 

Method for delivery 
of service (e.g. small 
group, one-to-one, 
tutoring, etc.) 

Small group 
instruction and 
tutoring for level 1 
and 2 students. 

 

When the service is 
provided (e.g. during 
the school day, 
before or after 
school, etc.) 

During lunch period 1 
– 2 days per week 

 

Type of program or 
strategy (e.g. 
repeated readings, 
interactive writings, 
etc.) 

● For middle school 
students, the 
Academic 
Intervention Program 
includes (where 
differentiated 
instruction is 
provided in small-
group settings by 
teachers through the 
StudySyncfor middle 
schoolers, NewsELA, 
and readworksfor 
ELAand ALEKS, 
jmap.org and Khan 
Academy for math).  

● Middle School 
students are also 
provided 45 
minutesof academic 
enrichment twice a 
week. 

● These programs 
help to minimize the 
occurrence of low 
performing students 
who lack the 
knowledge, skills, 
reading and 
comprehension skills 
and may experience, 
test anxiety, and low 
expectations for 
success. 

2018-19 RSCEP-R                                                                                                                                                                                          72 

 

Mathematics 

Lowest third, 
overage, under 
credited, ESL or SWD 

 

Science 

Lowest third, 
overage, under 
credited, ESL or SWD 

 

For high school 
students, Academic 
intervention is 
provided for students 
failing a Regents 
exam via a Regents 
review during lunch 
and after school. PM 
school is offered to 
students who fail 
classes and repeater 
classes are offered 
during each semester 
to assist with credit 
accumulation. 

 
● For Middle school 
students, Academic 
Intervention Program 
includes twice a week 
AIS(where 
differentiated 
instruction is 
provided in small-
group settings). 

For High School 
students, lower level 
students will be 
scheduled for ICT 
classes After school 
PM classes and 
Saturday will be 
offered to students to 
assist with credit 
accumulation. Regent 
review will be offered 
after school.  

 
● For middle school, 
students are 
scheduled for 5 
periods of instruction 
per week instead of 
the required 4 
periods per week to 
include lab time, 
which is provided by 
their regular Science 
teacher.  

After school 
homework help is 

Small group 
instruction and 
tutoring for level 1 
and 2 students. 

 

During lunch period 1 
– 2 days per week 

 

Whole class & small 
groups 

Classroom 
instruction 

 

 

2018-19 RSCEP-R                                                                                                                                                                                          73 

 

Social Studies 

Lowest third, 
overage, under 
credited, ESL or SWD 

 

made 
availablethrough our 
Literacy/Homework 
help program as well 
as through our CBO, 
the New York City 
Mission Beacon 
Program. 

For high school, 
academic 
intervention takes 
place during the 
school day in small 
groups and during 
class periods with 
differentiated 
instruction. After 
school PM class and 
Saturday school will 
be offered to 
students to assist 
with credit 
accumulation. 
Regents review 
classes will be offered 
after school. 

 
● For middle school, 
the Academic 
Intervention Program 
consists of small 
group instruction 
based on our 
instructional strategy, 
the Workshop Model.  

● For high school, 
academic 
intervention takes 
place during the 
school day in small 
groups and during 
class periods using 
differentiated 
instruction.  

After school PM class 
will be offered and 
Saturday to students 
to assist with credit 
accumulation. Regent 

Whole class & small 
groups 

Classroom 
instruction 

 

 

2018-19 RSCEP-R                                                                                                                                                                                          74 

At-risk services (e.g. 
provided by the 
Guidance Counselor, 
School Psychologist, 
Social Worker, etc.) 

SWD, LTA, overage 
under credited 

 

 

 
 

Small groups & 
individual 

 

Instructional day 

 

review classes will be 
offered after school. 

 
● Mandated 
counseling will be 
provided, one to one 
or in a group setting 
is provided to 
students at risk. 

● Attendance 
dropout prevention 
intervention services 
are also provided. 

 

● Students are 
referred by teachers 
for one to one 
tutorial services.  

 

● Students are 
counseled and 
tutored so that 
placement in the 
least restrictive 
environment is the 
ultimate option. 

 

● Academic testing, 
referral initial 
evaluation or re-
evaluation is available 
for special education 
services. Placement 
in the least restrictive 
environment is the 
ultimate option. 

Initial evaluation and 
one to one and/or 
group counseling. 

 

2018-19 RSCEP-R                                                                                                                                                                                          75 

 

Section 9: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH)  

 

Directions: 
-  All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. 
-  All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. 
 
Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) 
As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the 
federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and 
report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support 
your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: 
http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf   

 

Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 

1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your 
school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE 
systems and may change over the course of the year.) 

13 

 

2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. 

Dedicate a college advisor for students in temporary housing. 

 

Offer laptop that students in temporary housing can sign out on a weekly basis for homework, college and career 
research, etc. 

 

Create a webpage that directs all students to: Job postings, healthcare, financial aid, scholarships, college info, SAT 
prep courses and tutoring. 

 

Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 

1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school 
(please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 

N/A 

 

2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 

2018-19 RSCEP-R                                                                                                                                                                                          76 

 

 

Items of clothing to meet a school’s dress or uniform requirements 

  Personal school supplies such as backpacks and notebooks 
 
  Counseling services / domestic violence counseling services 
  Parental involvement specifically oriented to reaching out to parents of homeless students 
  Homeless awareness activities 
 

Fees for SAT/ACT testing if not waived by college or university 

3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary 
housing.  If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation 
Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question.  If your school did not receive an allocation 
and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. 

N/A 

 

  

2018-19 RSCEP-R                                                                                                                                                                                          77 

 

 

Section 10: Title I Program Information 

Directions: 
  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1 
  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2 
  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3 
  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  
 

If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can 
be found 

  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage 
 
Part 1: Title I Status 

Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. 

X 

Schoolwide Program (SWP) 

 

Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools  

 

Non-Title I 

 
Part 2: All Title I Schools 

2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) 

Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support 
including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. 
● Recruitment is based on the Open Market process 

● Teachers are provided assistance in designing meaningful unit and lesson plans (using UBD) and rubrics. 

● Teachers are helped with content knowledge and pedagogy through consistent low-inference observations with 
immediate and effective feedback. 

● Teachers are encouraged to pursue courses that lead to administrative licenses and are allowed to do their 
internship under the schools’ existing administrative team. These teachers are given opportunity to take the lead in 
curriculum design, common core learning standards protocol and professional development. 

● Teachers are provided a mentor their first year teaching. Teachers with an ineffective rating are required to meet 
once per week with their direct supervisor to assist them with lesson planning. 

● The school has created a teacher resource room for instruction purposes, planning and professional development. 
This room is equipped with a smart board, computers and printers. 

● Supervisors assist teachers with lesson planning as per their TIP . 

 

 
2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development 

Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and 
paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS).  
Differentiated professional development is provided based on observation reports and areas needing improvement. 
Teachers are also given the opportunity to participate in professional development outside the building based on 
their interest and needs. 

 

 
Part 3: TA Schools Only 

3a. Use of Program Resources 
2018-19 RSCEP-R                                                                                                                                                                                          78 

 

Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 
n/a 

 

 
3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program 

Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., 
providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from 
the regular classroom during regular school day). 
n/a 

 

 
Part 4: SWP Schools Only 

4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only)  

Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary 
school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, 
early intervention services, etc.). 
n/a 

 

 
4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments 

Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate 
multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to 
improve instruction.    
● All teachers will meet during the Common Planning sessions to design common assessments that are aligned to 
their content-specific curriculum map and scope and sequence.  

● Departments will create instructional files that include curriculum maps, assessments, unit plans, best teaching 
practices, pacing calendars and resources to supplement their lessons in Google docs. 

● Teachers will also use the common planning time to analyze data from STARS and skedula, and review the common 
assessments to make the necessary adjustments to the curriculum and implement individual instructional strategies.  

● During informal and formal observations, the administration will focus on designing coherent instruction (Danielson 
1e), engagement (Danielson 3c) and questioning techniques (Danielson 3b).  

● The academic taskforce and inquiry team will review the data from the common assessments to identify specific 
target groups of students (overage/under-credited/other missing graduation requirements).  

Administration and academic taskforce meet regularly to revise the professional development plan based on data that 
derives from observations, inquiry team, WITsi, and coaching 

 

 
4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools 

Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and 
Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible 
for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its 
Schoolwide plan (RSCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program 
contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the 

2018-19 RSCEP-R                                                                                                                                                                                          79 

 

intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, 
State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the 
amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met 
the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. 
Program Name 

Fund Source 
(i.e. Federal, 
State or Local) 

Funding Amount 
Indicate the amount 
contributed to 
Schoolwide pool. 
(Refer to Galaxy for 
school allocation 
amounts) 

Place an (X) in Column A below to verify 
that the school has met the intent and 
purposes of each program whose funds are 
consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section 
references where a related program activity 
has been described in this plan. 

Column A 

Verify with an (X) 

Title I Part A (Basic) 

Federal 

$180,316 

 

$16,979.00 

Title I School Improvement 
1003(a) 

Federal 

 

Title I Priority and Focus 
School Improvement Funds 

Federal 

Title II, Part A 

Title III, Part A 

Title III, Immigrant 

Federal 

Federal 

Federal 

Tax Levy (FSF) 

Local 

$51,972 

 

 

 

 
0  

0  

0  

2,394,072 

 

X 
  

na 

 

 
X 
  

na 

 
na 

 
na 

 
x 

 

Column B 

Section Reference(s) 
 

5A, , 6AB, C, D 
  
na 

 

 

5C, D, E, 6A 
  

na 

 
na 

 
na 

 
 

5A,C, D, 6A 
  

 
1Explanation/Background: 
Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and 
programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and 
advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools 
may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, 
State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This 
gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students.   
 
Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a 
single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual 
identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool 
to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds 
used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from 

2018-19 RSCEP-R                                                                                                                                                                                          80 

 
which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to 
combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used 
conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the 
dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds.  
 
Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages: 

  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program 

separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different 
sources when accounting for their use. 

  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the 

statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., 
semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent 
and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended 
beneficiaries are met. 

 
2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as 
follows: 

  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to 
improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes 
provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH). 

  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified 

through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with 
district oversight and included in the DCIP/RSCEP.  

  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement 

plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  

  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in 

grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not 
available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional 
program. 

  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, 
develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and 
achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another 
purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-
quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in 
effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the 
participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language 
instruction programs. 

  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of 

English language acquisition and content area achievement. 

 
Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated: 

  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and 
programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent 
representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities 
funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with 
student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. 

  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and 

 

more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. 
IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education 
designed to meet their individual needs. 

  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be 

used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 

2018-19 RSCEP-R                                                                                                                                                                                          81 

 

Section 11: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 

  

 (Required for All Title I Schools) 

 

Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and 
representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will 
participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I 
program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson 
that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the 
parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school 
will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic 
achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family 
Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. 
 
The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current 
S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent 
Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent 
involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen 
family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy.  
 
Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample 
Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) 
as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. 
 
 

Parent and Family Engagement Policy 

Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. 
The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of 
parents and community in the school. Wadleigh Secondary School for the Performing and Visual Arts, in compliance 
with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA) Act, is responsible for creating 
and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement 
between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving 
them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to 
actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained 
volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. 

 

Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students 

Wadleigh Secondary School will support parents and families of Title I students by: 

 

● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., 
literacy, math and use of technology; 

● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision 
making in support of the education of their children; 

● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor 
their child’s progress; 

● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 

2018-19 RSCEP-R                                                                                                                                                                                          82 

 

● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in 
languages that parents can understand; 

● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve 
outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other 
members of the school community; 

The school’s Parent Involvement  

 

Parental Involvement and School Quality 

The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all 
parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The 
school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement 
policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school 
surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and 
enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school.  

 

In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the 
school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership 
Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for 
additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: 

● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I 
program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title 
I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; 

● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated 
directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; 

● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as 
described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; 

● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent 
Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support 
and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills;  

● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. 
The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the 
parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and 
inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents 
each month and file a report with the central office.; 

● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability 
grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and 
technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home;  

● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State 
accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, 
Learning Environment Survey Report; 

2018-19 RSCEP-R                                                                                                                                                                                          83 

 

● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of 
children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 
the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable 
sections under the Elementary and Secondary School Act; 

● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning 
or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and 
allow parents to provide suggestions; 

● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed;  

● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and 
workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; 

 

 

Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement 

The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: 

 

● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; 

● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; 

● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher 
Association) and Title I Parent Committee; 

● supporting or hosting Family Day events; 

● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; 

● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; 

● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their 
children’s progress; 

● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school 
activities and student progress; 

● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, 
and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. 

 

 

 

 

School-Parent Compact (SPC) 

Wadleigh Secondary School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary 
School (ESSA) Act, is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student 

2018-19 RSCEP-R                                                                                                                                                                                          84 

 

achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and 
programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will 
share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be 
developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. 

 

 

I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum 

Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to 
meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: 

 

● using academic learning time efficiently; 

● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; 

● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; 

● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; 

● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the 
Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA) Act; 

 

 

I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships 

Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: 

 

● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be 
discussed as well as how this Compact is related; 

● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students 
participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to 
be involved; 

● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds 
are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; 

● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation 
services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education;  

● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of 
participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; 

● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent 
Involvement Policy and this Compact; 

2018-19 RSCEP-R                                                                                                                                                                                          85 

 

● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results 
for each child and other pertinent individual school information;  

● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents 
each year; 

 

 

Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: 

I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff 

 

● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited 
English speaking parents;  

● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff 
member; 

● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to 
observe classroom activities; 

● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences;  

 

 

I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents 

Provide general support to parents by: 

 

● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment 
for parents and guardians; 

● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their 
child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of 
parents can attend); 

● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all 
members of the school community; 

● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents;  

● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in 
this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; 

● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and 
consistent with the Elementary and Secondary School Act Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) 
and Title I programs; 

2018-19 RSCEP-R                                                                                                                                                                                          86 

 

 

 

 

II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 

● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate 
procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; 

● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and 
his/her age; 

● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; 

● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes);  

● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; 

● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports 
and/or quality family time; 

● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; 

● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; 

● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education;  

● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by 
prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; 

● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; 

● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy 
and this Compact; 

● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn 
more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; 

● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on 
advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams;  

● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; 

 

 

Student Responsibilities: 

 

● attend school regularly and arrive on time; 

III. Student Responsibilities 

2018-19 RSCEP-R                                                                                                                                                                                          87 

 

● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; 

● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; 

● show respect for myself, other people and property; 

● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; 

● always try my best to learn. 

 

 
 

 

2018-19 RSCEP-R                                                                                                                                                                                          88 

 

DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT 

GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY 

SUBMISSION FORM 

2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR 

 

DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information 

necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English 

language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a 

part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the 

services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should 

be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily 

available on file in the school.  When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces.  For 

additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. 

Part I: School ELL Profile 

 

 

 
 

A. School Information 

District  3 
School Name   Wadleigh Secondary School for the Performing and Visual Arts  

Borough  Manhattan 

School Number   415 

 
B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant 

principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. 
 

Principal   Daisy Fontanez 
Coach  type here 
ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher  
 Uni Manni/ENL 
Teacher/Subject Area Melissa Stanton/SpEd 
Teacher/Subject Area type here 

Related-Service Provider  

Superintendent Ilene Altschul 

 

Assistant Principal  Michelle Roberts-Bacchus 
Coach type here 
School Counselor  
D. DeLiriano/L. Romain 
Parent  Gigs Taylor-Stephenson 
Parent Coordinator Eunice Paul 
Field Support Center Staff Member type here  
Other (Name and Title) type here 

C. Teacher Qualifications  
Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section.  Press TAB after each number entered to calculate 
sums and percentages.  
     
Number of certified 
ENL teachers currently teaching in the 
ENL program 

Number of teachers who hold both content 
area/common branch and TESOL certification 

1  

1 

0 

Number of certified 
bilingual teachers not currently 
teaching in a bilingual program  
Number of certified foreign 
language/world language teachers 
providing home language arts 
(HLA) to students in bilingual 
programs [applicable to grades 7–
12] 
Number of teachers currently 
teaching a self-contained ENL class 
who hold both a common branch 
license and TESOL certification 
[applicable to grades K–6] 

0 

0 

Number of teachers who hold both a 
bilingual extension and TESOL 
certification 

Number of special education teachers 
with bilingual extensions 

0 

0 

Number of certified 
bilingual teachers currently 
teaching in a bilingual program 

Number of certified ENL teachers 
not currently  teaching in the ENL 
program  

 

0 

0 

D. Student Demographics  
Total number of students in 
school (excluding pre-K) 

 330 

2018-19 RSCEP-R                                                                                                                                                                                          89 

Total number of ELLs 

11 

ELLs as share of total student population 
(%) 

3.33% 

 
 
 
 
Part II: ELL Demographics 
 
 
 
 
 
A. ELL Programs 

This school serves the following grades (includes 
ELLs and non-ELLs) 
Check all that apply 

 
 
This school offers (check all that apply): 

K

    1

    2

     3

     4

     5

 

6

   7

     8

    9

     10

     11

    12

 

Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) 

Yes

             No

Dual language program (DL) 

Freestanding ENL 

Yes

             No

Yes

             No

 

 

 

If yes, indicate language(s):            

If yes, indicate language(s):            

 

 
Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a 
separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. 
 

Bilingual Program Breakdown 

School 
Year 

Lang. 

Opened 
(e.g., 2013-14) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

K 

 
 

 
 
0 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

1 

 
 

2 

 
 

4 

 
 

3 

 
 

         

       

         

         

         

         

         

Program 
TBE 
TBE 
TBE 
DL 
DL 
DL 
Total 
 
 
 
Part III: Assessment Analysis 
 
 

 
 
0 

 
 
0 

 
 
0 

 
 
0 

       

       

       

5 

6 

7 

8 

9 

10 

11 

12 

         

         

         

         

         

         

         

         

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

       

       

       

       

       

       

       

       

 
 
0 

 
 
0 

 
 
0 

 
 
0 

 
 
0 

 
 
0 

 
 
0 

 
 
0 

Tot # 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 

After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 

1.  What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, 

teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? 
The School uses data compiled from many sources to determine the literacy skills of our ELL students. In early October, mIddle 
school students are administered baseline tests on iReady and high school students take the Gates MacGinitie to determine 
reading levels and areas of need. Baseline data shows that middle school students are reading at the early elementary levels 
varying between pre-primer to 4th grade. High school students are also below grade level reading at a wide range spanning 
elementary through middle school levels. The range in reading abilities suggest that instructional support needs to be student 
specific. Instruction of ELLs is targeted to support language acquisition based on this data, for example,  middle school 
students are given extra time on the computer on the iReady reading program that adjusts to student performance and high 
school students are given teacher feedback and support through the use of Google docs to support essay writing. In addition, 
on a schoolwide basis, teachers use Writing is Thinking Through Strategic Inquiry (WITsi) to assess student sentence skills to 
strategically addresss and strengthen problem areas and in the middle school, ELA teachers use the TC writing program to 

2018-19 RSCEP-R                                                                                                                                                                                          90 

 

 

monitor students progress. Based on these curriculum-based assessments, ELLs strengths and weaknesses are assessed and 
provided support.   
 

2.  What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 

Teachers are trained to use WITsi, iReady and TC Writing Program through the Office of Renewal and Teachers College. 
Students have access to laptops in every classroom to support instruction. Computer generated reading analyses are provided 
to all ELA teachers so they are aware of students reading levels and areas of need. For all content teachers, the ENL teacher 
conferences with them to provide detailed information of ELLs reading/writing levels and make suggestions on ways to 
scaffold or modify assignments. Since the school's ELL population is small, these meetings are generally made according to 
individual teacher's schedule to maintain flexibility and on-going channel of communication. 
 

3.  What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL 

Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? 
The school uses data from NYSESLAT, Regents, NYS Performance Tasks, iReady and TC Writing Program assessments as well as 
teacher made assessments to identify baseline, progress and areas of need. In middle school, Special Education students 
showed needs in phonics and vocabulary acquisition to support reading. In high school, students struggled with writing essays 
using academic language.  
 

4.  What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered?  

Data is shared with the teachers through grade level / content team meetings and through conferencing with the ENL teacher. 
Teachers are supported with ENL strategies by the ENL teacher during these said meetings and also through Monday Staff 
meetings after school. The ENL teacher workds with content teachers to modify and scaffold instruction. 
 

5.  How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-
5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.]  
N/A 
 

6.  What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? 

([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS].  
According to NYSESLAT data, 60% of ELLs are at the Expanding level (80% of our high school students) and 20% of ELLs are at 
the Transitioning level and 20% of ELLs are at the Emerging level. Within the NYSESLAT subsection, the Listening section was 
where most students declined in performance. Most students showed little improvement in the other subsections. Of concern, 
is on increasing performance of Expanding level students (2 out of 8 students tested Commanding last year). Last year, 2 of the 
3 students who attempted the ELA regents received passing scores. All the middle school students received 1 in the NYS ELA 
exam. Based on the data, high school students needs more instructional support in academic essay writing, and midddle 
school students need more support in both reading and writing. In particular, middle school students with IEPs have needs in 
decoding, Tier 2/3 vocabulary, and academic writing. The ENL teacher works closely with content teachers to in adapt their 
lessons to support ELLs. For example, math teachers will increase use of manipulatives and pictures to support problem-
solving, ELA teachers use iReady, WITsi and graphic organizers to address individual student needs, History teachers use multi-
media approaches such as videos to increase access to content.      
 

7.  What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? 

The Assistant Principals/Principal meet with the ENL teacher to discuss data analysis. Data is then shared with the teachers 
through grade level / content team meetings and through conferencing with the ENL teacher. Teachers are supported with 
ENL strategies by the ENL teacher during these said meetings and also through Monday Staff meetings after school. The ENL 
teacher works with content teachers to modify and scaffold instruction. Ongoing formative assessments as stated above, 
inform progress and further curricular adjustments as needed throughout the year.   

 
 
 
Part IV: ELL Programming 
2018-19 RSCEP-R                                                                                                                                                                                          91 

 
 

Programming and Scheduling Information 

1.  How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented 
as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students 
regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in 
one class]).  

a.  Freestanding ENL program. 

The ENL teacher meets with the school programmer to schedule all ELL student classes. Students are programmed 
based on their grade levels and NYSESLAT scores. In middle school, students are programmed to receive ENL in their 
ELA classes in heterogeneous groupings by grade level. In high school, ENL students are programmed in blocked 
heterogeneous groups by grade level. Because we have only one ENL teacher, stand-alone ENL classes are ungraded 
and heterogeneous. 

b.  TBE program.  If applicable.   

Paste response to questions here:    

c.  DL program.  If applicable.    

Paste response to questions here:    

 

2.  How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each 

program model? 

a.  How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 

below)? 

           In M.S. students are blocked by grade with mixed proficiency levels. All Entering and Emerging students receive 225 
minutes of stand-alone ENL and 225 minutes of Integrated ENL in an ELA class. Transitioning and Expanding students receive 
180 minutes of Integrated ENL in a content area. Commanding students receive 90 minutes of Integrated ENL in a content 
class. 
        In H.S. students are organized by grade and subject with mixed proficiency levels. Entering and Emerging students receive 
225 mutes of stand-alone ENL separated by no more than two grade levels. They also receive an additional 225 minutes of 
Integrated ENL in an ELA class. Entering students receive another 180 minutes of Integrated ENL class. Transitioning and 
Expanding level students receive 180 minutes of Integrated ENL in a content class. Commanding students receive 90 minutes 
of Integrated ENL in a content class.  
        The ENL teachers keep a weekly log of minutes served for each student and is given the flexibility on how those minutes 
are served based on the above perameters. 
         
 

3.  Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and 

methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core 
Learning Standards.  
    Common Core standards are used to create standards based lessons throughout the school. For integrated ENL classes, 
English is used to provide sheltered instruction in content areas using ENL strategies to foster language development. The ENL 
teacher works closely with content teachers to in adapt their lessons to support ELLs. For example, Math teachers will increase 
use of manipulatives and pictures to support problem-solving, ELA teachers use iReady, WITsi and graphic organizers to 
address individual student needs, History teachers use multi-media approaches such as videos to increase access to content. In 
stand-alone ENL classes, the ENL teacher integrates online resources to augment language development such as iReady, 
MyOn, PBS Media, Brain 
pop, NewsELA, Scholastic In Action, and Google translate to reinforce content knowledge in Science, Math, History, and ELA. In 
addition, the ENL teacher conferences with content teachers to discuss lesson strategies to scaffold vocabulary and increase 
explicit instruction on complex areas of study. For example: promoting academic writing via sentence frames, increased visual 
aids/prompts to augment complex ideas, offering articles in native language to reinforce academic content and access prior 
learning, and WITsi to target areas of improvement in writing. Teachers also use heterogeneous groupings so that ELLs who 
have a common home language with peers utilize collaborative tasks that target content and generate interactions in the 

2018-19 RSCEP-R                                                                                                                                                                                          92 

 

home language to facilitate language acquisition.   
  
 

4.  How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? 

   Students who are able to use home language resources are provided with content materials that have been translated into 
their home language. For example, in Living Environment, the class textbook is also available in Spanish. Currently, other 
content teachers use various translation software such as Google to translate teacher made materials and to find appropriate 
content materials online. Periodically, if available, ELL students will meet with a teacher who is fluent in the student's home 
language to evaluate student progress in reading and writing. For other languages that are less common, the DOE Translation 
and Interpretation Unit is used during tutoring sessions to facilitate learning.  
 

5.  How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? 

SIFE   

a. 
b.  Newcomer  
c.  Developing   
d. 
e. 

Long Term 
Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status  

Currently, all MS students use MyOn and iReady in their English, Science, or Social Studies class. These programs differentiate 
instruction with different supports (Lexile, option to have materials read, vocabulary) for SIFE, Newcomers, Developing, Long 
Terms and Former ELLs to enable them to access content area reading. In addition, we use a range of teacher supports to 
differentiate instruction for all our ELLs. At this time, we do not have any SIFE students.  Newcomer students are given native 
language-English dictionaries, and when available, articles in preferred language for help in content area instruction. Teachers 
also group students with same languages to assist in language acquisition. Furthermore, teachers who speak the preferred 
language of the ELL student are called upon as needed to help clarify content when there is evidence of confusion or difficulty 
that is not able to be addressed using ENL strategies. All students benefit from the use of scaffolded learning experiences such 
as increased use of visuals, highlighted texts, graphic organizers, and online resources that provide reading activity matched to 
student Lexiles. Many of our Long Term ELLs have learning disabilities that are unrelated to language acquisition. For these 
students who do not have literacy skills in their home language and English is their dominant language, ENL teachers work with 
their Sp Ed teachers to provide additional scaffolds that build foundational skills in literacy. Additional time and modified 
assignments are also provided as needed to support individual student learning. Former ELLs are given extra support in writing 
through WITsi, graphic organizers, and testing accommodations. Finally, teachers use online resources such as  MyOn and 
iReady to reinforce independent reading in the classroom and at home.  
 

6.  What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic 

content areas and accelerate English language development?  
Currently, all MS students use MyOn and iReady in English, Science, or Social Studies class that supports ELL-SWDs with Lexile-
matched reading, option to have materials read, and vocabulary enhancement for content areas. ENL teachers use this 
software to provide additional reading support and to encourage independent reading at home in order to accelerate language 
development. Online resources such as NEWSELA and ESL Brain Pop provide audio-visual presentations that build student's 
content knowledge. In addition, teachers provide  native language-English dictionaries, and when available, articles in 
preferred language for content areas. Teachers also group students with same languages to assist in language acquisition. 
Students benefit from the use of scaffolded learning experiences such as increased use of visuals, highlighted texts, and 
graphic organizers. Many of our Long Term ELLs have learning disabilities that are unrelated to language acquisition. For these 
students who do not have literacy skills in their home language and English is their dominant language, the ENL teacher works 
with their Sp Ed teachers to provide additional scaffolds that build foundational skills in literacy. Additional time and modified 
assignments are also provided as needed to support individual student learning.  
 

7.  How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and 

attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? 
Our ESL teacher works closely with Sp Ed teachers in the Integrated ENL program to provide additional scaffolds that build 
foundational skills in literacy and meet IEP goals. WITsi helps students to address areas of improvement in sentence 

2018-19 RSCEP-R                                                                                                                                                                                          93 

 

development, grammar, and writing skills. Students benefit from the use of scaffolded learning experiences such as increased 
use of visuals, highlighted texts, and graphic organizers. Many of our Long Term ELLs have learning disabilities that are 
unrelated to language acquisition. For these students who do not have literacy skills in their home language and English is their 
dominant language, the ENL teacher works with their Sp Ed teachers to provide additional scaffolds that build foundational 
skills in literacy. Additional time and modified assignments are also provided as needed to support individual student learning.  
 

8.  Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups 

targeted).  List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which 
they are offered. 
Our ENL students receive targeted services and instruction in content areas such as Social Studies, Science, Technology, as well 
as, the Arts Studios (Dance, Drama, Music, and Visual Arts). Specifically, Academic Intervention Services are provided to meet 
the needs of all students, in particular our ELL students, who require additional assistance to meet the State Standards in ELA, 
Mathematics, Science and Social Studies. Through the AIS program, the most effective strategies for creating high-quality 
learning environments for diverse groups of students are used in an attempt to close the achievement gap for minority, low-
income, and learners not yet proficient in English. Additionally, our Extended Learning Time program enables students to 
enhance, enrich and extend literacy and mathematics strategies acquired during the school day. During Extended Learning 
Time, students develop in-depth content knowledge and enrichment, as well as, remedial support. Students are involved in 
projects that require them to discuss ideas while working in various settings. Students do extensive reading to develop schema 
around specific topics, review mathematics concepts using technology, and practice test-taking strategies. All intervention 
programs are given in English. In the transition time after obtaining proficiency on the NYSESLAT, students are provided with 
ELL modifications on state exams. Additionally, the ENL teacher conferences with content area teachers on the progress of E in 
their classes. ELLs are encouraged to participate in all programs that Wadleigh has to offer. Due to Wadleigh being a 
performing and visual arts school, ELLs can express themselves through music, art, and dance in a way that they may not be 
able to do in other schools.  
 

9.  Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year?    

Based on data and trends, iReady is being used to address the needs of middle school ELLs who are at various reading levels. 
This is especially helpful for our incoming ELLs who are at PP and 1st grade reading levels. These students get extra time for 
phonics and beginner reading practice. In addition, in high school, students who are two grades below in reading levels will be 
scheduled for additional vocabulary support using the Rewards Curriculum to boost their reading levels. 
 

10.  If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? 

N/A 
 

11.  How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs?  Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in 

your building. 
ELLs are afforded equal access to all SWD school programs.  They are not limited because of English Language Acquisition. We 
offer enrichment in the Arts and content areas as well as remedial support with teachers after school and on Saturdays. Ell 
students can schedule time for tutoring with content teachers after school, attend Regents prep classes after school and on 
Saturdays. 
 

12.  What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language 

materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. 
In Integrated ENL classes, the ENL teacher conferences and discusses lesson strategies to scaffold vocabulary and increase 
explicit instruction on complex areas of study. For example: Content areas (Math, History, Science) use videos, Brain Pop, and 
graphic organizers in addition to using sentence frames, increased visual aids/prompts to augment complex ideas, offering 
articles in native language to reinforce academic content and access prior learning, and WITsi to target areas of improvement 
in writing. Teachers also use heterogeneous groupings so that ELLs who have a common home language with peers utilize 
collaborative tasks that target content and generate interactions in the home language to facilitate language acquisition. LTE's, 
Newcomers, and ELLs with disabilities benefit from using tech resources to increase engagement and support areas of need. 
Online resources used to boost language development are iReady, MyOn, PBS Media, ESL Brainpop,  and NewsELA, and Google 
translate to reinforce content knowledge in different areas in English and preferred language when available. Former ELLs get 

2018-19 RSCEP-R                                                                                                                                                                                          94 

 

 

continued support through additional support materials such as Wordly Wise (vocabulary support) and Google doc's teacher 
feedback to support essay writing.  
 

13.  How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? 

Home language support is provided by the availability of dual language dictionaries, literature, and online resources. In 
addition, teachers group ELL students with same the home language as peers to facilitate discussions in home language. 
Teachers who speak the same home language as the ELL student are also called upon to support the student progress. 
 

14.  Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels.  

ELL students are programmed according to grade level. Differentiation occurs within the classroom based on readiness and 
proficiency levels. The resources in the classroom are age and grade appropriate and provide the appropriate entry point for 
individual students. Teacher's also differentiate reading and/or assignments so that all students are learning the same content. 
 

15.  If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the 

ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met?   
Our school shares the library, gym, and cafeteria with another high school. The librarian allows access to the library and 
computers during lunch hours. Lunch time in the cafeteria and gym time is coordinated by the principal. ELLs are programmed 
lunch, gym, and library with peers so that they will have peers who are familiar to increase socialization. In addition, the ENL 
teacher will meet with students when schedule allows for socio-emotional and academic support during lunch periods. 
 

16.  Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for 

new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, 
parent coordinator).  
All newly enrolled ELL students meet with the ELL Coordinator and Parent Coordinator who take the student on a tour of the 
school and provide students with information about the school environment. New ELL students are strongly encouraged to 
participate in our extended learning activities. Most of the activities are academic in nature, but after school activities develop 
life skill, such as the culinary art entrepreneur program or social skills through the sports and arts clubs. Students also meet bi-
monthly with their advisor who provides academic supports and guidance on school matters.   
 

17.  What language electives are offered to ELLs?  

Students are offered Spanish.    
 

18.  For schools with dual language programs: 

a.  What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day 

(percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. 
In which language(s) is each core content area taught? 

b. 
c.  How is each language separated for instruction? 
d. 

Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same 
time (simultaneous)? 

Paste response to question here:    
 

Professional Development and Support for School Staff 

1.  Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic 

staff.)  What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs 
as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? 
The ENL teacher is provided with PDs opportunities to improve her/his pedagogy through the offerings by DELLS and Borough 
field Support Offices. The ENL teacher develops her/his own PD plan along with her/his supervisor to address the needs that 
arise based on the needs of the ELL students and the teacher's own professional development goals. New ENL coordinators are 
routinely scheduled for the Nuts and Bolts PD. At a minimum, 50% of PDs are those that support language acquisition in core 

2018-19 RSCEP-R                                                                                                                                                                                          95 

 

 

content areas and integrateing language and content instruction for ELLs. Some of the PDs schedules are WITsi for ELLs series. 
Additional PDs will be decided upon as they are offered. The PDs for teachers of ELLs will be provided by the ENL teacher 
during Grade team meetings, Content team meetings and during Monday staff meetings. Scheduled on the school calendar of 
PDs, the ENL will provide 15% of all PDs during the Monday staff meetings for ENL teaching strategies.  
 

2.  Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all 
teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include 
how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance).  Refer to ELL Policy and Reference 
Guide, Professional Development section. 
Teachers are provided professional development on using the curriculum from the College Board which helps students to 
develop behaviors that lead to success in school and beyond. This curriculum is used during advisory and helps students to 
monitor their progress under the guidance of a caring adviser teacher, build supportive relationships with peers, and be 
provided with the resources necessary to make thoughtful decisions about their future. Teachers are scheduled for a minimum 
of 15% of their total professional development hours on trainings that focus on language acquisition, co-teaching strategies, 
and integrating language and content instruction for ELLs. For ENL teachers, a minimum of 50% of the required professional 
development hours are dedicated to language acquisition in alignment with core content instruction. Our ENL teacher attend 
PDs provided by the DOE Division of English Language Learners and Student Support. These trainings are turn-keyed to teacher 
during common planning and designated PD days. Also, our community partner Teachers College provides Professional 
Development. Teachers and Administrators collaborate on providing PDs that best serve our ELL students. All records of 
attendance are kept by administration to ensure mandated hours are kept. Specifc dates and topics are TBA.   
 
 

Parental Involvement 

1.  How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language 
development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? 
Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent 
orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences?  
ENL teachers keep a log of all parent contact including phone calls, letters, and meetings. Progress reports are sent to students 
each marking period to keep parents abreast of how the student is progressing in class. Meetings are scheduled by the ENL 
teacher in the beginning of the fall semester to discuss student goals and language development progress. At this time, 
discussion takes place concerning NYSESLAT results, language development needs in all classes, and NYSESLAT testing dates. A 
second parent meeting is scheduled before April to discuss student progress. The scheduled meetings will be planned to 
accommodate the attendance of the student's content teachers so that they can also provide information on student progress. 
Translation services are provided by staff who speak the home language or by the DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit. If 
parents are unable to attend the meetings, then a phone meeting is scheduled, but is only used as a last alternative and noted 
on the parent outreach log.  

2.  Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. 

Parent involvement at Wadleigh is an ongoing endeavor. We encourage parents, including parents of ELLs to come to PTA 
meetings, Parent-Teacher conferences and to visit the school, and attend their children's classes at any time. The school 
partners with Mission Society to conduct workshops for parents throughout the year. Parents are asked what type of 
workshops they would find helpful and beneficial. Also, at the beginning of the year, there is a school barbecue with 
translators available for parents. This allows families to meet administration, faculty, and staff of their child's school. As always, 
translation services are also provided by staff during informal parent meetings and Parent-Teacher conferences. The Parent 
Coordinator schedules engagement workshops. These are TBA.  
 

 

 

2018-19 RSCEP-R                                                                                                                                                                                          96 

 

Additional Information 

Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for 
ELLs.  You may attach/submit charts.   This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted.   
Paste response here:    
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

2018-19 RSCEP-R                                                                                                                                                                                          97 

Part V: ELL Identification Attestation 

Principal Certification 

2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 
6. 

7. 

8. 

9. 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL 
Policy and Reference Guide, I, Daisy Fontanez, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered 
to and staff are trained on the following: 
 
1. 

The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for 
students entering with IEPs). 
Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined 
a. 

If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status 
relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level.  

The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue.   
a.  The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services 
are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality 
translation service.   

Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined.   
a. 

If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility 
to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. 

Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible.   
Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language.  
a.  Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. 
If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish 
LAB.  
Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources 
available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-
education-sife.  
If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting.  
a.  Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent 

video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask 
questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided 
throughout the meeting. 

10.  ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected.  

a. 

b. 

If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program 
in accordance with DOE transfer policies. 
If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent 
choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice.   

11.  Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process).  
12.  If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose 

ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 
 

 

2018-19 RSCEP-R                                                                                                                                                                                          98 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

Part VI: LAP Assurances 

School Name:   Wadleigh Secondary School                                                                              School DBN: 03M415 
Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate.  Names listed in Part A, should align with this 
section.  

Name (PRINT) 

Daisy Fontanez 

Title 

Principal 

Michelle Roberts-Bacchus 

Assistant Principal 

Eunice Paul 

Parent Coordinator 

Uni Manni/ENL 

ENL/Bilingual Teacher 

Gigs Taylor Stephenson   

Parent 

Melissa Stanton/SpEd 

Teacher/Subject Area 

           

           

           

           

           

           

           

           

           

Teacher/Subject Area 

Coach 

Coach 

School Counselor 

Superintendent 
 
Field Support Center Staff 
Member 
               

Other            

Other            

Other            

 

Signature 

Date (mm/dd/yy) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2018-19 RSCEP-R                                                                                                                                                                                          99 

 

 
 

2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS 

Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools 

 

DBN: 

03M415  
 

School 
Name: 

Wadleigh Secondary School for Perfo  
 

Superintendent: 

Ilene Altshul  
 

 
The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. 
If there is more than one LAC, list all. 
 

First Name  

Last Name  

Title  

Has the LAC attended a 

2018-19 training 

The LAC was involved in 
the development of this 

conducted by the Field 

plan? Yes/No  

 

 

Language Access 

Coordinator? Yes/No  

 

(*Primary) 

 

   

 
* The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs 
on translation,  
interpretation, compliance and budget.  
 

School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful 
opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's 
Regulation A-663).  
 
By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and 
interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). 
 
Part A:  Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 
 
1.  Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written 

and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from: 

  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS) 
  Automate The System (ATS) reports 
  Student Emergency Contact cards 
  Surveys conducted by your school. 

 

Wadleigh uses the Home Language Report to identify the different home languages of families in the school. 
Currently there are parents who speak languages in Bengali (1), French (6), Haitian Creole (1), Mandinka (3), 
Spanish (96), and Wolof (1). Information on home languages and preferred language of communication are 
attained through the HLIS and Blue Cards. This information is updated into ATS and all documents are kept in the 
students' permanent records. A copy of the HLIS is also kept in the ELL Critical Documents folder maintained by 
the ENL Coordinator. Translation and interpretation needs for schoolwide events and meetings are referred to the 
Parent Coordinator a month in advance for translation. For informal and immediate language 
translation/interpretaition needs, bilingual staff are used.    
 

 
 

2018-19 RSCEP-R                                                                                                                                                                                          100 

 
2.  List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, 

which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language 
Report (RCPL) ATS report. 
 

Written Preferred  

Percent Written  

 

 

Oral Preferred  

Percent Oral  

 

 

Language  

Currently there are 
parents who speak 
languages in Bengali 
(1), French (6), Haitian 
Creole (1), Mandinka 
(3), Spanish (96), Niger-
Congo, and Wolof (1).  

   

 

3.  From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at 

least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, 
French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. 
 

 

 
 
Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 
 
1.  List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be 

How do you plan to translate? 
Include procedures to ensure 
timely provision of translated 

documents to parents.  

 

distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents.  
 

Document Name  

Month/Frequency Distributed to 

Families  

 

Translation and Interpretation needs for 
schoolwide events/meetings are referred 
to the Parent Coordinator a month in 
advance. These events/meetings include 
parent orientation, school barbecue, 
Curriculum Night, parent/teacher 
conferences, regional fairs and workshops, 
regional parent training sessions, 
suspension hearing and impartial hearings, 
citywide or regional parent meetings, and 
community education council meetings. 
Informal meetings and 
translation/interpretation needs such as 
parent-teacher progress reports, 
disciplinary meetings, and student 
advisements are provided by bilingual staff 
and by the DOE's Translation and 
Interpretation Unit.  

  
2018-19 RSCEP-R                                                                                                                                                                                          101 

 
 

 

2.  List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as 

parent-teacher  
conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings.  
   

Meeting Name  

Month/Frequency of Meetings  

How does your school plan to 

provide interpretation service(s)?  

 

 

At the beginning of the school year 
parents are invited to parent 
orientation, school barbecue, and 
curriculum night. In the Fall and 
Spring parents are invited to attend 
the parent-teacher conferences. In 
addition, in the Spring ENL teachers 
schedule meetings with parents to 
discuss ELL student progress. 
Throughout the school year, parents 
are invited to attend events at the 
school that celebrate students' artistic 
achievements such as the Talent 
Show, Choir concerts, Art Shows and 
Exhibits. The Parent Coordinator also 
schedules periodic parent workshops 
that parents can attend. Informal 
interactions made by teachers, 
guidance counselors, and 
administration include phone calls 
and parent meetings to discuss 
student work and progress.  

   

 

3.  Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of 

a school emergency.  
 

 
 

 
 
Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure

 
Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and 
what resources are available to meet compliance.  
 

 

 

 
 
Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services 

2018-19 RSCEP-R                                                                                                                                                                                          102 

 
 
Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive 
information. Include any: 

  Translated signage 
  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents 
  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) 

 

The LAC works with the Parent Coordinator to fulfill notification requirements. Welcome Posters are prominently 
displayed by the entrance to the school and in the main office. Signage noting the availability of translators and 
translated materials and the Parents' Bill of Rights are displayed in the main office and are available in all languages in 
both the Parent Coordinator's office and the main office. A copy of the Language ID Guide is provided to the security 
desk and the front desk at the main office.  
 

 
 
Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services 
Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the 
language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services?   
 

Wadleigh uses the school's parent survey to monitor parent feedback on the quality of communication with the 
school. Attendance records and feedback at parent events are additionally used to monitor parent involvement and 
determine further actions to increase parent engagement and collaboration.  
 

 

2018-19 RSCEP-R                                                                                                                                                                                          103 

