 
 

 

 
 

 
  
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

2018-19 

COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN 

(CEP) 

 
 
 
 

 

DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 

24Q019 

School Name: 

P.S. 019 MARINO JEANTET 

Principal: 

GENIE CALIBAR 

 
 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                          
 

 

 

 

 1 

 

Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline  

 
 
Section 1: School Information Page 
 
 
Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page  
 
 
Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) 
 
 
Section 4: CEP Overview  
 
 
Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  

  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction 
  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment 
  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers 
  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership 
  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties  

 
 
Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS)  
 
 
Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) 
 
 
Section 8: Title I Program Information  
 
 
Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 
 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          2 

 

 

 
School Name: 

BEDS Code: 

Grades Served: 

School Address:  

Section 1: School Information Page 

 

School Information 

 

The Marino P. Jeantet School 

24Q019 

School Number (DBN): 

 

 
342400010019 

 
K-5 

 
40-10 99th Street, Corona, NY 11368 

 
718-424-5859 

Phone Number: 

 

718-424-7953 

Fax: 

 

Genie Calibar 

gcaliba@schools.nyc.gov 

School Contact Person:  

 

Principal: 

UFT Chapter Leader: 

Parents’ Association President: 

SLT Chairperson: 

Title I Parent Representative (or 
Parent Advisory Council 
Chairperson): 

Student Representative(s): 

 

CBO Representative: 
 

Email Address: 

 

Mrs. Genie Calibar 

 
Ms. Iris E. Diaz 

 
Mrs. JohanaPineda 

 
Mrs. Genie Calibar 

 

Ms. Bertha Asitimbay 

 
N/A 

 
N/A 

 
NA 

 

 

District Information 

 

Geographical District: 

24 

 

Superintendent’s Office Address: 

Madeline Chan 

Superintendent: 
98-50 50 th Avenue, Corona, New York 11368 

 

 
MChan2@schools.nyc.gov  

Superintendent’s Email Address: 

 

718-592-3357  

Phone Number: 

 

718-592-3770 

Fax: 

 

 
 

Field Support Center (FSC)  

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          3 

 

Queens North FSC 

Lawrence Pendergast 

FSC: 

 

Executive Director’s Office Address: 

Executive Director: 
28-11 Queens Plaza North, LIC, NY 11101 

 

 
lpender@schools.nyc.gov  

Executive Director’s Email Address: 
917-225-2020 

 

Phone Number: 

 

718-391-8320 

Fax: 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          4 

 

Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page  

 

All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this 
Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to 
support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention 
Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal 
number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with 
Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. 
 
Directions: 

 

1.  List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 
2.  Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization 
(CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an 
asterisk*. 

3.  SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member 

does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, 
which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT 
member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval.   

4.  The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file 

in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. 

 

Name 

Position and Constituent Group 

Represented 

Signature 
(Blue Ink) 

Genie Calibar 

 
Iris E. Diaz 

 
JohanaPineda 

 

 

Bertha Asitimbay 

 

N/A 

 

N/A 

 

 

Justin Thompson 

 
Matthew Ray 

 
Silvana Espinal 

 

*Principal or Designee 

*UFT Chapter Leader or Designee 

*PA/PTA President or Designated Co-
President 

DC 37 Representative (staff), if 
applicable 

Title I Parent Representative or 
Parent Advisory Council Chairperson  

Student Representative  
(optional for elementary and middle 
schools; a minimum of two members 
required for high schools) 

Student Representative  
(optional for elementary and middle 
schools; a minimum of two members 
required for high schools) 

CBO Representative, if applicable 

 
Member/Assistant Principal 

 
Member/ Teacher 

 
Member/Teacher 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          5 

 

Name 

Marianne Sladowski 

 
Irene Oliva Sutherlann 

 
Ginger Valero 

 
Sandra Bentacur 

 
RosalinaVelazquez 

 
MarisolGutierrez 

 
Norma Flores 

 
 

 

 

Position and Constituent Group 

Represented 

Signature 
(Blue Ink) 

Member/Teacher 

 
Member/ Teacher 

 
Member/ Parent 

 
Member/ Parent 

 
Member/Parent 

 
Member/Parent 

 
Member/Parent 

 
Member/ 
 
Member/ 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          6 

 

Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan  

 

The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to 
support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing 
school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, 
monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. 
This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the 
school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, 
Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. 

Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools 

The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect 
the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms 
where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity 
and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and 
classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more 
attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and 
Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our 
families and students. 

Strong Schools, Strong Communities  

The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, 
educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school 
prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult.  

The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers 
and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of 
schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, 
school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that 
all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New 
Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students.  

The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development 

The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and 
external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase 
learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently 
ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan 
(CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school 
community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and 
address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for 
students. 
 

Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish 
high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the 
Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community 
members concrete ways to improve. 
 
In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in 
consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to 
participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a 
comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          7 

 
the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all 
the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements 
work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing 
that it likely addresses other elements as well. 
 

The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools  

Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards 
are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical 
thinking skills. 
Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, 
and challenged by their teachers and peers. 
Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. 
They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous 
improvement. 
Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, 
developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. 
Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by 
welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. 
Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school 
and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value 
each other. 

 

The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools 

In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in 
improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative 
and qualitative data. 

NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) 

The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by 
coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality 
Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 
Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below:  

I.       Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) 
II.    School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4)  
III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and 

Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) 

  
School Quality Guide  

The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to 
set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to 
accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also 
available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s 
practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. 
For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. 
The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of 
similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set 
based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. 

 

Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          8 

 
Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, 
professional development, and parent and family engagement. 
 
To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in 
improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will 
serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the 
administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish: 
 
 
 
It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School 
Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the 
joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% 
parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% 
budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent 
and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on 
establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. 

a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; 
a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) 

 
Next Steps for CEP Development 

School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  

  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the 

requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655. 

  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability 

status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year. 

  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed 

by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are 
SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you 
monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school 
community know when you’ve reached your goal. 

  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action 
plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement. 

  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I 

schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). 

  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall 

cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action 
plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. 

Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful 
implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to 
accomplishing desired results. 

Section 4: CEP Overview 

 

1.  What is your school’s mission statement? 

We believe it is our mission to provide the best education possible to empower our students to achieve their highest 
levels of personal academic excellence. Our goal is to instill habits in our students that will foster autonomy and help 
them become the leaders of today and tomorrow. 

 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          9 

 

2.  Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, 

including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented.  
The Marino Jeantet School, a Community Learning School, has a current population of 1,898 students, making it one 
of the largest elementary schools in this part of the country. P.S.19Q is located in central Corona, Queens. There are 
80 classrooms which will be housed in the renovated main building including 20 kindergarten and first grade classes 
which are returning from two different annex sites. Our ethnically diverse school, includes a population of almost 60% 
identified as English Language Learners, representing 23 different languages. There are approximately 1,100 English 
Language Learners (ELLs) serviced by 14 English as a New Language (ENL) teachers. Students are serviced through ENL 
push-in programs, one bilingual self-contained class in each grade K-2, three Dual Language classes in each grade K-3, 
and two Dual Language classes in both grades 4 and 5. Twenty-one percent of the population is identified as special 
education. There are more than 390 students with IEPs, 15 self-contained special education classes (one bilingual self-
contained class in kindergarten, first and second grade) and 16 Integrated Co-Teaching (ICT) classes (one ICT dual 
language class in kindergarten through third grade.)  

 

The concept of “school within a school” has been established to create smaller communities to enable us to become 
familiar with and address the needs of students and their families throughout their education at PS 19. 

There are four schools within the Marino Jeantet School: The School of Math, Science, and Technology; The School of 
Communication and Performing Arts; The School of American Studies; and The School of Dual Language. Although 
each school has its unique focus, all the schools share a common goal: To have high expectations for all students and 
to celebrate student achievement. Each school has the same curriculum and emphasis, namely to build the basic 
foundation to support the development of critical thinking and to guide students to a career or college path. Each 
school houses students from grades kindergarten through fifth grade and has one guidance counselor and one 
assistant principal. P.S.19Q has also departmentalized grade five, which includes classes from each school.  

The Dual Language School (DL) embraces the concept of developing bilingual, bi-literate and bi-cultural students who 
are proficient in both English and Spanish. This school promotes language and culture while building an understanding 
of social equity. By means of a school wide enrichment program, this “school within a school” provides students with 
projects that foster their interests, self-esteem, and caring for others and the environment. During this transition year 
and in-house construction, this school is housed throughout the building. 

The School of Math, Science, and Technology (MST) is housed primarily on the third floor of the main building. Science 
and technology cluster teachers implement the inquiry instructional model (5-E) and work on engineering designs. 
The school focuses on scientific/mathematical/ technological inquiry-based projects. A culminating Fair highlights 
students’ experiments and technological projects and celebrates student efforts in these areas. 

The School of Communication and Performing Arts (CPA) utilizes music and theater as another venue to teach literacy 
to students. This school is located primarily on the fourth floor of the main building. The school presents a number of 
class plays in which the Blueprints for Theatre Arts Benchmarks are taught by grade with the support of music cluster 
teachers. This school’s enrichment activities encourage students to collaborate on and produce a school performance 
by exploring diverse theatrical elements. 

The School of American Studies (SAS) emphasizes the concepts of the social studies content area. The initiatives of 
these classes are supported by art and social studies cluster teachers. A culminating Fair, exemplifying student 
projects that are an outgrowth of exposure to the concepts of the social studies content area, highlights student 
work. During this transition year and in-house construction, this school is housed throughout the building. 

The staff at PS 19 is dedicated to providing individualized instruction to suit the specific strengths and needs of each 
and every child in our school. Our aim is that all of our students will meet the required standards in all areas while 
they acquire a love for learning. In order to meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) and 
transition to the Next Generation Standards, we are using Teacher's College, Reach for Reading, Reach into Phonics 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          10 

 

and Go Math as our primary programs, we are also making sure that all units are aligned to teach the domains and 
standards prescribed within the Literacy and Math standards. In order to have instructional cohesiveness, among our 
80 classes, we have one universal literacy coach and two Math coaches as well as six Peer Collaborative Lead 
Teachers. An additional school wide initiative: “Books That Help us Grow”, introduces to the students books that help 
students build character and leadership. The Leader in Me program has enhanced the character building and 
leadership skills development process. This year the Leader in Me focus is aligning academics with the program 
concepts to help bolster student goal attainment.  

 

In connection with the DOE's Computer Science for ALL initiative and to enhance students' problem solving and 
deeper thinking skills, our school plans to begin to explore the practices and concepts presented in computer science 
education. The planning process will involve understanding how to integrate computer science into our current 
curriculum so that it is accessible to all students, and determining current skills and professional development needs 
of our staff, to foster successful implementation in the following school year. To begin this process, three of our 
Science teachers are taking a STEM approach and teacher Computer Science. Additionally, two of our 5th grade 
classroom teachers will also teach Computer Science with a STEM focus. 

The professional development team meets throughout the year to work with the Professional Learning Resource 
given by the City. A weekly professional development survey has been implemented to capture feedback for future 
needs and teacher recommendations. A professional development plan has been put in effect that outlines the areas 
indicated in the school’s Instructional Focus: 

 

Our instructional focus is to make students autonomous learners by putting systems and structures in place to 
process how our teaching practices engage all students in learning that is intellectually active in challenging content. 
Such activities should range from a variety of choices, to making important decisions that will enhance the intellectual 
life of the individual student and that of the class. It will require activities and assignments that promote learning, 
student thinking that emphasize depth over breadth and that students explain their thinking. This will support how we 
build autonomy and help students take ownership of their learning. Specific differences that should be evident in 
classroom observations: 

  A lesson structure that will allow for beginning, middle and an end, with scaffolding provided to make each 

student’s goal attainable. Workshop- model with ample time for independent practice  

  Planning that requires the thoughtful construction of lessons that contain cognitively engaging learning 

activities and the intentional grouping of students using the Hess Cognitive Rigor Matrix 

  Evaluation of lesson/chapter/Unit by both pedagogues and students using the Stop, Start, Continue, Change 

protocol 
Leadership Classroom Best Practices including embedding the 7 Habits in normal and academic interactions 

 

Key Questions that we will Consider: 

1.  How are students engaged in critical analysis of their own learning? Are students intellectually engaged? 
2.  Are the students being challenged to work independently or in groups? 
3.  Are the teachers and students providing formative feedback aligned to the objective? 
4.  Are the assessment criteria clear and aligned to the learning objective/instructional outcome? 

 

 

3.  Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          11 

 

Our Title I population is approximately 74%, with 69% of students qualifying for Free Lunch. Almost sixty percent of 
our population are English Language Learners (ELLs), and 21% are Students with Disabilities (SWD): 

English Language Learners (ELL) 

ELL 

 
Special Education 
(Total students with IEPs excluding PreK) 

Percent of students with IEPs at this school who: 

receive Related Services only 

spend less than 20% of the week receiving 
Special Education classroom services 

spend between 21 and 59% of the week receiving 
Special Education classroom services 

spend >60% of their week in 
Integrated Co-Teaching (ICT) classes 

1046  55.23% 

 
 
393 

 
 
20.75% 

38  9.67% 

26  6.62% 

26  6.62% 

157  39.95% 

received Self-Contained services >60% of the week  146  37.15% 

 

In addition to the more than 1,000 Limited English proficiency students, 19% of our students receive Speech services, 
thus creating an additional challenge to understanding the complex texts and produce the complex language required 
of the standardized exams. 

Our SWD and ELL population continues to be our focus as their State exam results compared to those of the general 
education population are lower. On the positive side, these subgroups are making some progress in most grades and 
in both ELA and Math. For example, in 2017, our 3rd grade overall scored 33.4% proficient in ELA, a 2.7 point increase, 
our 3rd grade ELLs improved to 15%, but our SWDs scored at 9% proficient; in 2018, our 3rd grade overall ELA score 
increased to 38.4% (+5% points), the ELLs improved to 24.2% and SWD increased to 13.6%.  

 

4. 

Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over 
the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. 

One of the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which we made the most progress over the past year is 
Rigorous instruction. For several years our 3rd grade students achieved scores on the ELA and Math state exams that 
were below our 4th and 5th grade as well as far below our peer schools. Our goal has been to improve these scores 
and thereby reduce or eliminate these gaps. For a third consecutive year, 3rd grade has shown at least a 3% point 
increase in ELA proficiency. The 2018 increase was 5% points (a 15% increase.) Our 4th grade ELA experienced a 7.3% 
point increase this past year. Even with this 4th grade increase, the 3rd grade was able to close the achievement gap 
between them and our 4th grade to only 2.8% points. 

This same Framework element of Rigorous Instruction is also an area of focus in the current school year. The results of 
our 2018-19 Sate exams continue to revealed that across the board (all grades and subjects) our ELLs and SWD are 
making some progress, but not scoring as well as our general education population. For example, in 2017 our 4th 
grade overall scored 32.9% proficient in ELA, while only 5.7% of ELLs and 7.1% of SWD were proficient; whereas in 
2018, overall score was 41.2% were proficient in ELA, while only 19.3% of ELLs and 9.5% of SWD were proficient. Most 
of our Annual goals in last year's Comprehensive Education Plan addressed these subgroups, and our plan is to 
continue focusing on these subgroups as our percents continue to increase and this aligns to the district goals. 

For a 4th year, fifth grade was departmentalized in order to prepare our fifth grade students for middle school and 
high school. This initiative provides a rigorous curriculum in each content level that aligns with the expected standards 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          12 

 

in the higher grades. We have five reading teachers to provide Academic Intervention Services which is given before, 
during, and after school to students identified to be at risk. For IEP students who are entitled to receive least 
restrictive or with additional support services, there are four Special Education Teacher Support Services (SETSS) 
teachers, nine full time speech teachers, three occupational therapists, physical therapist, and one part-time hearing 
educator. The services include Physical Education, Art, Music, Spanish, Science, Social Studies, and Computer. We 
have a state-of- the-art library funded by the Robin Hood Foundation, that continues to cover the funding for a 
librarian, paraprofessional and after-school programs. Our students enjoy enriching experiences such as Glee Club, 
Chess in the Schools, Dance residencies, Music residencies, basketball team, and theater performances during the 
school day. After school, there is a chess club, a School of CPA theater performance, Flamenco residency, soccer club, 
robotics, music engineering, early childhood math enrichment program and various other activities providing students 
with enrichment through numerous partnership programs. 

Another Framework element in which we made the most progress this past school year was in Strong Family and 
Community Ties through our 3rd full year as a Community Learning School. PS 19Q has always collaborated with a 
number of organizations to provide different services to its families. The Community Based Organization (CBO) Hanac- 
Beacon has had its after school program at our school for many years, which is why, when the school was chosen as 
one of the Community Learning School (CLS) schools, they were asked to be one of the representatives in the CLS 
team. Other organizations that provide different types of programs or services to the families at the school are The 
New York Philharmonic, Hall of Science, Town Hall, Theater Works, Center for Arts Education and New York Cares. As 
a Community Learning School , we are always seeking different services to best meet the needs of our community. 
Thus far, we have provided students with back packs and school materials, provided specialized eye exams and free 
glasses for students who have been identified by Seeing a Bright Future, provided dental check-ups and oral health 
education by Colgate’s Bright Smiles Bright Futures, offered tutoring and presented parental workshops by Make the 
Road, Latin Woman Association and Hispanic Federation. Additionally, our school serves as a Food Bank of NYC 
resource site for neighborhood families for Food Pantry deliveries. 

At PS 19, we utilize every possible space available in our facility to provide an inviting and enriching environment for 
our students. We anticipate doing the same in the new addition to our building. Although we are large in size, we all 
work as one cooperative team. We are dedicated to individualize instruction in order to suit the specific strengths and 
needs of each and every child in our school.  

 

 

 

 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          13 

 

 

School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 24Q019 

School Configuration (2018-19) 

Grade Configuration 

0K,01,02,03,04,05 

Total Enrollment (2017-
18) 
English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 

1891 

SIG Recipient (Y/N) 

Transitional Bilingual 

YES 

Dual Language 

YES 

Self-Contained English as a Second 
Language 

Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) 

# Special Classes (ELA) 
# Special Classes (Math) 

# Visual Arts 
# Foreign Language 

% Title I Population 
% Free Lunch 
% Limited English Proficient 

171 
171 

26 
 

% American Indian or Alaska Native 
% Hispanic or Latino 
% White 

# SETSS (ELA) 
# SETSS (Math) 
Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) 
# Music 
# Drama 
# CTE 
# Dance 

77 
73 

24 
 

# Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) 
# Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) 

School Composition (2017-18) 

92.0%  % Attendance Rate 
88.3%  % Reduced Lunch 
57.2%  % Students with Disabilities 

Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) 

% Black or African American 

0.2% 
93.2%  % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 
0.4% 

% Multi-Racial 

Personnel (2015-16) 

Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) 
% of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate 
% Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 

15 
0% 
10% 

# of Assistant Principals (2016-17) 
% Teaching Out of Certification 
Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) 

Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) 

ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 

34.6%  Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 

Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 

82% 

Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-
17) 

Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) 

ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 
Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 
4 Year Graduation Rate 

Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 

N/A 
N/A 
N/A 

N/A 

Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 
US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 
6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) 
% ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures 
(2015-16) 

Reward 
In Good Standing 
Focus District 

Priority School 

Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) 

No 
Yes 
Yes 

Recognition 
Local Assistance Plan 
Focus School Identified by a Focus District 

No 

Focus Subgroups 

N/A 

Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) 

Elementary/Middle School 

Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) 

American Indian or Alaska Native 
Hispanic or Latino 
White 
Students with Disabilities 
Economically Disadvantaged 

American Indian or Alaska Native 
Hispanic or Latino 
White 
Students with Disabilities 
Economically Disadvantaged 

American Indian or Alaska Native 
Hispanic or Latino 
White 
Students with Disabilities 
Economically Disadvantaged 

American Indian or Alaska Native 
Hispanic or Latino 
White 
Students with Disabilities 
Economically Disadvantaged 

American Indian or Alaska Native 
Hispanic or Latino 
White 
Students with Disabilities 
Economically Disadvantaged 

American Indian or Alaska Native 
Hispanic or Latino 
White 
Students with Disabilities 
Economically Disadvantaged 

N/A 
NO 
N/A 
NO 
NO 

Black or African American 
Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander 
Multi-Racial 
Limited English Proficient 
ALL STUDENTS 

Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) 
Black or African American 
Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander 
Multi-Racial 
Limited English Proficient 
ALL STUDENTS 

N/A 
YES 
N/A 
NO 
YES 

Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) 

N/A 
YES 
N/A 
YES 
YES 
High School 

Black or African American 
Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander 
Multi-Racial 
Limited English Proficient 
ALL STUDENTS 

Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) 

N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 

Black or African American 
Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander 
Multi-Racial 
Limited English Proficient 
ALL STUDENTS 

Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) 
Black or African American 
Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander 
Multi-Racial 
Limited English Proficient 
ALL STUDENTS 

N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 

Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) 
Black or African American 
Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander 
Multi-Racial 
Limited English Proficient 
ALL STUDENTS 

N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 

No 

N/A 

207 
207 

23 
 

95.2% 
2.7% 
21.0% 

0.6% 
5.5% 
0.3% 

10 
2% 
7.3 

37.3% 

N/A 

N/A 
N/A 
N/A 

N/A 

N/A 
No 
No 

N/A 
YES 
N/A 
NO 
NO 

N/A 
YES 
N/A 
NO 
NO 

N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
YES 
YES 

N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 

N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 

N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          14 

 

 
 

Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans 

 

Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, 
motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged 
in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. 

Part 1 – Needs Assessment   

Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and 
formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not 
limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. 
Number responses accordingly. 
 
1.  What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element?  Indicate the data trends, source and year. 
2.  What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? 

Indicate the data trends, source and year. 

 
Our school's strengths relative to this Framework element are: 

 

 

for the 2017-18 ELA exams, our 3rd grade General Education and ELL students continued to improve their 
scoring in the 3 and 4 level range, indicating that that our curriculum changes in the past few years are having 
a positive effect. 
through implementation of the Leader in Me program, all grades have focused on a common academic goal of 
showing progress in achieving grade level reading 

  our parents continue to be greatly involved in the day to day school environment through volunteering in the 

classroom, on class trips, during special events and trips and in working closely with teachers to further the 
education of their children  

However, our priority needs continue to be performance and progress of our Limited English Proficient students and 
our Students with Disabilities, who in 2016-17 failed to make AYP as per the NYS Report card. Supporting data is as 
follows: 

 

In order to provide rigorous instruction for all students, including the subgroups of ELL and SWD, effective 
plans must be designed that provide opportunities for students to be highly engaged and intellectually 
challenged.  

  To be actively engaged in learning important and challenging standardized content, students need to become 

responsible for their own learning by developing autonomy. This autonomy is essential for any learner, 
however it may have the most impact on SWD's and ELL students.  

  The 2017-2018 Register Sheet states that of 1950 total students, 57.7% are English Language Learners (ELL) 

and 21 % are Students with Disabilities (SWD). These two subgroups have performed historically lower on the 
NYS ELA exam than the Non-ELL and non-SWD population of tested grades 3-5.  

Results from 2016, 2017 and 2018 NYS ELA Exam when comparing SWD's with General Education students Grades 3-
5: 

  Grade 5 General Education students scoring at level 3/4: 32% / 30% / 29% 
  Grade 5 Special Education students scoring at level 3/4: 2% / 0% / 4% 
  Grade 4 General Education students scoring at level 3/4: 49% / 41% / 51%  
  Grade 4 Special Education students scoring at level 3/4: 7% / 7% / 9% 
  Grade 3 General Education students scoring at level 3/4: 37% / 40% / 45% 
  Grade 3 Special Education students scoring at level 3/4: 11% / 9% / 14% 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          15 

 

Results from 2016, 2017 and 2018 NYS ELA Exam when comparing ELL students with Non-ELL students Grades 3-5: 

  Grade 5 Proficient students scoring at level 3/4: 40% / 35% / 37% 
  Grade 5 ELL students scoring at level 3/4: 5% / 2% / 1%  
  Grade 4 Proficient students scoring at level 3/4: 56% / 52% / 63% 
  Grade 4 ELL students scoring at level 3/4: 13% / 6% / 19% 
  Grade 3 Proficient students scoring at level 3/4: 51% / 60% / 64% 
  Grade 3 ELL students scoring at level 3/4: 8% / 15% / 24%  

Analysis: 

 

 

Subgroup SWD performed on average 32% lower than the rest of the non-SWD population on the 2015-2016 
ELA Exam, 31% lower on the 2016-2017 exam, and 33% lower on the 2017-18 exam.. 
Subgroup ELL performed on average 40% lower than the rest of the non-ELL population on the 2015-2016 ELA 
Exam, 41% lower on the 2016-2017 exam, and 40% lower on the 2017-18 exam. 

In 2015-16, 3rd grade moved up to 2nd place in the comparison to peer schools for the ELA exam, while 4th and 5th 
grade either stayed the same or moved down one slot compared to peer schools. This information is currently not 
available for 2017-18. 

 

In 2016-17, 15% of Expanding level ELLs moved from performance level 2 to 3 and 26% moved up one performance 
level from any level. When All ELL levels are examined, 16% of ELLs moved up at least one performance level on TC 
Running Records assessments. For the same period, 6% of SWD moved from performance level 1 to 2, while the 
movement for all levels of SWD was 11%.  

In 2017-18, only 6% of Expanding level ELLs moved from performance level 2 to 3, while 22% of Expanding ELLs 
moved up at least one performance level. When all ELLs are examined, 17% moved up at least one performance level. 
For the same period, 8% of SWD moved from performance level 1 to 2, while the movement of at least one 
performance level for all levels of SWD was 17.5%. A slightly lower outcome from year to year for ELLs, but slightly 
better for SWD  

  Although moving in the right direction, more focus on increasing grade level reading comprehension is 

required. Anecdotal evidence from observations showed that while teachers are more effective in executing 
effective guided reading lessons, guidelines and professional development on more effective use of data 
gathered during guided reading is required.  

According to the Danielson Framework for Teaching, student engagement 3C, is essential to learning and fostering 
autonomy. In the 2016-2017 school year 72% of teachers were rated effective in area 3C: student engagement, an 
increase of 4%, 10% were rated highly effective. 17% were rated in the developing range, and 1% were rated 
ineffective. In the 2017-18 school year, these ratings remained consistent, with the exception that 18% were 
developing and less than 1% ineffective. 

*Designing Coherent Instruction is also essential in developing the thoughtful construction of lessons that contain 
cognitively engaging activities. In the 2016-2017 school year 70% of teachers were rated effective and 17% were rated 
highly effective in 1E Planning and preparation (PP) & 70% effective plus 12% highly effective in the observation 
component of 1E. An additional 12% were rated in the developing range for PP & 17% for observations, 1% were 
rated ineffective for both PP and observation. In the 2017-18 school year, 66% of teachers were rated effective and 
19% highly effective in 1E: PP, and 70% were effective and 12% highly effective in 1E observation. Overall, these 
results indicate slightly higher effective/highly effective ratings for planning, but no change for implementation of the 
planned lesson compared to last year.  

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          16 

 

 

 

 
Part 2 – Annual Goal 

Indicate  your  school’s  2018-19  goal  for  improving  student  outcomes  and  school  performance  that  addresses  this 
element  of  the  Framework  for  Great  Schools–Rigorous  Instruction.  Your  goal  must  be  responsive  to  the  identified 
priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-
bound.  
By June 2019, the ELL and SWD subgroup of students in 3rd through 5th grade will be prepared to achieve a 2% increase 
in the number of students achieving scores of 3 and/or 4 on their ELA NYS exams, as measured by a shift in the number 
of 1) SWDs moving from Performance Level 1 to Performance Level 2 and, 2) Expanding level ELL students moving from 
Level 2 to Level 3, on the TC Running Records assessment.  

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          17 

 
Part 3a – Action Plan 

Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies 
your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for 
this Framework for Great Schools element, including: 

  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional 

 

development, and/or systems and structures needed to 
impact change. 
Strategies to address the needs of students with 
disabilities, English language learners, and other high-
need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, 
SIFE, STH). 

Target 
Group(s) 
Who will be 
targeted? 

Timeline 
What is the 
start and 
end date? 

Key Personnel 
Who is responsible 
for implementing 
and overseeing the 
activity/strategy? 

- During summative Year End conference supervisors discussed 
with teachers where they stand on our 2017-2108 instructional 
focus (building student autonomy) and discussed best practices 
to be implemented for 2018-2019 school year. 

All teachers 

June 2018 - 
June 2019 

Principal, Asst. 
Principals and 
coaches 

-Expectations for specific, timely and relevant feedback were 
discussed as it pertains to building student independence and 
accountability for their own learning.  

-The Leader in Me program, helped staff members understanding 
how to set student, class and grade goals (WIGs - Wildly 
Important Goals) and fostering student autonomy and leadership 
towards attaining those goals. 

-For 2017-18 all grades worked towards a goal of 100% of 
students showing progress in running record level. 

-Component 1e, will measure teachers design of effective lessons 
that include a clear sequence of instruction and a cognitively 
engaging independent practice that achieves conceptual learning 
for the 2018-2019 school year. Danielson component 1e will see 
an increase in effective ratings as a result of these teacher 
designed structures that promote greater student autonomy.  

● Assistant Principal will train reading and lead teachers in use of 
guided reading supplemental resources and analysis of data: 

All teachers 

Sept 2018– 
June 2019 

 

 

 

 

Lead Teachers will be provided next phase of PD on the 
approach and materials to new teachers 
Lead Teachers will be provided training on using data 
gathered during guided reading to effectively plan future 
instruction 
Supervisors will ensure that guided reading is included in 
all class program matrices and link to balanced literacy 
instruction 
Supervisors will monitor teacher implementation of 
guided reading in the classroom, with particular focus on 
SWD and ELLs 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Principal, Asst. 
Principals lead 
teachers, and 
coaches, planning 
teams 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          18 

 

 

Students will be taught self-monitoring skills to be 
applied independently so that students can be more 
autonomous. 

  Kindergarten teachers will assess foundational skills--
phonemic awareness and concepts of print--and use 
these earlier and more often to predict Reading 
readiness. 

  Guided Reading will begin earlier in Kindergarten, based 

on earlier identification of students "Ready to read." 

School wide professional development will outline clear 
expectations of school Instructional focus (Developing student 
autonomy.)  

-Focus on lesson design to optimize student intellectual 
challenge, differentiated rigor, performance and choice.  

-Tasks will be developed to support behaviors that increase 
motivation and engagement. Students are expected to share 
their own thinking, reflect and assess their own progress.  

-Units to include inquiry based projects that allow students to 
explore and problem solve through differentiated 
demonstrations of learning.  

-Use of feedback writing structures and Writing  

Pathways rubrics and checklists to evaluate the writing and 
provide feedback to students. Students will receive specific 
feedback aligned to goals, next steps and standard setting 
criteria.  

-Use the NYCDOE Framework for Early Literacy to evaluate 
components of Kindergarten literacy curriculum beginning with 
inclusion of explicit vocabulary instruction. As per the 
Framework, vocabulary is inextricably linked to comprehension 
and it is a crucial pillar of literacy development for all students, 
but in particular for our ELLs, SWD and economically 
disadvantaged students. 

-We will continue to purchase the i-Ready™ Diagnostic and 
instruction program for assistance in diagnosing students’ skill 
levels in Math and Reading. This program will be used for grade 
level supplemental instruction. Students will be expected to 
monitor their progress and pace their completion of programs as 
assigned by teacher. i-Ready will be introduced in Kindergarten. 

  Teachers use Hess Cognitive Rigor Matrix to develop 

instruction that meets rigorous expectation for different 
student levels and subgroups.  

  Provide teachers with timely update of their students' 

progress towards their reading level goals after each 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Sept 2018- 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          19 

 

 

running record cycle through the Running Record Growth 
report. 

o  Grade supervisors work with teachers to address 

All teachers, 
and parents, 
students  

June 2019 

the immediate needs of struggling students  

Leader in Me 

-Involve parents in setting students’ goals and analyzing student 
progress toward these goals through ongoing meetings during 
parent engagement time and parent teacher conferences. 

-Provide parents with suggestions for working toward the 
established goals at home. 

-Provide parent workshops about how to use i-Ready.com and 
other web-based/online instructional programs 

- Involve students in student-led parent-teacher conferences, 
thereby raising students' awareness of their goals, and together 
with parents, analyze progress towards goals as well as develop 
action plans to achieve goals by year end. 

SWD Subgroup: 

 

-Inclusion of materials such as thinking maps, graphic organizers 
and differentiated instruction to meet the needs of individual 
students as indicated on their IEP's. Specially designed 
instruction such as LLI, Wilson, and Fundations will be utilized to 
promote student phonemic skills so that they may access texts 
independently. 

 

Goals for students with disabilities will match or enhance their 
IEP goals. Goals will stress independent application of standard -
based skills which will provide access to the general education 
curriculum based on the Present Level of Performance on an IEP. 

 

Include SWD in after school and Saturday enrichment programs, 
including Basketball league, Robotics 

 

ELL: Subgroup  

 

Sept 2018 – 
June 2019 

SWD's 
Students 
with 
disabilities  

Principal, Asst. 
Principals and 
School Based 
Support Team. 
teachers of SWD and 
other service 
providers 

English 
Language 
Learners 

Sept 2018 – 
June 2019 

Principal, Asst. 
Principals and 
coaches, 

ENL teachers  

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          20 

-Design of structured lesson plans (1e) that support grade 
standards and current unit. Plan will also include a clear language 
objective that will be applied through cognitively challenging 
activities (3c).  

-Scaffolds and ENL methodology will also provide support for 
differentiated language proficiency levels using the New 
Language Progressions.  

-Inclusion of strategies from the Hochman Writing Program and 
the research conducted by Lilly Wong Fillmore to  

develop academic vocabulary for ELL subgroups. 

  Continue to support the Dual Language classes' transition 

to Teacher's College bilingual curriculum to enable ELLs 
in the Dual Language classes to build Native language 
proficiency and help them transfer those skills into their 
English language skills.  

  Review previous year's results of all four NYSESLAT 

modalities by grade to develop and implement strategies 
to help increase ELL language development. 

  ENL and other AIS teachers will continue, working with 
Maryann Cucchiara, work around Disciplinary Literacy 
and expand to all grades to address the need for ELL 
students to work with and comprehend complex texts. 
Through deconstructing complex texts and paying close 
attention to the grammatical structures of sentences 
teachers will lead ELL students to greater comprehension 
and better prepare them for the texts they may 
encounter in subsequent grades and in assessments. 

 

 
 

 
3b – Parent and Family Engagement 

How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York 
State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible 
for implementation and oversight. 
Conduct orientation meetings in September to introduce parents to grade curriculum and extra-curricular 
opportunities 

Request teachers conduct one parent workshop per month during parent engagement Tuesdays focused on home-
school support for the current unit. Topics may include: 

independent reading 

 
  writing prompts and structures 
  math facts and grade expectations in math 
iReady, Raz-Kids and other online programs 
 
  Hess Cognitive Rigor Matrix 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          21 

 

Hold grade-wide parent workshops including the following topics: 

state test requirements 
state standards by grade 

 
 
  home math practice and games 
  use of online instructional support programs (i-Ready, Raz-Kids)  

 

 
Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 

Part  4a.  Indicate  resources  you will  leverage  to  achieve  this  annual  goal  and  implement this  action  plan,  including 
human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 
● Professional development will take place for the most part during Monday professional development time as per 
UFT contract 

● Whenever necessary, mass prep periods will be provided to allow for grade level professional development 

● Per-diem substitutes 

guided reading protocols and materials 

 
  ASCD and research articles about lesson structure and student autonomy 
  Disciplinary Literacy 
  TCRWP Reading Assessments 
  TC Writing Performance Based Assessments 
  EDL2 Reading Assessments 
  Reading Street/ Calle de la Lectura Reading Assessments (Kindergarten Dual only) 
  Reach for Reading and Reach into Phonics Assessments for K-2 
  Writing Pathways 
 
  NYS Language Progressions 

i-Ready Diagnostics and Instruction Program for K-5 

 
Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 
Title III, 

X 

Tax Levy 

X 

Title I SWP 

 

Title I TA 

X 

Immigrant 

Title II, 
Part A 

X 

Title III, 
Part A 

 

 

C4E 

 

21st Century 

Grant 

 
Part 5 – Progress Monitoring  

 

SIG 

 

PTA Funded 

 

In Kind 

 

Other 

Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement 
planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 
By February 2019, SWD and ELLs will have made adequate progress in their Fountas and Pinnell reading levels 
required to move up one performance level, based on a comparison between the September and January 
benchmarks of the TC Running Records. 

 
Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January 
Regents, etc.) 
TC Running Records, Lead measures that support wildlyy important goals (WIGs)  

 
Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action 
plan, if applicable. 

 

 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          22 

 

Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans 

 
Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and 
school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. 

Part 1 – Needs Assessment   

Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and 
formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not 
limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. 
Number responses accordingly. 
 
1.  What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element?  Indicate the data trends, source and year. 
2.  What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? 

Indicate the data trends, source and year. 

3.  What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? 
Our school's strengths relative to this Framework element include (based on 2017-18 School Environment Survey): 

Increase in both overall ELA, and Math State test scores 

 
  35% met state standards on ELA (below city’s average of 47%, but above comparison group at 33%) 
  38% met state standards on Math (below city’s average of 49%, and equal to comparison group at 38%) 

  100% of K-5 teachers say that students are safe in the hallways, bathrooms, locker room, and cafeteria (City: 

95%)  

  89% of teachers say that adults at the school teach students how to advocate for themselves (City: 85%, but 

6% points higher than last year)  

  90% of teachers say that students feel it is important to come to school every day (City: 88%, but 6% points 

lower than last year) 

  94% of teachers say that adults at their school tell their students they believe they can achieve high academic 

standards 

  92% of teachers say that they recommend their school to families seeking a place for their child 

P.S. 19Q has received a Very Good rating on its Learning Environment Survey, with 92% of parents and 86% of 
teachers responding positively. For the 2018-2019 school year we want to build on this strength, creating and 
maintaining a culture that encourages students to support one another, build community and prepare students 
socially and emotionally for life's challenges. Promoting the academic and social development of our students, 
requires that we provide an environment in which these students feel safe, supported and engaged in ambitious 
intellectual activity. In order to increase student achievement, we need to promote a culture that encourages 
students to become active agents in their own learning, setting goals, supporting one another so each may learn to 
his or her fullest potential.  

The Leader in Me program in 2017-18 yielded positive outcomes by moving beyond the physical structure and 
beautification of the school environment and student awareness to individual, class, grade and school academic goal 
setting and involving students in more leadership opportunities. Survey of 4th and 5th grade teachers showed that in 
most classes 60-80% of students met at least one personal or academic goal. 

The priority needs that will be addressed in this goal and action plan for this Framework element are as follows: 

Leader in Me Year 3 challenges include: 

  bringing all staff and students together under one roof and maintaining high level of LIM awareness and 

involvement 

  maintaining momentum by including 1st through 5th grade in individual personal and academic goal setting. 
 

involving parents as a way to support student's overall growth by practicing LIM habits outside of school 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          23 

 

 

increased focus and training on social emotional skills awareness 

School’s needs based on the 2017-18 School Quality Guide, 2017-18 School Environment Survey, and Leader in Me 
survey:  

  11% point gap between school and city both ELA, and Math State test scores 
  35% met state standards on ELA (below city’s average of 47%, but above comparison group at 33%) 
  38% met state standards on Math (below city’s average of 49%, and equal to comparison group at 38%) 

79% of teachers say that adults at their school recognize disruptive behavior as social-emotional learning opportunity 

77% of teachers say that adults at their school have access to school based supports to assist in behavioral and 
emotional escalation 

Based on end of year LIM survey, teachers want to learn more about how to teach the social/emotional aspects 

Supporting the whole child includes having: 

 
 
 

 

Full implementation of the Leader in Me program 
Full implementation of the community Learning School initiative 
Staff of four guidance counselors on board to get to know and address all issues for all students in their 
academy 
Increased parental involvement and engagement through effective and efficient use of Tuesday afternoon 
sessions 

  Establishing protocols to maintain safety, for example, our Student Transitioning memorandum, Missing Child 

Protocols, Social Media Protocols, and following NYCDOE Student Discipline Code, among other policies and 
procedures. 

 

 
Part 2 – Annual Goal 

Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this 
element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the 
identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, 
and Time-bound. 
By June 2019, through our implementation of The Leader in Me core habits, 100% of 1st through 5th grade students 
will be able to set short and long term personal goals (through Social/Emotional skills awareness) and academic goals 
(focused on improving their ELA proficiency), and 50% of these students will be able to meet one personal and one 
academic short term goal, as measured by a teacher survey(for academic goal) and student survey (for social 
emotional goal). 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          24 

 
Part 3a – Action Plan 

Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies 
your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for 
this Framework for Great Schools element, including: 

  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional 
development, and/or systems and structures needed 
to impact change. 
Strategies to address the needs of students with 
disabilities, English language learners, and other high-
need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-
credited, SIFE, STH). 

 

Target 
Group(s) 
Who will be 
targeted? 

Timeline 
What is the 
start and 
end date? 

Key Personnel 
Who is responsible 
for implementing 
and overseeing the 
activity/strategy? 

 

Research based instructional programs: 

All K-5 
Teachers and 
Administrators  

June 2018- 
June 2019 

 

During the 2018-2019 school year PS 19Q will implement year 
three of The Leader in Me program to address the needs of the 
whole child and to develop fundamental life skills to put each 
child on the path to college and career readiness. 

Administrators  

Leader in Me 
Associate 

Leader in Me 
Lighthouse team 

  Provide new staff with an overview of the philosophy of 
The Leader in Me program. The first training for all staff 
will introduce Rethinking Leadership, the Seven Habits, 
Launching Leadership, and Creating Culture.  
Support staff in the next phase of implementation-
Empowering Instruction.  
Increase student leadership through full 
implementation of Student Lighthouse team 

 

 

  Provide time for Teachers on Action Teams to meet 

regularly with student lighthouse counterparts 

  This will continue to assist in modeling the structure of 

building student autonomy. 

  Grade team study group look at inclusion of Leader in 

Me in the curriculum planning 

  Purchase Leader in Me Spanish materials. 

  The "Books that Help us Grow" will be aligned to the 7 

 

 

Habits of the Leader in Me program. 
Student Leadership opportunities through the Schools 
within Schools community service projects, including 
classroom jobs and school-wide teams, such as 
Recycling Team. 
Students in Grade 1 through 5, including SwDs and ELLs 
will create Student Data Portfolios to visibly track their 
achievements and create goals based on their own 
needs. The Student Data Portfolios are aligned to the 
instructional focus engaging students to use discussion 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          25 

 

practices, incorporate feedback and provide 
opportunities to develop students’ ability to measure 
their own learning for each lesson objective. 

  The Student data Portfolios will be initiated in 

November and will be ongoing throughout the school 
year. Each teacher will implement activities/times and 
situations when students can ascertain and update 
these portfolios within the classroom.  

  During the May Teacher/Parent conferences, it is 

expected that Students in Grades 4 and 5 students will 
conduct their own conferences based on the portfolios 
they have created informing their parents of their 
successes and struggles with the guidance of their 
teacher(s).  

  During the 2018-2019 school year, the "Lighthouse 

Team" will continue to serve as the steering committee, 
guiding school implementation of the Leader in Me 
philosophy. 

  The Leader in Me School Implementation Process will 

 

provide training in the Leader in Me Sustainment Core. 
This will include the Leader in Me Coaching System 
which will provide community coaching days and onsite 
coaching days as well as the Leader in Me Online and 
Intellectual Property License. 
Social -emotional learning is the ability to understand, 
manage, and express the social and emotional aspects 
of one’s life in ways that enable the successful 
management of life tasks such as learning, forming 
relationships, solving everyday problems, and adapting 
to the complex demands of growth and development. 

All teachers 
and 
Administrators 

September 
2018-June 
2019 

Administrators 

Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, 
English language learners, and other high-need student 
subgroups. Currently 57% of our student population are English 
Language Learners, and 21% of our students have an IEP.  

Lighthouse 
Team  

Sept. 2018-
June 2019 

Administrators  

 

  The 7 Habits is a synthesis of universal, timeless 

principles of personal and interpersonal effectiveness, 
such as responsibility, vision, integrity, teamwork, 
collaboration and renewal, which are secular in nature 
and common to all people and cultures. 

  Understanding that all students and parents, regardless 

of socio-economic or migratory status, have special 
talents that can contribute to school activities, for 
example designing and producing costumes, painting or 
illustrating for plays.  

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          26 

 

  All students (1-5) including SWD and ELLs will be able to 

visibly track their achievements and create new goals 
based on their own needs. 

  Trade books that offer examples of the seven habits will 

be utilized so the students have concrete examples to 
make personal connections. 

Members of the Lighthouse Team, as well as the Leader in Me 
Coach, will provide additional training before and after school, 
during professional development days, Monday PD’s and 
Tuesday Family Engagement. 

All parents 

Sept. 2018-
June 2019 

Principal, AP's, 
Lighthouse team 

 

  Engaging families and supporting their understanding of 

Supportive Environment in order to support their 
children at home. 

  Parent understanding of social-emotional learning.  
Offering workshops to parents during the day and in 
the evening to understand the expectations and the 
process of The Leader in Me. 

Fair to engage our school community in the TLIM work. 

  Open School Week. 
 
  Parent Orientation. 
  Parent-Teacher Conferences (4x year as per contract). 
  Utilizing Parent Engagement time during Tuesdays for 

workshops on timely topics being taught in the 
curriculum. 

  Newsletters to parents. 
  Apps and website recommendations to parents to help 

students at home. 

  Translated Notices and Services.  

 

 
 

 
3b – Parent and Family Engagement 

How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to 
support  the  whole  child?  Include  the  timeline  and  identify  key  personnel  and  stakeholders  responsible  for 
implementation and oversight. 
Members of the Lighthouse Team, as well as the Leader in Me Coach, will provide additional training before and after 
school, during professional development days, Monday PD’s and Tuesday Family Engagement. 

  Engaging families and supporting their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support their 

children at home. 

  Parent understanding of social-emotional learning.  Offering workshops to parents during the day and in the 

evening to understand the expectations and the process of The Leader in Me. 

Fair to engage our school community in the TLIM work. 

  Open School Week. 
 
  Parent Orientation. 
  Parent-Teacher Conferences (4x year as per contract). 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          27 

 

 

  Utilizing Parent Engagement time during Tuesdays for workshops on timely topics being taught in the 

curriculum. 

  Newsletters to parents. 
  Apps and website recommendations to parents to help students at home. 
  Translated Notices and Services.  

 
Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 
Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including 
human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 
 

Instructional Resources: 

Student data portfolios; and student journals/workbooks/ teachers’ guides  

 
  Ongoing partnership with Franklin Covey and other schools implementing TLIM  
 
  Posters and banners to highlight the 7 habits  
  TLIM website (license) for videos  
  Books that Help us Grow Literature (Texts aligned to each habit for all classes)  
 
  Human Resources 
 
  Action Team meetings and meetings student lighthouse 

 

Lighthouse Team monthly meetings (will require schedule adjustments) 

 
Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 

X 

Tax Levy 

X 

Title I SWP 

 

C4E 

 

21st Century 

Grant 

 
Part 5 – Progress Monitoring  

 

 

Title I TA 

SIG 

 

 

Title II, 
Part A 

PTA Funded 

 

 

Title III, 
Part A 

In Kind 

 

X 

Title III, 

Immigrant 

Other 

Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement 
planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 
 

By February 2019, students in Grades 1 through 5 will design their own Student Data Portfolios with a personal 
mission statement, and incorporate a personal goal, an ELA goal and a math goal, and 25% of the students targeted 
will report progress in achieving their short term goals as measured by a teacher survey and student survey. 

 
Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 
First through 5th grade teachers will complete a survey in February and Students in Grades 1 through 5 will complete 
a survey in June of 2019, assessing their own progress in meeting targeted goals based on an assessment of their 
Leadership Notebooks(Binder). 

 
Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action 
plan, if applicable. 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          28 

 

Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans 

Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success 
and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional 
development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. 

 

Part 1 – Needs Assessment   

Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and 
formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not 
limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. 
Number responses accordingly. 
 
1.  What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element?  Indicate the data trends, source and year. 
2.  What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? 

Indicate the data trends, source and year. 

Our school's strengths relative to this Framework element are: 

(From the 2017-18 School Environment Survey) 

  93% of teachers say that at their school the principal, teachers and staff collaborate to make the school run 

effectively (City: 88%) 

  97% of teachers say that they talk to one another about instruction (City: 97%) 
  93% of teachers say that their professional development experiences this year have been sustained and 

coherent. 

  One of the school's biggest strengths this year is the addition of six Peer Collaborative Lead teachers who took 

on the inter-visitation plan for our Effective and Highly Effective teachers, as well as support colleagues 
through peer coaching targeting 1e: Designing Coherent Instruction, planning organized lessons suitable to 
groups of students; 3C:Engaging students in learning that are fully aligned with instructional outcome, and 
utilization of professional learning structures to improve student learning; work with school leadership to 
improve curriculum and maximize use of the Danielson Framework targeting components 1e: Designing 
Coherent Instruction, 3c: Engaging Students in Learning, and Aligning Academic Systems to build student 
autonomy embedding the Leader in Me Framework. 

The priority needs that will be addressed in this goal and action plan for this Framework element include; 

  Teacher effectiveness affects students' outcomes. The 2015-16 Advance Teacher Effective outcomes 

demonstrated a need for further teacher development in two of the components -1e: Designing coherent 
instruction and 3C: Engaging Students in Learning to support building student autonomy. In 2016-2017, 87% 
were rated effective or highly effective in 1e, 11% were rated developing in 1e. In 2017-18, 83% of teachers 
were rated effective or highly effective in 1e. In 2016-17, 82% of teachers were rated effective or highly 
effective in 3c. 17% were rated developing in component 3C. Representing a 4% increase in Effective/Highly 
effective from previous year. This rating remained unchanged in 2017-18. Student progress cannot happen 
until there is further teacher progress in the area of designing coherent sequenced lessons that intentionally 
organize instructional groups to advance and engage students in learning. 

  The School Environment Survey identified teacher's low perception of questioning and discussion as follows: 

58% of teachers say that students build on each others ideas during class discussion. 

47% of teachers say that students respond to challenging questions in class. 

76% of teachers say that students participate in class discussions at some point. 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          29 

 

Despite this low perception, 80% of 3B:questioning and discussion ratings are effective or highly effective. However, 
the component is rated 15% less often than 3C. There is opportunity to increase the number of times this component 
is rated as well as opportunity to support teacher improvement in this component. 

  Our population of greater than 50% ELL's demands explicit teaching of oral language skills, thoughtfully 

planned learning tasks and lessons that support as well as reflect important concepts that are fully aligned 
with the instructional outcomes designed to challenge student thinking. 

  The 2016-17 Inquiry focused on integrating ENL strategies in all subjects and by all teachers created a greater 

 

awareness of the ELL students' language needs and how the Common Branch teachers can address these 
needs in order to achieve greater outcomes in subject specific goals. In 2017-18, continued to utilize these 
strategies 
Since 2016-17 all staff members participated in a 2-day training for implementation of the Leader in Me 
program. The expectation was that teachers would implement the program in their classrooms and would 
encourage goal setting and autonomy in their students. In 2017-18 teacher collaboration on the 
communication of the core elements of the program increased, however more time is needed for planning 
collaboration for student autonomy. In June, further professional development was offered that focused on 
putting Instructional Action Plans together that supports Wildly Important Goals (WIGs). The Leader in Me 
Lighthouse team created a school WIG and all grades implemented their own WIG. In 2017-18, teachers were 
provided PD opportunities to plan specific strategies and opportunities to measure these WIGs. 

  During 2017-18, our school once again took full advantage of the Professional Learning(PL) opportunities 

offered by the Queens North BFSC. More than 100 teachers attended 65 different series of PLs. The topics for 
PLs were strategically chosen to meet the needs of teachers identified by Measure of Teacher Practice 
feedback and Measure of Student Learning outcomes or to support new initiatives. Many turnkey 
opportunities were provided at the whole school or grade levels. 

  One challenge our school faced last year was transitioning back to the Teacher's College Readers and Writers 

Project curriculum for grades 1-5 for all classes except the Dual language classes. All ELA teachers required 
retraining due to high turnover in the 5 years since we used the program. For 2018-19, this transition will 
include dual language 1st through 5th grade, Kindergarten writing units of study and we will secure the 
services of a Teacher's College coach.  

  Assistant principal's professional development has been sporadic. To align with the district leadership 

development goals, all assistant principals will have a professional development goal as part of their APPR. 

 

 
Part 2 – Annual Goal 

Indicate  your  school’s  2018-19  goal  for  improving  student  outcomes  and  school  performance  that  addresses  this 
element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified 
priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-
bound. 
By June 2019, all teachers will participate in a series of professional development sessions with supervisors (for grade 
level literacy, math, and questioning and discussion best practices), BFSC (for areas identified in observations) , and the 
Peer Collaborative Teacher (PCT) Team (leading inquiry cycles targeting the planning of specific lessons) which will lead 
to an increase of 3% in the effective ratings on the Danielson Framework component 3C: Engaging students in learning 
and an increase of 1% on 3B: Questioning and discussion, in order to support our instructional goal of building student 
autonomy, as measured by the Danielson Framework .  

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          30 

 
Part 3a – Action Plan 

Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies 
your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for 
this Framework for Great Schools element, including: 

  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional 

 

development, and/or systems and structures needed to 
impact change. 
Strategies to address the needs of students with 
disabilities, English language learners, and other high-
need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, 
SIFE, STH). 

  Kindergarten teachers will continue to integrate Thinking 

 

Maps into all literacy and mathematics units of study 
First, second and third grade and dual language teachers 
will receive professional development on Thinking Maps 
about methods of applying different strategies to 
support student thinking that will transfer into writing.  

  All teachers will receive Hochman Writing Revolution 
Professional Development that will include discussion 
with grade level colleagues about methods of applying 
these methodologies to support learning tasks that 
provide cognitive challenge to their specific grade. 

  All teachers will receive professional development that 

will include study groups based on published studies, 
articles and books about designing/planning coherent 
structured lessons, engaging students in learning and 
how to build student autonomy in various subjects and 
disciplines, for example, incorporating a book study 
using The Leader in Me by Steven Covey and Sean Covey 
published in 2008,2014 by Simon and Schuster as well as 
the Professional Development that will occur by the 
trainers from the Leader in Me Program.. 

  All new Teachers K-5 will receive training from the 

Leader in Me Staff Developers/Trainers of the Program. 
The first training for all staff will introduce Rethinking 
Leadership, the Seven Habits, Launching Leadership, and 
Creating Culture. This will assist in modeling the 
structure of building student autonomy. 

  The Leader in Me School Implementation Process will 

continue the "Lighthouse Team" which is a small team of 
teachers that will work on building the plan and Seven 
Habits Certification. The "Lighthouse Team " will work 
with teachers on 1E: Designing Coherent Instruction with 
some differentiation, 3C: Engaging Students in Learning 
with the goal of building structure into activities in order 
to build student autonomy. 

  The Leader in Me School Implementation Process will 

provide training in the Leader in Me Sustainment Core. 
This will include the Leader in Me Coaching System 
which will provide community coaching days and onsite 

Target 
Group(s) 
Who will be 
targeted? 

Timeline 
What is the 
start and 
end date? 

Key Personnel 
Who is responsible 
for implementing 
and overseeing the 
activity/strategy? 

Kindergarten 
and first 
grade 
Teachers 

Sept.2018- 

June 2019 

 

All teachers 

 

 

 

 

 

 

All Staff 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Sept.2018-
June 2019 

 

 

 

Sept.2018-
June 2019 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Principal, Assistant 
Principals, Peer 
Collaborative Lead 
Teachers, and 
Literacy Coach. 

 

 

 

 

 

Staff Developer from 
the Leader in Me 
Program, Principal, 
Assistant Principals, 
Peer Collaborative 
Lead Teachers, 
Coaches, and 
teacher teams. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          31 

 

 

coaching days as well as the Leader in Me Online and 
Intellectual Property License. 
Inquiry Cycles will focus on components 1E:Designing 
Coherent Instruction, 3C: Engaging students in learning 
and aligning academic systems embedding the Leader in 
Me structure working towards building student 
autonomy. Teachers will work collaboratively setting 
school goals, student goals fostering student lead 
learning, using curriculum calendars/units to plan 
learning activities to maximize student learning. Utilize 
student data, as well as student work to customize 
instruction addressing scaffolds in order to provide 
cognitive challenge. 

  Math coaches will provide training in teaching strategies 
to address Number Sense Standards and developing Tier 
II vocabulary for math usage with ELL's. 

  All science clusters will receive professional 

development to address 1e: Designing and Planning 
Coherent Instruction embedding science, technology, 
engineering, math teaching strategies (STEM), and Tier II 
vocabulary to support ELL's in the development of 3c: 
Engaging Students in Learning through inquiry based 
tasks in our efforts to build student autonomy.  

  All Social Studies will receive professional development 

 

on the use of the new passport program and related 
materials  
Self-Paced professional development from Teq was 
purchased for more engaging interactive lesson 
planning. All teachers will be expected to complete a 
minimum number of Tech related PDs as a way to 
strengthen their ability to support the Computer Science 
for all initiative 

  All ELA teachers in grades K-5 will participate in 

professional develop designed to reintroduce the 
Teacher's College Readers and Writers Project. 
  All teachers who attended outside professional 

development will be given the opportunity to turnkey 
the learning to rest of staff during Monday PDs, 
Chancellor conference days and Study groups 

  Administrators will rate Danielson components 3b as 

often as they rate component 3c as both must be 
connected and supported in every lesson 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

All staff 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Sept.2018- 

June 2019 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Assistant Principals, 
Coaches, Peer 
Collaborative 
Teachers, and all K-5 
staff. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          32 

 

 

K-2 
Classroom 
Teachers 

 

 

 

All Science 
Clusters 

 

 

 

 

 

All Staff 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Assistant Principals, 
Math Coaches, Peer 
Collaborative 
Teachers, and K-2 
classroom teachers. 

Sept.2018- 

 

June 2019 

Assistant Principal 

 

 

 

 

 

Assistant Principal 

Sept.2018-
June 2019 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Sept.2018-
June 2019 

Assistant Principal 

 

 

Assistant Principal 

 

 

 

 

All Staff 

 

 

 

Sept.2018-
June 2019 

1-5 grade 
teachers 

 

Trained teachers 

 

 

Sept.2018-
June 2019 

 

All teachers 

Nov 2018-
June 2019 

  Teachers with specific training in Thinking Maps will 

 

 

 

continue to support colleagues' professional 
development in the planning of clear unit structures 
using the strategies to engage students and advance 
them through the content. Expectation is that 2nd and 
3rd grade teachers will be trained by June 2019. 

Kindergarten 
and First 

Sept.2018-
June 2019 

Principal, Assistant 
Principals, Peer 
Collaborative Lead 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          33 

grade 
teachers 

 

All Teachers 

 

 

 

Teachers, and 
Literacy Coach 

 

Sept.2018-
June 2019 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  Teachers with specific training in the Hochman 
Revolution will continue to support colleagues' 
professional development in the planning of clear unit 
structures designed to engage students and advance 
them through the content implementing these strategies 
throughout the year. 
In support of ELL's and students with disabilities, 
teachers will be provided with professional development 
on intentionally planning/organizing instructional groups 
to target student learning (1e), differentiating instruction 
within the types of Thinking Maps to teach students to 
find patterns, incorporating the Hochman outline to 
assist in scaffolding writing in order to challenge and 
support student thinking (3c). 

  Teachers who were rated highly effective last year were 

also ones with advanced skills in both components 1e: 
Designing Coherent Instruction and 3c:engaging students 
in learning. These teachers will open up their classrooms 
for inter-visitations focused on these components, how 
they plan instruction as well as embed a leadership 
culture and align academic systems to support school 
wide goals, student goals, student led learning to build 
student autonomy within their classrooms.  

  The Peer Collaborative Lead Teachers will support 

colleagues through peer coaching targeting 1e: 
Designing Coherent Instruction, planning organized 
lessons suitable to groups of students. 3C:Engaging 
students in learning that are fully aligned with 
instructional outcome, and utilization of professional 
learning structures to improve student learning. 

  Peer Collaboratve Lead Teachers will work with school 
leadership to improve curriculum and maximize use of 
the Danielson Framework targeting components 1e: 
Designing Coherent Instruction, 3c: Engaging Students in 
Learning, and Aligning Academic Systems to build 
student autonomy embedding the Leader in Me 
Framework. 
Supervisors will specifically look for evidence of both 
1e:Designing Coherent Instruction ,planning engaging 
instruction and 3C: Engaging students in Learning with 
Leader in Me structures embedded during teacher 
observations for all teachers, not only those rated under 
the Danielson Framework. 

 

Highly effective teachers will model the behaviors they teach 
and the expectations they set forth for their students in relation 
to components 1e and 3C as well as how they align academic 
systems from the Leader in Me Framework to create a 
leadership culture within the classroom building student 
autonomy. 

All Teachers  Sept.2018-
June 2019 

Principal, Assistant 
Principals, Highly 
Effective Teachers, 
Coaches, Peer 
Collaborative Lead 
Teachers. 

  Parents are their children's first teachers, and it is 

All Parents 

important to inform parents of the benefits of 

Sept.2018-
June 2019 

Principal, Ass 
Principals, Parent 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          34 

coordinator, 
Lighthouse Team  

 

developing student autonomy at home and how that 
translates into life skills, critical thinking, career, college 
readiness, and social emotional learning skills, thus 
leading to improved decision making and 
communication skills. Parents will be encouraged to 
attend workshops during parent engagement days on 
how to build autonomy in the home and how that can 
transfer to skills they will be learning in class. 

  The Leader in Me professional development will include 
a Seven Habits Families certification in which parents will 
be provided with training on family communication, the 
seven habits training for families, how to use as well as 
teach those habits at home and how those skills transfer 
into the classroom. 

 

 
 

 
3b – Parent and Family Engagement 

How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies 
to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and 
identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 

  Parents are their children's first teachers, and it is important to inform parents of the benefits of developing 
student autonomy at home and how that translates into life skills, critical thinking, career, college readiness, 
and social emotional learning skills, thus leading to improved decision making and communication skills. 
Parents will be encouraged to attend workshops during parent engagement days on how to build autonomy 
in the home and how that can transfer to skills they will be learning in class. 

  The Leader in Me professional development will include a Seven Habits Families certification in which parents 

will be provided with training on family communication, the seven habits training for families, how to use as 
well as teach those habits at home and how those skills transfer into the classroom. 

 

 
Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 

Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including 
human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 

  TC Readers and Writers Project professional development 
  Professional development will take place for the most part during Monday professional development time as 

per UFT contract. 

  A common prep period will be provided to allow for grade level professional development.  
  Per diem substitutes 
  Copies of articles/handouts, and the book, The Leader in Me by Steven Covey 
  Hochman professional learning 
 
  Teq online professional learning 
  Teq in-house professional learning 
  BFSC professional learning 
  Thinking Maps professional learning 

SDE professional learning 

 
Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 

X 

Tax Levy 

X 

Title I SWP 

 

Title I TA 

 

Title II, 
Part A 

 

Title III, 
Part A 

 

Title III, 

Immigrant 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          35 

 

 

C4E 

 

21st Century 

Grant 

 
Part 5 – Progress Monitoring  

 

SIG 

 

PTA Funded 

 

In Kind 

X 

Other 

Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement 
planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 
By February 2019, there will be an increase of 1.5% in the number of teachers who have been observed and rated to 
have effectively demonstrated the attributes modeled during professional development and outlined in the Danielson 
Rubric for component 3C: Engaging Students in Learning and 3B: Questioning and Discussion.. 

 
Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 
The instrument of measure to monitor and assess progress is through the Danielson Rubric for component 3C. 
Supervisors will monitor and look for evidence through teacher observations rated on Advance in component 3C: 
Engaging students in Learning and 3B: Questioning and Discussion. 

 
Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action 
plan, if applicable. 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          36 

 

Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans 

 

Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and 
nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional 
support that drives student achievement. 
 
Part 1 – Needs Assessment   

Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and 
formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not 
limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. 
Number responses accordingly. 
 
1.  What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element?  Indicate the data trends, source and year. 
2.  What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? 

Indicate the data trends, source and year. 

Our school's strengths relative to this Framework element are: 

  97% of our teachers say that the Principal makes clear to the staff her expectations for meeting instructional 

goals 

  98% of teachers say that the principal sets high standards for student learning 
  95% of teachers say that principal sets clear expectations for teachers about implementing what they have 

learned in professional development 

  96% of parents feel that the principal works to create a sense of community in the school 
  90% of teachers say that it is clear how all the programs offered are connected to their school's instructional 

vision 

The areas of priority need that will be addressed in this goal are: 

● The well-developed school, according to the Quality Review rubrics, develops curricula and academic tasks that are 
planned and refined using student work and data so that individual and groups of students, including the lowest and 
highest achieving students, English Language Learners (ELLs), and Students with Disabilities (SWDs), have access to 
the curricula and tasks and are cognitively engaged. 

● The need for modeling of effective instruction and model classrooms led to the expansion of planning teams and 
lead teachers on some grades. This will provide teachers with open access to effective teaching practices and new 
initiatives such as student autonomy. 

These planning teams and lead teachers will support the development of curriculum maps and lessons that promote 
student autonomy. The observation process has revealed during the 2016-2017 school year, that student autonomy 
during lessons still needs to be increased, as evidenced by Danielson's component 1E. Teachers are observed to 
engage in guided practice but have few structures in place in lesson planning to allow for autonomy.  

● We will continue to use the Inquiry Cycle to develop and support our school focus. Authentic student work will be 
used to guide and monitor progress.  

- Designing Coherent Instruction is also essential in developing the thoughtful construction of lessons that contain 
cognitively engaging activities. In the 2016-2017 school year 70% of teachers were rated effective in 1e Planning and 
preparation (PP) & 70% in the observation component of 1e. 17% were rated highly effective in PP & 12% in 
observation. 12% were rated in the developing range for PP & 17% for observations, 1% were rated ineffective for 
both PP and observation. Although these reflect a majority of teachers using effective planning techniques, teachers 
are not promoting student autonomy during instructional periods. 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          37 

 

- As evidenced by observations conducted during the 2015-2016 school year, guided reading instruction did not 
employ practices which would teach skills needed at appropriate reading levels. In 2016-2017, effective guided 
reading practices were more evident, however, use of the data gathered from this instruction required further 
development. In 2017-18, further changes were made to the guided reading model to enhance comprehension skills. 
Additionally, professional development was provided to Kindergarten teachers on what data to use early in the year 
to support growth. 

 

 

 
Part 2 – Annual Goal 

Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this 
element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the 
identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, 
and Time-bound. 
By June 2019, each Assistant Principals will have attended at least one series of professional development sessions 
and/or participated in a cohort, and all teachers will have received professional development and individual coaching 
(as needed ) from administrators, Peer Collaborative Teachers, teacher teams and coaches, focused on the skill of 
designing lessons that include structures and strategies that promote student autonomy, so that the number of 
teachers rated effective or highly effective in the Danielson component 1E (Designing coherent instructions) increases 
by 3%. 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          38 

 
Part 3a – Action Plan 

Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies 
your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for 
this Framework for Great Schools element, including: 

  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional 

 

development, and/or systems and structures needed to 
impact change. 
Strategies to address the needs of students with 
disabilities, English language learners, and other high-
need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, 
SIFE, STH). 

Target 
Group(s) 
Who will be 
targeted? 

Timeline 
What is the 
start and 
end date? 

Key Personnel 
Who is responsible 
for implementing 
and overseeing the 
activity/strategy? 

● During professional development use planning protocols that 
allow all teachers to participate in and contribute to unit 
planning 

All teachers 

Sept. 2018 – 
June 2019 

Principal, Asst. 
Principals and 
coaches, planning 
teams 

● Track and memorialize rationale for plan changes from prior 
year 

● Include more specific accommodations that address the needs 
of ELLs and SWDs in both literacy and math units 

● Provide explicit training on component 1E, particularly in the 
area of developing cognitively challenging activities. This will 
include opportunities for students to think critically about the 
learning process, explain their thinking and choose from a variety 
of activities differentiated by rigor.  

● Highly effective teachers and lead teachers will open up their 
classrooms for intervisitations focusing on structures and 
strategies necessary for the development of tasks which foster 
autonomy. 

  Effective teachers who selected option 3, will also 

provide intervisitation opportunities to fellow teachers. 

● Supervisors will also analyze professional development 
reflection sheets completed by all teachers attending in-house 
professional development to determine follow-up needs of 
teachers on the subjects presented. 

- Complete mid-year review of teachers' ratings on Danielson 
component 1E. Provide differentiated professional development 
where needed. Where applicable, observe and provide additional 
feedback of this component during remaining observations.  

● Teachers of ELLs and SWDs will be provided professional 
development on what specific expectations to set for these 
students that will continue to show rigor, yet enable these 
students to meet periodic goals and feel like they are making 
progress even if their report cards reflect level 1 achievement. 

All teachers; 
ELLs and 
SWDs 

Sept. 2018 – 
June 2019 

Principal, Asst. 
Principals, coaches 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          39 

 

-Materials such as literacy notebooks,  

concept boards, anchor charts, teacher/peer  

feedback, and student checklists will be used to help  

student determine their next steps for learning and  

develop ownership of learning. 

- The "Leader in Me" program will continue. This program will 
continue to develop  

leadership skills for all stakeholders. It's goal is to  

create a culture of student empowerment based on 

the idea that every child can be a leader. During the first year of 
implementation, training will primarily  

target teachers and staff. Focus will be on the "The  

Seven Habits of Highly Effective People." This will be achieved 
through a blended delivery model of on-site coaching, 
community sessions and on-line sessions. 

 

Teachers will use Tuesday parent engagement sessions to share 
unit plans, students' expectations, assessments and applied 
learning projects. In doing so parents can become partners in 
helping to move students toward their goals. 

 
 

 
3b – Parent and Family Engagement 

Teachers, 
students. 

Sept 2018-
June 2019 

Lead teachers, 
supervisors, coaches 
and planning teams. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Teachers, 
students. 

 

 

 

 

All teachers, 
supervisors, TLIM 
training staff. 

 

All parents 

Sept. 2018-
June 2019 

All teachers, 
supervisors, coaches 

How  will  your  school  engage  parents/families  and  support  their  understanding  of  Effective  School  Leadership  and 
strategies  to  promote  parent  leadership  and  engagement  in  order  to  support  their  children  at  home?  Include  the 
timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 
Teachers will use Tuesday parent engagement sessions to share unit plans, students' expectations, assessments and 
applied learning projects. In doing so parents can become partners in helping to move students toward their goals. 

 

 
Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 
Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including 
human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 

  Adjust teacher schedules to include a weekly study group period 
  Provide teacher per session and per diem to allow time for planning for formative assessments and feedback 

 

structures on a grade-specific basis 
Implement Lucy Caulkin's Writing Pathways Performance Assessments and Learning Progressions checklists 
and rubrics 

  TCRWP Reading Assessments 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          40 

 

  TC Writing Performance Based Assessments 
  EDL2 Reading Assessments 
  Reading Street Reading and Writing Assessments 
  Calle de la Lectura Reading and Writing Assessments 
  Reach into Phonics Assessments 
  Thinking Maps 
  Hochman Writing Project  
 
  TLIM training  

Staff Development for Educators 

 
Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 

X 

Tax Levy 

 

C4E 

X 

X 

Title I SWP 

21st Century 

Grant 

 

 

Title I TA 

SIG 

 

 

Title II, 
Part A 

X 

Title III, 
Part A 

PTA Funded 

 

In Kind 

 

 

Title III, 

Immigrant 

Other 

 
Part 5 – Progress Monitoring  

Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement 
planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 
By February 2019, an increase of 1.5 % in the number of teachers observed and rated up to that time that will have 
effectively demonstrated the attributes modeled during professional development and outlined in the Danielson 
Rubric for component 1E. 

 
Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 
Danielson Framework for component 1E. 

 

Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action 
plan, if applicable. 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          41 

 

Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans 

 
Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a 
welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. 
 
Part 1 – Needs Assessment   

Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and 
formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not 
limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. 
Number responses accordingly. 
 
1.  What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element?  Indicate the data trends, source and year. 
2.  What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? 

Indicate the data trends, source and year. 

Our school's strengths in relation to this Framework element are: 

Maintained the feel of a cohesive school community and creating a welcoming environment for families and providing 
equal access to community resources to all students and families will be our greatest challenge this school year due to 
the relocation of 20 of our classes (approximately 450 students) in two separate annexes: 

  During Summer 2016, the transportable classroom units located in the yard were removed and the 

construction of a five-story building extension began. This caused us to move 21 classrooms to school building 
Q315 located 3 blocks away.  
In July 2017, 11 of those kindergarten classes moved to building Q298, located .8 miles away from main 
building, for another year, while construction of our extension is completed. 

 

  Creating the same environment of rigorous instruction while creating strong leaders in line with our school-

wide Leader in Me initiative is crucial 

  Parent communication could be challenged due to 60% of our kindergarten students now traveling by bus and 

not having the daily parent interaction with teacher and administration 

 

● One of our continued strengths has been our Community Learning School initiative. Now in its 3rd full year of 
implementation, the Community Learning School initiative, led by the Community Learning Resource coordinator, has 
helped support some of the following student/family needs: 

o Provided Thanksgiving and Christmas dinner packages to more than 325 families  

o Provided free school day tutoring to 25 low performing 2nd grade students 

o Provided dental checkups through the Smiles program to 1500 students 

Provided more than 850 students with Christmas gifts through a partnership with New York Cares 

Solidified partnership with community educational institutions such as NY Hall of Science (NYSCI), expanding the 
relationship to include several free field trips for special Google sponsored events for 4th and 5th grade students, 
Spring break Science programs for 3rd and 4th graders, teacher professional development, and discounted family 
memberships 

- Distributed about 200 coats to students in need 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          42 

 

o Student health needs are prevalent in our large population. Two years year, more than 800 letters reminding 
parents about basic lapsed vaccinations, physical exams, and vision exams were sent to parents requiring repeated 
follow-up because of a lack of parent response. Through the efforts of the CLS, last year, only 250 reminder letters 
needed to be sent. 

- Through the help of NY Cares, we trained 17 parents with numerous workplace skills and student group leadership 
skills to execute and supervise extra-curricular activities called " Fun Fridays" 

- "Fun Fridays" provided after school enrichment programs to more than 500 students. These activities included 
Flamenco Vivo, Odyssey of the Mind, Let's play Board games, Sports Explorers, Arts Explorers, and Lego Robotics. 

- Thirty-five families were referred for psychological counseling to the Western Queens Consultation services 

- thirty-one classrooms (approximately 700 students) participated in the Yoga Fosters program in which yoga is 
incorporated into classroom activities 

- Approximately 70 families were referred to and received SNAP services since April when services began. 

- Through a partnership with the Foodbank for NYC, more than 3000 school and community families received free tax 
preparation services during this past tax season  

Twice monthly, in partnership with the Foodbank for NYC open food pantry for low income community and school 
families 

-While these efforts will be repeated this year, being in three locations adds a significant challenge to access for the 
approximately 450 students and families at the annexes. 

 

● Another strength is our continued high attendance at parent conferences with greater than 85% of our parents 
attend, and parent association meetings where average attendance is between 150 and 200 parents.  

● Additionally,  

o As of mid-February 2018, 73% of our teachers have met with an average of 8 parents in individual conferences, 
outside of parent teacher conferences. This resulted in 914 parent contacts. 

o Almost 50% of our teachers have conducted on average two (2) teacher-led parent workshops during the Tuesday 
Parent Engagement time. This has resulted in 1,765 parent contacts. 

o Other meetings and/or written, electronic or phone communication have resulted in 2,065 parent contacts. 

o In total 4,744 parent contacts were made during the first half of the last school year. 

Math and ELA coaches conducted parent workshops that were attended by more than 900 parents of all grades 

May conference workshop power point presentations were also posted online and easy access was provided through 
a QR code link. 

 

 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          43 

 
Part 2 – Annual Goal 

Indicate  your  school’s  2018-19  goal  for  improving  student  outcomes  and  school  performance  that  addresses  this 
element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the 
identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and 
Time-bound.  
By June 2019, we will promote a transfer from school to home of the core habits of Leader in Me to increase community 
building and a leadership culture by providing learning opportunities to family through our CLS initiatives, so that we 
experience a 10% increase in positive parent involvement and engagement as measured by analyzing teacher records of 
parents attendance at parent conferences/workshops, CLS coordinator records of parent participation in on-going CLS 
activities and responses to parent surveys, 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          44 

 
Part 3a – Action Plan 

Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies 
your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for 
this Framework for Great Schools element, including: 

  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional 

 

development, and/or systems and structures needed to 
impact change. 
Strategies to address the needs of students with 
disabilities, English language learners, and other high-
need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, 
SIFE, STH). 

Target 
Group(s) 
Who will be 
targeted? 

Timeline 
What is the 
start and 
end date? 

Key Personnel 
Who is responsible 
for implementing 
and overseeing the 
activity/strategy? 

Principal, Assistant 
Principals, CLS 
director , Parent 
Coordinator, 
Guidance counselors 

As we return to one location, guidance counselors will return to 
their regular schedule and be able to more efficiently support 
students and parents  

All school 
families. 

September 
2018 - June 
2019 

 

Promote the use of SchoolCNXT parent communication system 
by parent coordinator, teachers and administrators to assist in 
real time communication of important school news and in the 
case of the teachers, specific student news. 

 

Encourage all parents to attend monthly Parent Association 
meetings to stay connected and in the loop. 

 

Community Learning School (CLS): 

● Community Learning School Resource Director continues to 
reach out to various community service organizations to secure 
free services for a variety of student and family needs 

● Through this initiative, the school will work with other 
community-based organizations to provide needed social 
services to our students and others in the community, such as 
Food Bank Free Tax preparation services and SNAP assistance. 

● Services may include: medical services, mental health services, 
optometry and dental services, and other social services as 
needed and available with our eventual partners. 

● This initiative is being implemented in conjunction with our in-
house CBO—Hanac Beacon, an organization that has been 
providing after school and Saturday programs for more than 20 
years. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

All school 
families 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          45 

 

- We received a 21st Century Learning Grant that will enable us 
to offer enrichment and extra-curricular programs to our 
students such as music engineering and robotics  

 

Parent Workshops: 

● Teachers will identify students’ academic needs and design 
parent workshops that will help parents support their child’s 
learning in these areas of need.  

● Teacher will also develop workshops for parents of more 
advanced students to help them maintain their high achieving 
status.  

● Teachers will develop workshops focused on areas of interest 
to parents. For example, parents have requested help with using 
the online programs offered by the school, and with how to help 
their children complete certain types of homework.  

● Teachers will use the Tuesday Parent Engagement time to 
implement these workshops. 

● Kindergarten & 1 st grade parents will be provided with multi-
session workshops about how to help their children complete 
their homework.  

● Whenever possible, teachers will request that parents 
complete a survey to ascertain the effectiveness of the 
workshops presented by teachers. 

● Through Title I funding, assign a teacher to provide parents the 
opportunity to participate in adult ESL classes, and basic 
computer workshops. 

● In partnership with the Parent Association, provide workshop 
opportunities based on parent interest, such as Zumba™ training 
with a certified instructor and knitting classes. 

  The new construction with two A/V equipped cafeterias 

will allow for multiple parent sessions to take place 
simultaneously for greater impact 

Ongoing parent meetings: 

● During Parent Engagement time on Tuesdays, teachers will 
meet with individual parents to discuss student progress. 
Teachers will share detailed assessment results with parents and 
will provide guidance on how to help the student progress. 
These meetings may be teacher or parent initiated. Also at these 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Parents of 1st 
grade 
students 

 

 

 

 

All parents 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          46 

 

meetings parents will be given information about services 
available as part of CLS initiative.  

● Teachers will use scheduled appointment times for the two 
parent-teacher conferences related to report cards. The use of 
specific appointment times allows teachers to better plan for 
each parent’s meeting and enables parents to better plan for 
their visit, especially those parents who have several children in 
the school. 

● September and May parent conferences will provide parents 
with general classroom requirements, and later with 
reinforcement and preparation for summer vacation and for the 
upcoming school year. 

Last year's NYC Schools Survey revealed parent responses 
indicating that 36% of parents had only communicated with their 
child's teacher once or never. As a result, we implemented a 
process by which teachers notify guidance counselors about 
parents who have never come to parent teacher conference or 
whom they have never been able to reach. Guidance counselors 
follow up and facilitate/schedule meetings at times convenient 
to parent and teachers. This process will be repeated after each 
parent teacher conference date. 

We will use the extended capabilities of our current Blackboard 
communication system to enhance digital communication with 
parents 

Our Parent Coordinator will use SchoolCNXT and other online 
communication systems to enhance and increase two-way 
communication with parents  

Parents will be invited periodically to view culminating activities 
connected to the arts residencies. 

 

Services already in place though community partnerships 
include:  

● Thanksgiving dinner – through partnership with St. Nicholas 
Greek Orthodox Church, needy families are given all the 
materials necessary to prepare their family’s Thanksgiving dinner 

● Optical exam with eye dilation – in partnership with Seeing a 
Bright Future. Identified students with vision problems will 
receive an eye examination and will be offered free glasses. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

All 
kindergarten 
families 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          47 

 

● Dental checkups – in partnership with Smile NY, on a monthly 
basis, identified students will visit a mobile dental van that will 
visit the school for a day. 

Emotional and Social Needs 

● Each academy will select a community service initiative and 
execute various activities around that topic throughout the year. 
Each academy has a different focus: 

 

 

 

 

All students 

o School of Dual Language: Caring for others and the 
environment by promoting awareness about recycling, the 
protection of endangered species, and rebuilding school garden. 

o School of Math, Science and Technology: Building awareness 
about water conservation and potable water in partnership with 
Charitywater.org 

 

 

 

 

o School of Communication and Performing Arts: Pay it Forward 
through penny collections benefiting St Jude’s and other 
children’s charities. 

Needy 
families 

o School of American Studies: Being a Good Citizen by building 
awareness of good deeds and penny harvest collections that 
benefit local organizations.  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          48 

 

All students 
by academy 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

All students 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          49 

 

 

All students 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

● Enforcing mandatory Chapter 408 compliance by ensuring that 
every teacher reads and understands Individual Education Plans 
(IEPs) of all students they service, making particular note of the 
social-emotional needs that might trigger deterioration of self-
esteem. 

Students 
with 
Disabilities  

September 
2018 - June 
20189 

AP/Special 
Education 
supervisor; 
Guidance counselors 

● Engage students in post-activity reflection about how an 
activity made them feel and/or reflecting on how the recipients 
of the goodwill may feel. 

● Professional development is provided to special education 
teachers and paraprofessionals on PBIS (positive behavioral 
intervention supports). 

  During parent conferences, provide translation services 
of varying degrees using our own bilingual staff or DOE 
translation services.  

Engage parents in the community service projects 

All parents 

 

All parents 

In addition to all actions mentioned above,  

  With support of the Parent Association and Parent 

Coordinator, present workshops for parents around the 
topics of safe classroom behaviors and self-esteem. For 
example, the Latin Women Association’s workshop on 

Sept 2018-
June 2019 

Sept 2018-
June 2019 

CLS director, 
Academy supervisor, 
teachers 

Principal, Assistant 
Principals, CLS 
director , Parent 
Coordinator, 
Guidance counselors 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          50 

 

parenting, importance of school attendance, discipline, 
and domestic violence. 

● Invite a greater number of parents into the classroom as 
volunteers. Studies show that students whose parents are active 
participants in school life have better self-esteem and achieve 
greater academic progress.  

●  

 

 
 

 
3b – Parent and Family Engagement 

If  any,  list  the  Community  Based  Organizations  or  other  partnerships  that  support  parent/family  and  community 
engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. 
In addition to all actions mentioned above,  

  With support of the Parent Association and Parent Coordinator, present workshops for parents around the 

topics of safe classroom behaviors and self-esteem. For example, the Latin Women Association’s workshop on 
parenting, importance of school attendance, discipline, and domestic violence. 

● Invite a greater number of parents into the classroom as volunteers. Studies show that students whose parents are 
active participants in school life have better self-esteem and achieve greater academic progress.  

● Engage parents in the community service projects  

 

 

 
Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 

Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including 
human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 
● Resources needed include: 

● For parent workshops and meeting – teachers, copying of handout materials 

● For Community Learning School – CLS Resource director, CLS team 

● For other services – guidance counselors, office support staff 

● Guidance counselor planning time and professional development 

● Parent coordinator and parent association meetings 

● Art materials 

● Programs to include dedicated Arts period in order to complete some of the projects 

 
Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          51 

 

X 

Tax Levy 

 

C4E 

X 

X 

Title I SWP 

21st Century 

Grant 

 

 

Title I TA 

SIG 

 

 

Title II, 
Part A 

 

Title III, 
Part A 

PTA Funded 

X 

In Kind 

 

X 

Title III, 

Immigrant 

Other 

 
Part 5 – Progress Monitoring  

Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement 
planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 
By February 2019, we will experience an increase of at least 5% in positive parents engaged in parent workshops or 
one-on-one teacher meetings, or participation in a community service learning activity. 

 
Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 
Parent Sign in Sheets, agendas, teacher surveys, parent surveys 

 

Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action 
plan, if applicable. 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          52 

 

Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS)  

(Required for All Schools) 

  

Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services 
(AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records 
need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area 
listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. 
 

Type of Academic 
Intervention Service 
(AIS) 

English Language 
Arts (ELA) 

Criteria for 
determining AIS 
services (For 
additional guidance, 
refer to NYSED’s 
memo.) 
● Grade 3 scaled 
score below 299 

● Grade 4 scaled 
score below 296 

● Grade 5 scaled 
score below 297 

Type of program or 
strategy (e.g. 
repeated readings, 
interactive writings, 
etc.) 

1. Reading with TLC 
is a literacy program 
that focuses on 
letter- sound 
recognition and 
letter-sound 
formation. 

● Grade 1 holdovers 

 

 

 

2. RAZ Kids  

Raz Kids is a 
research–based 
individualized 
instructional reading 
program delivered via 
the Internet. 

Method for delivery 
of service (e.g. small 
group, one-to-one, 
tutoring, etc.) 

1. Administered in 
small groups and on 
a one-on- one basis 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2.One-to-one; home 
independent work 

3. ESL Instruction:  

The Balanced Literacy 
Model with 
Established Language 
Goals and scaffolding 
techniques are 
presented in all self-
contained ESL and 
Bilingual Classes. 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

4. Tutoring Support - 
Afterschooltutoring 
to targeted students 

3.Whole class and 
small group 
  

When the service is 
provided (e.g. during 
the school day, 
before or after 
school, etc.) 

1. Three to five days 
a week during the 
school day by 
designated AIS and 
speech teachers 
 

 

 

2. During the school 
day and at home 
access 

 
 

 

 
  

3. During the school 
day 
 
 
 

 
 

 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          53 

 

 

5. Extended Day  

Additional time is 
provided for all 
students who 
demonstrated areas 
of need. 

6Response to 
Intervention (RTI) – 
Tier I  

Students potentially 
at risk are identified 
and serviced by AIS 
Literacy specialists 
utilizing Leveled 
Books; Sing, Spell, 
Read and Write; 
Fountas and Pinnell 
Phonics; Peoples’ 
Common Core 

7. RTI – Tier II  

Students potentially 
at risk are identified 
and serviced by AIS 
Literacy specialists 
utilizing LLI, Words 
Their Way, 
Fundations, and 
Stephanie Harvey 
Comprehension Tool 
Kit 

8. RTI – Tier III 
Students potentially 
at risk are identified 
and serviced by AIS 
Literacy specialists 

9. AIS Literacy 
Specialists Provide 
daily push-in support 
for Grades K to 5. The 
Literacy specialists 
implement the 
Balanced Literacy 
curricula in order to 
provide additional 

 

 

 

 

 

 

4. During the day and 
Afterschool 

 

 
 

5. After school 
 
 
 

4. individual or small 
group 
  
  
  

5. Small group and 
whole class  
  

6. During the school 
day 
 
 
 
 
 
 

6. Small group  
 
 
 
 

 
 
  

 

 

 

 

 

7. Small group  
  
  
  
  
  
  

 

 

 

 

 

 

7. During the school 
day 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

8. During the school 
day 
 
 
 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          54 

 

support and 
differentiate 
instruction for these 
students. 

10. Wilson/ 

   
  

 
  

Fundations Phonics 
instruction for 
students not 
responding to Reach 
for Phonics program. 

 

8. One to two 
student groups  
  
   
  

9. Small group  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

9. During the school 
day 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

10. During the school 
day. 

 

Mathematics 

● Grade 3 scaled 
score below 293 

● Grade 4 scaled 
score below 284 

● Grade 5 scaled 
score below 289 

 

1. Small Group Skill 
Intervention 
Intervention using Go 
Math Grab-n-Go 
resources for 
students not meeting 
standards based on 
unit assessments 

2. Basic Math Facts  

10. Small group 

 

 
1. Small group 
 
 
 
  

 
 
 

1. During the school 
day 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          55 

 

Students are being 
motivated to take 
charge of their 
learning by 
encouraging study of 
grade level math 
facts on their own 
through the use of 
the XtraMath.com 
Program.  

2. One-to-one 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
  

 
  

Science 

Teacher 
recommendation 
based on student 
work 

 

3. Extended Day  

Third, Fourth, and 
Fifth grade students 
participated in this 
school based 
program. 

 
  

 
 
  

3. Small group 
 
 
  
 

4. Whole class, small 
group 

 

 

1. Small group and 
whole class 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

4. Bridges Math - 
enrichment support 
for kindergarten and 
1st grade students 

 

1. Tier I Instruction  

● Comprehensive 
Assessment for Level 
2 students 

● New York Coach for 
Level 3 students 

● Included a 30-
minute Read Aloud 
session 

● Included the use of 
the Passwords 
Vocabulary 

● Selected ESL 
Teachers support the 
science curriculum 
calendar using 
literature that is 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          56 

2. During the school 
day and online home 
access 
 
 
 
  
 

 
 
  

3. After school and 
on Saturday 
 

 
   
4. During the school 
day andAfterschool 

 

 

 

 
1. During the school 
day 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

aligned with the 
Harcourt text series. 
These teachers work 
specifically on science 
content vocabulary 
with a small group of 
students. 

● AIS/SPED Support 
Services - Teachers 
work with ICT and 
SPED Students on 
Science Academic 
Vocabulary in small 
groups. 

● All students 
participate in one 
content area 
performance task 
 

2. Tier II Instruction  

● AIS/SPED Support 
Services - Teachers 
work with ICT and 
SPED Students on 
Science Academic 
Vocabulary in small 
groups. 

● This intervention 
included the use of 
the Passwords 
Vocabulary Book 
Extension of 
Activities 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
   
 
 

2. Small group and 
whole class 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 
 
 

 

 
 
 
2. During the school 
day 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          57 

 

Social Studies 

Teacher 
recommendation 
based on student 
work 

 

1. Students are 
identified for AIS in 
Social Studies by 
assessing four key 
areas of need in the 
essential skills listed 
in the NYS Social 
Studies Standards. 
Students are 
evaluated during 
each unit in 
Economics, 
Government, Civics, 
Geography, and 
History. Students 
receive intervention 
based on their 
performance on 
classroom tests and 
assessments. Based 
on the identification 
of specific areas of 
deficiency, small 
group and whole 
class instruction is 
then designed to 
target and address 
these needs. 
Students also 
respond to essential 
questions posed in 
each unit based on 
their understanding 
of the NYS Standards 
and writing of 
Informational Texts 
(CCRS). These 
responses are then 
assessed. Non-Fiction 
writing skills are then 
scaffolded and 
supported 
throughout the year 
based on these 
content area 
questions in order to 
assess progress. In 
addition, practice is 
provided in analyzing 
various types of 
primary sources 
including 
photographs, maps, 

1. Whole class 
 
 
 
 
 

1. During the school 
day 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          58 

 

At-risk services (e.g. 
provided by the 
Guidance Counselor, 
School Psychologist, 
Social Worker, etc.) 

1. Teacher or Asst 
Principal referrals; 
Mandated 
psychological 
services as per IEPs; 
parent request for 
counseling 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

letters, political 
cartoons, and 
posters. 

2. Students 
participate in one 
content area 
performance task. 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

2. Whole class 

 

 
1. Individual and 
small group 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

1. As part of their 
daily assignments 
with students, the 
Guidance Counselors 
serve as liaisons with 
parents 

as part of our 
Academic 
Intervention Teams 
on behalf of the 
students. 

● address issues of 
maladaptive 
behaviors which may 
have an impact on 
learning as well as on 
social relationships 
within the school. 

● deal with self-
esteem issues that 
arise as a result of 
academic struggles. 

● contact parents of 
students who have 
been excessively 
absent or who have 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

2. During the school 
day 

 

1. During the school 
day and after school 
with parents 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          59 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

created a pattern of 
absences. 

● investigate student 
needs, such as 
health-related issues, 
including vision and 
hearing. 

● Present students 
during PPC meetings 
for evaluation and 
collaborative 
discussions. 

● Facilitate Peer 
Tutoring, Suicide 
Prevention, Behavior 
Modification 
Services, Bullying 
Programs, and School 
Service activities. 
 

2. In addition to 
conducting the 
evaluation process 
for Committee on 
Special Education 
(CSE), the School 
Psychologist: 

● Serves as a support 
service for parents of 
children with 
disabilities who are 
entering the school 
and who require 
services offered 
under special 
education. This 
service includes pre-
screening for 
academic difficulties, 
referrals to outside 
agencies, crisis 
counseling, providing 
out-reach services to 
parents and behavior 
assessment plans. 

● Serves as a 
member of the Pupil 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 
 
  
  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 2. During the school 
day 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          60 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2. Student who are 
referred by PPCfor 
evaluation; students 
referred through 
turning 5 process; 
students going 
through re-
evaluation process 
during IEPcycles or 
referral 

Personnel Committee 
(PPC). 
 

3. The school Social 
Worker works with 
parents in the pre-
referral stage of the 
evaluation process to 
determine if social 
and environmental 
conditions may be 
having an impact on a 
child’s performance. 
Whenever possible 
the Social Worker 
connects with the 
guidance staff in 
order to align current 
general education 
services with the 
current student 
subject prior to 
conducting a CSE 
evaluation. 

 

4. In addition to daily 
school nursing duties, 
school nurses at P.S. 
19Q: 

a. implement Open 
Airways classes . 
Each class is 
comprised of six 
sessions. During the 
classes, the Nursing 
staff teaches the 
students how to 
recognize the 
symptoms of an 
impending asthma 
attack and what to do 
to prevent or 
minimize the severity 
of the attack. The 
children were taught 
about how asthma is 
triggered and how to 
avoid the attacks. The 
children’s families 

 

2. Individual and 
small group 
 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 

 
 

 
 
 
 

3. Individual 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 

3. During the school 
day 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          61 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

were included in 
these sessions by 
means of newsletters 
and printed material 
translated into the 
languages of the 
community. In 
addition, the children 
were taught how to 
use a spacer and a 
peak flow meter. 
After a modeling 
demonstration, the 
students were 
required to repeat 
the procedure for the 
Nursing Staff to show 
that they had learned 
the proper technique. 
The students were 
also asked to take an 
asthma pre-test and 
post-test to measure 
their level of 
understanding. 

b. School nurses 
implement Healthy 
Options and Physical 
Activity Program 
(HOP) to assist 
children and families 
in developing healthy 
lifestyles. Nurses 
provide families of 
students with (Body 
Mass Index ( BMI ) 
greater than 99% 
with clinical 
assessment, health 
education, 
counseling, and 
referrals to available 
resources in the 
community. 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

  
  
 
 

4. Small group 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 

4. During the school 
day 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          62 

 

 

 

 

3.Student who are 
referred by PPCfor 
evaluation; students 
referred through 
turning 5 process; 
students going 
through re-
evaluation process 
duringIEPcycles or 
referral 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          63 

 

 

 

 

 

4. Students identified 
with medical 
histories of breathing 
disorders or 
childhood obesity  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          64 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          65 

 

Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH)  

 

Directions: 
-  All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. 
-  All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. 
 
Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) 
As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the 
federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and 
report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support 
your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: 
http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf   

Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 

 

1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your 
school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in 
DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 

As of June 
28, 2018 the 
total 
number of 
students in 
temporary 
housing is 
documented 
in ATS as 
215. Almost 
all students 
reflect a 
housing 
status of D, 
indicating 
that they 
are doubled 
up and 
multiple 
families 
share 
domiciles. 

 

2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          66 

 

 

Currently the STH students are served by guidance personnel which are assigned to "Schools within Schools" Such 
learning communities make it feasible to develop relationships with students and families, as students articulate from 
one grade to the next with the same guidance and administrative personnel. In this way changes to students housing 
status can be monitored and appropriate support be offered. Students who are designated with a code of S, or 
shelter, by pupil accounting, are flagged and given sessions with guidance counselors, who also monitor attendance in 
conjunction with the district attendance teacher. STH funding in 2018-2019 will be used to fund guidance counselors 
and instructional supplies for students designated as STH. Such materials are inclusive of schoolbags, notebooks, 
school uniforms and other assorted supplies that parents would otherwise have to purchase. 

 

Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 

1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your 
school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 

215 

 

2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 

Currently the STH students are served by guidance personnel which are assigned to "Schools within Schools" Such 
learning communities make it feasible to develop relationships with students and families, as students articulate from 
one grade to the next with the same guidance and administrative personnel. In this way changes to students housing 
status can be monitored and appropriate support be offered. Students who are designated with a code of S, or 
shelter, by pupil accounting, are flagged and given sessions with guidance counselors, who also monitor attendance in 
conjunction with the district attendance teacher. STH funding in 2018-2019 will be used to fund guidance counselors 
and instructional supplies for students designated as STH. Such materials are inclusive of schoolbags, notebooks, 
school uniforms and other assorted supplies that parents would otherwise have to purchase. 

 

3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary 
housing.  If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation 
Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question.  If your school did not receive an allocation 
and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. 

$29,800 

 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          67 

 

Directions: 

Section 8: Title I Program Information  

 

  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1. 
  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2. 
  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3. 
  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4. 
 

If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response 
can be found. 

  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. 

 
Part 1: Title I Status 

Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. 

X 

Schoolwide Program (SWP) 

 

Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools  

 

Non-Title I 

 
Part 2: All Title I Schools 

2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) 

Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support 
including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. 
In an effort to implement a rigorous, high quality plan of instruction for our students, we aim to continue to employ 
and retain highly effective teachers. The following strategies and activities are implemented throughout the school 
year: 

● Available positions are posted on the Open Market Hire System with the expectation of hiring the most qualified 
applicants. 

● Participate in college internship programs and bring in high quality interns that may be potential new hires upon 
completion of their certification requirements. 

● Participate in the DOE Bilingual Pupil Services program to bring in high quality interns that may be potential new 
hires for our Bilingual and ESL classes upon completion of their certification requirements. 

● Interns participate in all PD provided to their cooperating teachers. 

● Participate in NYCDOE sponsored Hiring Fairs to recruit qualified applicants. 

● Untenured teachers participate in New Teacher Mentoring with one of our lead teachers for the required hours per 
year. 

● New teachers are partnered with an experienced teacher in the grade to provide on-going support. 

● New teachers are provided support and weekly individualized professional development by the lead mentor and 
both Literacy and Math coaches appropriate to their grade, level of experience, and needs.  

● Provide opportunities for teacher collaboration, in-house and Borough Field Support center professional 
development: 

- All teachers participate in grade specific professional development at least once per week. 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          68 

 

● Lead teachers are identified for each grade. Their responsibilities include, but are not limited to, planning monthly 
units, developing performance tasks together with Assistant Principals and Coaches, attending and turn keying in-
house and external professional development, being the go-to person for the grade. 

- 6 Qualified Peer Collaborative Lead teachers have been identified to work at implementing model classrooms and 
coach facilitators for the curriculum of their perspective grades. 

● All teachers are provided ongoing feedback as a result of informal walkthroughs and formal observations.  

 

 
2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development 

Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, 
paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS).  
● Peer Collaborative Lead teachers and other highly effective teachers participate in the following professional 
development partnerships: 

o Lead Teachers will implement model classrooms for inter-visitations 

o Thinking Maps professional Development 

o Staff Development for Educators- will have professional development for K-2 in Mathematics to build on the 
Mathematical Practices and on the Number Sense 

o Integrated Co-Teaching Workshops – (network-sponsored program designed to build collaboration and teaching 
practice in the co-teaching model) 

o ENL, half of ICT partner teachers, and planning team member teachers participate in the Hochman Writing 
Revolution program 

● All teachers participate in Professional Development on Monday afternoons. 

● Grade planning teams attend Teacher's College Literacy professional development, and turnkey what they have 
learned for the other teachers on the grade. 

● Grade planning teams attend Go-Math CCLS aligned professional development, and turnkey what they have learned 
for the other teachers on the grade. 

● Spanish Dual Language teachers participate on-going Dual Language training for all Dual Language teachers 

Dual language teachers attend Teacher's college Literacy professional development as they transition to this literacy 
program 

● Coaches support teachers’ work through individual and group professional development. 

● Coaches attend monthly District-provided Next Generation Standards professional development. 

● Principal and AP’s attend District-provided professional development. 

 

 
Part 3: TA Schools Only 

3a. Use of Program Resources 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          69 

 

Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 
Not applicable 

 

 
3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program 

Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., 
providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from 
the regular classroom during regular school day). 
Not applicable 

 

 
 
 
 
 
Part 4: SWP Schools Only 

4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only)  

Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary 
school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early 
intervention services, etc.). 
Parents of pre-kindergarten children receive orientation from guidance counselors and speech providers in the spring 
before the students are entering kindergarten. These orientation sessions are group sessions and include: 

● Guidance for how to prepare students emotionally for kindergarten. 

● Packets of worksheets and workshops that will allow parents to work with students over the summer on the 
number sense and phonemic awareness. 

● Instruction about how to begin to practice sight words that students will learn in kindergarten. 

● Information about how to prepare students with life skills necessary for more independence in kindergarten, such 
as tying shoe laces, zipping up jackets, eating lunch unassisted, etc. 

● Parents of students who will be attending special programs, such as Dual Language, attend special orientation 
sessions with the teachers to help them better understand the requirements of the program and special preparation 
activities they can implement at home during the summer. 

 

 
4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments 

Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate 
multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to 
improve instruction.    
● Performance tasks are now administered after every unit in ELA and every Unit in Math. These assessments are 
reviewed and adjusted accordingly by the grade-specific planning teams, of which teachers are members. Weekly 
grade-specific meetings provide professional development for teachers on the purpose of and how to administer 
assessments, as well as use of assessment results to plan and improve instruction.  

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          70 

 

● Teachers are asked to complete Action Plans with specific feedback on a regular basis to target the specific needs of 
all students. Teachers are encouraged to develop formative/interim assessments to help provide multiple assessment 
measures designed to monitor progress and inform instruction.  

● As part of ongoing professional development, teachers will be provided training and practice dealing with 
component 3d (Using assessment in instruction) and specifically around the elements of Feedback to students and 
Student Self-Assessment and monitoring of progress.  

● A school-wide assessment plan (calendar) is used to monitor assessment timing and assures adequate planning. 

● The Measure of Student Learning (MOSL) committee looked closely at our instructional focus to make sure that the 
selection of assessments improved and informed instruction and student learning. This year, the committee surveyed 
each grade and created a strategic assessment plan, whereby the teachers identified which tests administered last 
year informed their instruction and which tests required more time to score, norm, and submit. This information 
helped us to be realistic and identify our capacity for our operational needs. The following topics were discussed 
during our meetings: 

o MOSL Guide  

o Time line and changes 

o MOSL selection process 

o Additional assessment options 

o Additional subgroup options 

o Flexibility with assigning measures 

o Informing the staff 

o Discussions of different measures by the committee (pros and cons) 

o Recommendations for the Principal  

o 2018-19 Assessments chosen include: 

 Local:  

-ELA - NYC – TCRWP K-5 (Running Records) - Individual Growth  

-Math - NYS 4th grade Science Test - K-5  

State: 

-4th grade NYS Science for all Science teachers and other non-classroom - School Growth  

- NYS 4th grade Science Test for all 4th grade Sciences teachers - Individual Growth (4th Gr)  

 - NYSESLAT for all ESL teachers and classroom teachers with more than 10 ELLs for all grades - Individual Growth 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          71 

 

All other teachers - NYSESLAT for all other teachers - School Growth 

 

 

 
4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools 

Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and 
Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible 
for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide 
plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the 
consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and 
purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, 
and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount 
each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the 
intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. 
Program Name 

Place an (X) in Column A below to verify 
that the school has met the intent and 
purposes of each program whose funds are 
consolidated.  Indicate in Column B, section 
references where a related program activity 
has been described in this plan. 

Column A 

Verify with an (X) 

Column B 

Section Reference(s) 
Section 4; Section 
5A; Section 5D; 
Section 5E; Section 
7; Section 9 

 
Section 5A; Section 
5D; Section 7, part 
2a, 2b, 4b 

 
Section 5A; Section 
5D; Section 6 

 
 

Section 4; Section 
5A; Section 5D; 
Section 5E; Section 6 

Fund Source 
(i.e. Federal, 
State or Local) 

Funding Amount 
Indicate the amount 
contributed to 
Schoolwide pool. 
(Refer to Galaxy for 
school allocation 
amounts) 

Title I Part A (Basic) 

Federal 

955,407.00 
 

Title II, Part A 

Federal 

164,468.00 
 

Title III, Part A 

Federal 

139,728.00 
 

Title III, Immigrant 

Federal 

0  

Tax Levy (FSF) 

Local 

12,204,967.00 
 

X 

 

X 

 

X 

 

 

X 

 

 

 
1Explanation/Background: 
Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and 
programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and 
advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools 
may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, 
State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This 
gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students.   
 
Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a 
single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual 
identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool 
2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          72 

 
to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds 
used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from 
which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to 
combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used 
conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the 
dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds.  
 
Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages: 

  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program 

separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different 
sources when accounting for their use. 

  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the 

statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., 
semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent 
and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended 
beneficiaries are met. 

 
2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as 
follows: 

  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to 
improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes 
provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH). 

  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement 

plans that aims to  improve instruction and address the identified needs  

  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in 

grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not 
available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional 
program. 

  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, 
develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and 
achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another 
purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-
quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in 
effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the 
participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language 
instruction programs. 

  Title III Immigrant:  Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of 

English language acquisition and content area achievement. 

 
Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated: 

  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and 
programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent 
representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities 
funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with 
student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. 
IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education 
designed to meet their individual needs. 

 

  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by 

the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 

 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          73 

 

Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)  

 (Required for All Title I Schools) 

 

Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and 
representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will 
participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I 
program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson 
that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the 
parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school 
will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic 
achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family 
Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. 
 
The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current 
S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent 
Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent 
involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen 
family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy.  
 
Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample 
Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) 
as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. 
 
 

Parent and Family Engagement Policy 

Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. 
The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of 
parents and community in the school. P.S. 19Q, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every 
Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen 
the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is 
designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the 
education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent 
Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community.  

 

P.S. 19Q The Marino P. Jeantet School will support parents and families of Title I students by: 

Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students 

 

● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., 
literacy, math, and use of technology; 

● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision 
making in support of the education of their children; 

● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor 
their child’s progress; 

● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 

● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in 
languages that parents can understand; 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          74 

 

● communicating important and time-sensitive notices and information through the Blackboard Connect5 ™ Voice 
Broadcast and Emergency Notification System; 

● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve 
outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other 
members of the school community; 

 

 

The school’s Parent Involvement  

 

Parental Involvement and School Quality 

The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all 
parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The 
school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement 
policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school 
surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and 
enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school.  

 

In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the 
school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership 
Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for 
additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: 

● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I 
program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title 
I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; 

● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated 
directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; 

● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as 
described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; 

● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent 
Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support 
and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills;  

● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. 
The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the 
parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and 
inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents 
each month and file a report with the central office.; 

● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, 
grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and 
technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home;  

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          75 

 

● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State 
accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review 
Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 

● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of 
children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 
the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable 
sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); 

● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning 
or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and 
allow parents to provide suggestions; 

● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed;  

● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and 
workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; 

 

 

The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: 

Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement 

 

● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; 

● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; 

● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher 
Association) and Title I Parent Committee; 

● supporting or hosting Family Day events; 

● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; 

● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; 

● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their 
children’s progress; 

● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school 
activities and student progress; 

● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, 
and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. 

 

 

School-Parent Compact (SPC) 

School-Parent Compact (SPC) 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          76 

 

 

P.S. 19Q, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is 
implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between 
the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, 
agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 
improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure 
that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. 

 

Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating 
children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: 

I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum 

 

● using academic learning time efficiently; 

● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; 

● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; 

● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; 

● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the 
Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); 

 

 

Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: 

I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships 

 

● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be 
discussed as well as how this Compact is related; 

● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students 
participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to 
be involved; 

● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds 
are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; 

● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation 
services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education;  

● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of 
participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          77 

 

● communicating important and time-sensitive notices and information through the Blackboard Connect5 ™ Voice 
Broadcast and Emergency Notification System: 
 

● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent 
Involvement Policy and this Compact; 

● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results 
for each child and other pertinent individual school information;  

● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents 
each year; 

 

 

Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: 

I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff 

 

● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited 
English speaking parents;  

● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff 
member; 

● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to 
observe classroom activities; 

● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences;  

 

 

I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents 

Provide general support to parents by: 

 

● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment 
for parents and guardians; 

● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their 
child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of 
parents can attend); 

● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all 
members of the school community; 

● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents;  

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          78 

 

● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in 
this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; 

● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and 
consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; 

 

 

II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 

● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate 
procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; 

● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and 
his/her age; 

● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; 

● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes);  

● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; 

● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports 
and/or quality family time; 

● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; 

● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; 

● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education;  

● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by 
prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; 

● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; 

● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy 
and this Compact; 

● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn 
more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; 

● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on 
advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams;  

● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; 

●  

 

Student Responsibilities: 

III. Student Responsibilities 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          79 

 

 

● attend school regularly and arrive on time; 

● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; 

● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; 

● show respect for myself, other people and property; 

● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; 

● always try my best to learn. 

 

 
 
 
 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          80 

Division of English Language Learners and Student Support 
Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 
52 Chambers Street, Room 209  
New York, New York 10007 
Phone:  212-374-6072 
http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY 
Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components: 
1. 

 

2. 

3. 

The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need 
These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154.  
Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. 
Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.   

Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high 
academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas.  
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on 
the teachers’ performance in classrooms.”  
1. 

Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term 
workshops and conferences.  

Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet 
community needs.   
1. 

These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process.  

 
NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional 
development, and 20% to OTPS.   
  
For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and 
Performance Specialist.  Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30.   
 

Part A: School Information 
Name of School:            
This school is (check 
one): 
 

DBN:            

conceptually consolidated (skip part E below)                
NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below)     

 

Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information  
The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): 

Before school                After school             

Saturday academy        

Total # of ELLs to be served:            
Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply):  

1       
7       

3       
9       

2       
8       

K       
6       

4         
10       
Total # of teachers in this program:            
# of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers:            
# of content area teachers:            

5 
11       

12 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          81 

 

Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information  
Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the 
· 
· 
· 
· 
· 
· 

rationale 
subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  
schedule and duration 
language of instruction 
# and types of certified teachers 
types of materials  

# and types of certified teachers 

&nbsp; Before and After School programs: 

# and types of certified teachers:&nbsp;4-6&nbsp;&nbsp;Content teachers and&nbsp; 2 

Begin description here:            
 
· 
  
· 
Project Bridge Math Enrichment Program 
 
Activities: After school program, Math ELL enrichment 
Number of students to be served: 60-70 students 
Grade Levels: K  Grade Students 
Languages of instruction: English 
· 
&nbsp;ESL/bilingual teacher 
 
Times per day/week: program duration: Two times a week for a total of Three hours - from 
November to May for a total of 80 hours 4-6 classes Tuesdays, Wednesdays and Thursdays from 
2:20p.m.- 3:30p.m. 
Service provider and qualifications: Program was written and researched by St John’s 
University, ELL Research Department and Common Branches state certified teachers 
Rational for the selections of programs and activities 
 
Project Bridge is a researched program from St. John’s University.  It targets ELL students with 
high Math aptitude.  As an enrichment program it targets language as it provides Math 
enrichment.  Project Bridge involves an additional 90-minute program three times a week in 
Mathematics. This after school program targets 60-70 ELL students through the course of three 
years and involves three classes that meet for three 90-minute sessions each week for a total 
of 80 hours each from November until May.  
 
Math Enrichment is provided through Math multiple-steps problem based activities, where 
students work collaboratively to solve and discuss the process of the Math work involved. Math 
word problems and tasks have been provided by St. John's University. Math materials 
from  Math program are also included.  
 
Pilot Project Bridge Math Enrichment Program 
 
Activities: After school program, Math ELL enrichment 
Number of students to be served: 20-30 students 
Grade Levels:1st  Grade Students 
Languages of instruction: English 
· 
and&nbsp;&nbsp;1&nbsp;ESL/bilingual teacher 
 

# and types of certified teachers:&nbsp;2&nbsp;Content teachers 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          82 

 

Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information  
Times per day/week: program duration: Two times a week for a total of Three hours - 
from February to May for a total of 30 hours 2 classes  on Tuesdays, Wednesdays and Thursdays 
from 2:20p.m.- 3:30p.m. 
Service provider and qualifications: Program was written and researched by St John’s 
University, ELL Research Department and Common Branches state certified teachers 
Rational for the selections of programs and activities 
 
Project Bridge is a researched program from St. John’s University.  It targets ELL students with 
high Math aptitude.  As an enrichment program it targets language as it provides Math 
enrichment.  Project Bridge involves an additional 90-minute program three times a week in 
Mathematics. This after school program targets 20-30 ELL students in a pilot program that 
will  involve two classes that meet for three 90-minute sessions each week for a total of 30 hours 
each from February until May.  
 
Math Enrichment is provided through Math multiple-steps problem based activities, where 
students work collaboratively to solve and discuss the process of the Math work involved. Math 
word problems and tasks have been provided by St. John's University. Math materials 
from  Math program are also included.   
 
Math After School Program: 
 
Activities: After school program, Math ELL Intervention 
Number of students to be served: 250 students 200-150 ELLS and 70-100 former ELLS 
Grade Levels:  3rd-5th Grade Students 
Languages of instruction: English 
 
· 
Times per day/week: program duration: Once a week for 1.5 hours - from November to April for 
Third- fifth grade students  Thursdays from 2:20p.m.- 4:50p.m. 
 
Service provider and qualifications: ENL and Bilingual Teachers will push in for half hour to 
each class and  Common Branches Teachers with experience in the upper Primary grades will 
teach content. All students will receive services from both ENL teachers and Common Branch 
teachers.  The ENL teacher's role is to focus on the academic language used in Math problems 
that would interfere with student’s effectiveness in solving Mathematical word problems.  All 
teachers will receive training prior to the beginning of the program to understand the targeted 
concepts and pacing of the program. 
Rational for the selections of programs and activities: The After-School Math ELL Intensive 
Program addresses 3rd -5th grade at-risk ELL students for the purpose of improving student 
math performance and help students meet the Math Standards for the NYS Math exam. There 
will be a total of ten classes for the Math ELL after school program, servicing approximately 250 
ELLS, eight common branch teachers and two ENL teachers will service these 
classes.  Supplementary Math instructional materials will be provided as an intervention for these 
at-risk ELL students.  Classes will meet a total of 20  sessions beginning in October through 
April, from 2:20 p.m. to 3:50 p.m.  Group size will be maintained at 20-25 students per teacher.   
The students will be placed in classes based on their Math ability as well as language ability, 
therefore those At Risk are using the "Big Idea" text and materials, and those approaching 
mastery will be using "Get Set For Math NY" text. Both groups will also get individualized "I 
Ready Math" computerized instructional time to work on their individual targeted needs.  The 
thrust of this program is to provide additional support for these students to develop further 
understanding of the basic Mathematical concepts for their grade level domains. 

# and types of certified teachers: 8 content teachers and 2 ESL teachers 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          83 

 

# and types of certified teachers 5 Content teachers and 1 to 2 ESL teachers 

Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information  
 
Former ELL Language Enrichment Saturday Program  
 
Activities: Saturday Program, Math / ENL Language Enrichment for Advanced to Former ELLS 
Number of students to be served: 120 students 50 ELLS and 70 Former ELLS 
Grade Levels- 2nd-4th Grade students   
· 
This program will target Advanced ELL and Former ELL students who became proficient in the 
last two years and still need to further develop their Mathematical abilities, as well as to practice 
the language used in CCSS in English Language Arts /Math exams.  During math instruction the 
students will work on Exemplars to increase their language and Math skills in the process of 
problem solving.  During the ELA instruction, students will work with the Common Core Coach 
book, focusing on close readings that further develop language that increases their critical 
thinking to address the new CCSS reading standards. There will be a total of 6 classes that will 
meet for 3hrs on Saturdays from January to April for a total of 10 sessions. Saturdays from 8:30 
p.m. -11:30p.m. 
Service provider and qualifications: ESL and Bilingual Teachers will push in for half hour to 
each class and Common Branches Teachers with experience in the upper Primary grades will 
teach content. All students will receive services from both ESL teachers and Common Branch 
teachers.  The ESL teacher's role is to focus on the academic language used in Math problems 
and in ELA reading questions that would interfere with students.  All teachers will receive 
training prior to program to know the concepts and pacing of the program. 
 
ELA After School Program: 
 
Activities: After school program, ELA Intervention for ELL students 
Number of students to be served: 200 students 150+ ELLs 50Former ELLs 
 
Grade Levels:  3-5th Grade Students 
Languages of instruction: English 
 
· 
Times per day/week: program duration: once a week for 1.5 hours - from October to April for 
third, fourth, and fifth graders and  Wednesday and Fridays 2:20p.m. - 3:50p.m.  
Service provider and qualifications: ESL and Common Branches Teachers with experience in the 
upper Primary grades will teach this program.  ESL and or Bilingual teachers will push in half 
hour sessions. ESL will provide ESL targeted strategies on language structure and vocabulary 
development based on topics being presented by the program.  Time will be given on Tuesday 
other professional work time for teachers to coordinate instruction. 
Rational for the selections of programs and activities: The After-School ELA Program addresses 
At-Risk Ell students in grades 3-5 scoring intermediate to advance scores in 
the NYSESLAT.  There will be a total of sixteen classes servicing 
approximately 200 ELLs.  They will meet a total of 16/18 sessions beginning in October through 
April, from 2:20 p.m. to 3:50p.m.  once  a week.  Group size will be maintained at 20 students 
per teacher.  The sessions will address literacy skills and language structure development. Two 
different groups will be targeted those students with high level 1's and 2's scores at risk students 
and those approaching standards with high level 2's or low 3's.  They will use the 
text,  "Supporting the Standards-NY Coach"; Performance Coach"; and "Read, Reason and 
Write".  All of these programs will provide a high interest reading range of 
reading passages and writing activities to further develop academic language and discourse for 
our targeted students.  Certified Bilingual and ESL teachers will provide supplemental 

# and types of certified teachers: 6 Content teachers and&nbsp;2 ESL teachers 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          84 

 

 

# and types of certified teachers:&nbsp; 3&nbsp;Content teachers and 2 ESL teachers 

Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information  
instruction in alignment with the New York City and New York State content and performance 
standards. Reading Skills books will be provided to improve English language skills.  General 
instructional supplies such as chart paper, markers, manipulatives, books, computer license and 
certificates of achievement will be purchased to support the After School Programs. 
The 1st and 2nd Grade ELL After-School Reading Program: 
 
Activities: After school program, Literacy Development for ELL at risk students 
Number of students to be served: 75 students all ELLS 
Grade Levels:  1st and 2nd Grade Students 
Languages of instruction: English 
 
 
· 
Times per day/week: program duration: two times a week for 1 hour - from January to April 
Service provider and qualifications: ESL and Bilingual Teachers will push in for half hour 
sessions and Common Branches Teachers with experience in the Lower Primary grades will 
teach the core of the program. Bilingual or ESL teachers will provide ESL strategies in Language 
enrichment and vocabulary development.  Tuesdays other professional work time will be 
dedicated for these teachers to coordinate instruction.  
· 
 
Rational for the selections of programs and activities: The 1 and 2nd Grade ELL After-School 
Program address strategies to improve literacy.  It will meet 2 days per week (Wednesdays and 
Thursdays) from 2:20 p.m. to 3:20 p.m.  There will be a total of 6 classes for the ELL After-
school servicing approximately 90 students.  We will be using a literacy- based program to help 
the students develop language and literacy skills.  One of the programs we will use is "Language 
Power".  
 
Spanish Early Bird Program: 
 
Activities: To improve content Language vocabulary and language structure in Spanish   
Number of students to be served: 15 students Dual Language students. 
Grade Levels:  3-5th Grade Students 
Languages of instruction: Spanish  
· 
Times per day/week: program duration: Twice a week in the morning From January till April 
from 7:15 to 8:00a.m. (20 sessions of 45 minutes each) 
Service provider and qualifications:  Bilingual Common Branches Teachers with experience in 
the upper Primary grades 
Rational for the selections of programs and activities: The Spanish Early Bird Program will 
address instruction to improve content area vocabulary for students at-risk in the Dual Language 
Program.  Instruction will be provided in Spanish with supplemental materials in the Native 
Language Arts, to help students meet standards in Math and other content area. Supplementary 
instructional materials will be given to provide intervention for at-risk students.    
 
Sife Academic Support 
 
An ESL teacher will assist in the academic transitioning by providing scaffolds  to the identified 
SIFE students one hour 3 times a week in the am. The ESL Teacher will help address the mayor 
academic instructional gaps in literacy and Math 
Number of Students 10 

# and types of certified teachers: 1 Bilingual teacher 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          85 

 

 

# and types of certified teachers 1 Bilingual teacher 
 

Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information  
Grade levels -3-5 
· 
· 
Science After school 
Activities: After school program, Science ELL Intervention 
Number of students to be served: 70 students 50 ELLS and 20 former ELLS 
Grade Levels: 4th  Grade Students 
Languages of instruction: English 
 # and types of certified teachers: 3 content teachers 
Times per day/week: program duration: Once a week for 1.5 hours - for four weeks 
All students will receive services from both ENL teachers and Common Branch teachers.  The 
ENL teacher's role is to focus on the academic language used in Science that would interfere 
with student’s effectiveness in understanding Science word problems.  All teachers will receive 
training prior to the beginning of the program to understand the targeted concepts and pacing of 
the program. 
Rational for the selections of programs and activities: The After-School Science ELL Intensive 
Program addresses 4th grade at-risk ELL students for the purpose of improving student Science 
performance and help students meet the Science Standards for the NYS Science exam. There 
will be a total of three classes for the Science ELL after school program, servicing 
approximately 70 ELLS, three common branch teachers.  Supplementary Science instructional 
materials will be provided as an intervention for these at-risk ELL students.  Classes will meet a 
total of 4  sessions May , from 2:20 p.m. to 3:50 p.m.  Group size will be maintained at 20-25 
students per teacher.   
The students will be placed in classes based on their language ability, therefore those At Risk are 
using the "Big Idea" text and materials, and those approaching mastery will be using "Get Set 
For Science NY" text.  The thrust of this program is to provide additional support for these 
students to develop further understanding of the basic Science concepts for their grade level 
domains. 
      

rationale 
teachers to receive training  
schedule and duration 
topics to be covered 
name of provider 

Part C: Professional Development  
Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as 
other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs.   
· 
· 
· 
· 
· 
Begin description here:            
  
 
 
Staff Developers for Educators: SDE 
 
SDE will provide on-site Math professional development for all Kindergarten and first grade 
teachers. The focus of these workshops will be to further develop the areas of Number Sense and 
the development of Mathematical Vocabulary for our ELL population. This Professional 
development will take place during the month of October. 
 
Preparing for the New York State Exams: 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          86 

 

 

Part C: Professional Development  
 
The Title III program teachers will receive two to three professional development sessions, they 
will take place during the Tuesdays other professional work time and after this time too.  There 
will be an introductory session given by the Math Coach and lead Math teacher trained by 
Number Talks on training for Math ELLS. 
English Language Arts Title III programs will receive PD by the ENL teacher on scaffolding 
language and working with vocabulary development srategies. Teachers will also receive 
technology training to work with their small group of students on the "IReady" program by the 
Dual Language Technology supervisor.  
 
 
The 3L's - Creative Differentiated Tasks for Active Engagement with Learning, Language and 
Literacy: 
 
Title III program teachers will receive 16 hours of professional development workshops  in the 
3L training to incorporate the Language, Literacy and Learning strategies into the Disciplinary 
Literacy period.  This training will be provided by Great City Schools- Professional Learning 
Platform staff developer- Maryann Cucchiara. The differentiated tasks for the 3 Ts lesson 
provide  students with multiple pathways to demonstrate their expertise and mastery of the 
content, academic language and increasing literacy skills. The sessions will be held regularly to 
strategize how to best support the teachers in the classroom.  
 
Materials: The Program will provide support materials for up to 15 teachers.  
Time: The Program will take place from October - April. 
  

rationale 
schedule and duration 
topics to be covered 
name of provider 
how parents will be notified of these activities 

Part D: Parental Engagement Activities   
Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact 
higher achievement for ELLs.  NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as 
parent orientation during ELL identification process.   
· 
· 
· 
· 
· 
Begin description here:            
  
Attendance for the after school programs is monitored by the Parent Coordinator, Guidance 
Counselors, Coaches, Teachers and Paraprofessional who assist in monitoring attendance and 
making phone calls to the parents of children who have missed two consecutive 
sessions.  All information is gathered and kept in a binder. Parents receive all permission slips 
and other letter information regarding all Title III programs in English and preferred language 
identified in ATS 
 Dual Language Staff Developer will work with the parents and ESL department for family 
meetings and information sessions on programs for ELL students. Two sessions will be 
specifically Vocabulary Academics. Specific meetings giving information about the 
new CCLS and its impact on ELLS will take place in November and January and it will address 
grade specific content. The Coaches will mainly give it with translation from the parent 
coordinator and paraprofessional in Spanish, other languages (Chinese and Bengali) will be 
given documentation in their languages.  The meetings giving information about the shift in 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          87 

 

 

Part D: Parental Engagement Activities   
Academic Vocabulary through the CCLS and its impact on ELLS will take place in January and 
February it will address specific language standards. The literacy coaches will present it with 
translation from the parent coordinator in Spanish, other languages (Chinese and Bengali) will be 
given documentation in their languages.  
 
Math Parent Workshops: 
 
In addition, parents in grades K - 5, will participate in a series of monthly Math meetings. During 
these meetings specific monthly content and targeted Math the Math Coaches will present 
vocabulary and strategies for each unit. The parents of the ELL students will have the 
opportunity to engage in Math activities that their children will be currently learning. It is our 
vision to create a Math community of parents that are actively engaged in their students' 
learning.   
Three Math workshops will take place during Saturdays, 9:00 - 11:00. (2hrs.) October - April. 
Teachers specializing in the specific grade math content will also participate during the 
workshops. Translation will be available provided by an ELL Teacher or Dual Paraprofessional. 
 
 
 

Part E: Budget  
FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY.  Ensure that your 
Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. 
Allocation Amount: $           
Budget Category 

Budgeted Amount 

Explanation of expenditures in this 
category as it relates to the 
program narrative for this title. 
           
1-Project Bridge 
2-Math After School 
3-Former ELL Saturday 
Enrichment 
4-ELA After School Program 
5-1st and 2nd grade 
6 Spanish Early Bird 
7-SIFE Tutoring 
8- Math -Parent Workshops  
9-Science After School 

Professional salaries 
(schools must account for 
fringe benefits) 
1. 
2. 

Per session 
Per diem 

Purchased services 
1. 

High quality staff 
and curriculum 

           
 
 
 
 
 
1-80X3X1=240hrs   
1-40X6x1=240 hrs 
2-20X1.5X10=300hrs 
3-10X3X6=180hrs 
4-20X1.5X8=320hrs 
5-20X1X4=80hrs 
6-20X 45minX1=10.5 hrs 
7-10X2X1=20 hrs 
8-2X3X5=30hrs 
9-1.5X4X3=18 hrs 
1,438.5 hrs-$72,112 
20.99% Fringe $15,136.31 
Total of $87,248.30 
   
           
  1- 8,000 
 
 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          88 

           
1- Great City Schools 
 

Part E: Budget  
FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY.  Ensure that your 
Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. 
Allocation Amount: $           
Budget Category 

Budgeted Amount 

Explanation of expenditures in this 
category as it relates to the 
program narrative for this title. 
2- SDE- Math 
Professional Development 

           
  Spanish Libraries for13  Dual 
LAnguage classes         

           
           
           
           
           
  Dual Language ESL staff 
developer 105 salary         
           
           

 

 
 
 
 

development 
contracts. 

Supplies and materials 
2. 

Must be 
supplemental. 
Additional 
curricula, 
instructional 
materials. 
Must be clearly 
listed. 

3. 

4. 

Educational Software 
(Object Code 199) 
Travel 

Other 

TOTAL 

2-8,000 
 
Total $16,000         
           
    $35,117.7       

           
           
           
           
           
$12,093     

           
      $140,459     

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          89 

 

DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT 

GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY 

SUBMISSION FORM 

2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR 

 

DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information 

necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English 

language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a 

part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the 

services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should 

be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily 

available on file in the school.  When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces.  For 

additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. 

Part I: School ELL Profile 

 

 

 
 

A. School Information 

District  24 
School Name   Marino Jeantet School 

Borough  Queens 

School Number   019 

 
B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant 

principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. 
 

Principal   Genie Calibar 
Coach  Kristen Morris, Literacy 
ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher  
 Maria Gatanas, ENL 
Teacher/Subject Area Angela Priovolos, ENL 
Teacher/Subject Area Debbie Kinney, Testing 
Cord. 
Related-Service Provider Justin Thompson, AP 
Superintendent Madeline Chan 

 

Assistant Principal  Ivette Casado-Faya 
Coach Ellen Peruche, Math/Data 
School Counselor  
Laura Jett 
Parent  Victor Torres 

Parent Coordinator Carol Zhumi 

Field Support Center Staff Member Giuvela Leisengang  
Other (Name and Title) Carmen Montas, Dual AP 

C. Teacher Qualifications  
Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section.  Press TAB after each number entered to calculate 
sums and percentages.  
     
Number of certified 
ENL teachers currently teaching in the 
ENL program 

Number of teachers who hold both content 
area/common branch and TESOL certification 

18 

0 

0 

Number of teachers who hold both a 
bilingual extension and TESOL 
certification 

Number of special education teachers 
with bilingual extensions 

1 

8 

11 

2 

Number of certified 
bilingual teachers not currently 
teaching in a bilingual program  
Number of certified foreign 
language/world language teachers 
providing home language arts 
(HLA) to students in bilingual 
programs [applicable to grades 7–
12] 
Number of teachers currently 
teaching a self-contained ENL class 
who hold both a common branch 
license and TESOL certification 
[applicable to grades K–6] 

Number of certified 
bilingual teachers currently 
teaching in a bilingual program 

16 

Number of certified ENL teachers 
not currently  teaching in the ENL 
program  

12 

 

D. Student Demographics  

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          90 

 
Total number of students in 
school (excluding pre-K) 

1891 

Total number of ELLs 

1082 

ELLs as share of total student population 
(%) 

57.22% 

 
 
 
Part II: ELL Demographics 
 
 
 
 
 
A. ELL Programs 

This school serves the following grades (includes 
ELLs and non-ELLs) 
Check all that apply 

 
 
This school offers (check all that apply): 

K

    1

    2

     3

     4

     5

 

6

   7

     8

    9

     10

     11

    12

 

Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) 

Yes

             No

Dual language program (DL) 

Freestanding ENL 

Yes

             No

Yes

             No

 

 

 

If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish  

If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish 

 

 
Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a 
separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. 
 

Bilingual Program Breakdown 

School 
Year 

Opened 
(e.g., 2013-14) 

1 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

K 

1 
 
 
3 
 
 
4 

Lang. 
SP 
 
 
SP 
 
 
 

Program 
TBE 
TBE 
TBE 
DL 
DL 
DL 
Total 
 
 
 
Part III: Assessment Analysis 
 
 

2 
 
 
3 
 
 
5 

4 

0 
 
 
2 
 
 
2 

3 

0 
 
 
3 
 
 
3 

2 

0 
 
 
3 
 
 
3 

5 

0 
 
 
2 
 
 
2 

6 

7 

8 

9 

10 

11 

12 

         

         

         

         

         

         

         

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

       

       

       

       

       

       

       

 
 
0 

 
 
0 

 
 
0 

 
 
0 

 
 
0 

 
 
0 

 
 
0 

Tot # 
3 
0 
0 
16 
0 
0 
19 

After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 

1.  What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, 

teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? 
Beyond the initial screening, the progress monitoring of data is used throughout the year to make decisions and revisions to 
instructional goals and services that provide all ELL students opportunities to meet grade standards. A number of different 
types of assessment tools designed for specific purposes are used individually and in combination, to obtain a complete 
picture of student abilities, strengths and needs.   The systematic administration of these assessments allow for all staff 
members who service these students access to  student profiles, which  are used to design and differentiate instruction. 
Initially,  ATS data reports ( RLAT RESI,RNMR) are used to generate the EDAT,  STARS, student profiles cards, running 
records,  MOSL baseline assessments,  NYSESLAT and State assessments are used school wide  to get a preliminary measure for 
future comparison. 
During the year, continuous administration of TC Running Records/concepts of print (kindergarten) , I-Ready 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          91 

 

Diagnostics,  writing tasks and grade specific assessments are also administered and scored to help with the monitoring of this 
progress, student self-assessment, and independent reading levels.  In order to measure interim  progress of grade standards, 
our Writing Pathways rubrics  and module assessments are used.  In addition, we are also integrating alternate assessments 
such as project based learning assignments and assessments by skill in reading and writing, per grade, as selected by teacher 
planning teams to give students an opportunity to demonstrate what they have learned within different learning styles.  For 
Dual Language classes, Home Language Arts Assessments are used to build background and assess competency in both 
languages and content areas. 
Formative assessments for our ENL staff includes the EDAT tool and the grade specific TOMS checklist.  These assessments 
allow service providers  to  conduct an in depth analysis of progress monitoring in the four NYSESLAT modalities and identify 
areas of success and improvement in order to  establish individual goals. From these reports, we are also able to form flexible 
grouping of students.  
 

2.  What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 

Systematically throughout the year student progress is tracked and compared to student peer groups. School expectations for 
the monitoring of the above mentioned assessments are not limited to, but follow the guidelines below: 
 

3.  What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL 

Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? 
Several of our  assessments are used for both formative and  summative  assessments.  For example, our TC running 
records,  a tool used throughout the entire year,  monitors students for fluency and comprehension as they move through 
leveled benchmarks.  Unit tasks (post-assessment) are also used to measure growth upon completion of the unit and establish 
mastery levels of the genre, when addressing the unit later in the year.  This analysis also guides future instruction in that small 
groups are focused on areas of need and class lessons are planned according to appropriate points of entry.  Other documents 
such as the school report card, progress reports, NYSELA  and NYSESLAT results are also used to evaluate student progress.    
Our Dual language programs are also using the HLA assessment to provide a framework for teachers to ensure that students in 
English as a New Language and Bilingual Education programs are meeting the NYS Learning Standards. 
 

4.  What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered?  

Once the sumative data has been collected and shared with the administrative cabinet, it becomes available for teacher leader 
groups and study groups for analysis and development of action plans.  Within these groups comparisons to previous years, 
units and programs are conducted.  Moving forward, this data is then used to develop CEP goals, school initiatives and 
interventions/programs for the next school year.  Analysis, of our current 2016-2017 data has led us to the structuring of 
additional periods to  implement guidelines for the research-based "3L's" strategies of disciplinary literacy.  
Additional  structures include a sixth period to be used during grade study groups at which time they review student progress 
of grade benchmarks and concepts in order to collaboratively plan supportive instruction.  This information is also used to plan 
differentiated small-group instruction.  Furthermore,  noted trends within grades or student populations are addressed during 
in-house professional development where researched strategies or best practices are shared to be further developed in 
inquiry teams. 
This data also supports the creation of our  RTI groups.   Cycles of selected students prioritized by at-risk levels, run for ten 
weeks.  Upon completion of this cycle, students progress if further evaluated and either recommended for an increase in 
duration and/or intensity over time.  
Funding available, sections of Title III after school programs, in Literacy and Math are offered to targeted students.  The 
nominated students are grouped according to proficiency levels to address targeted and appropriate levels of proficiency.  
 
 

5.  How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-
5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.]  
RTI is being used as a pre-evaluation that aims at prevention of inappropriate referrals while increasing and supporting 
instructional time.  In determining additional support services, student profiles (years of instruction, HL proficiency, 
social/emotional needs, examination) are also taken into consideration.  Licensed reading teachers service students through a 
schedule which is in addition to their regular class instructional time providing for adequate opportunities to learn.  Data 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          92 

 

gathered is used to differentiate instruction (UDL) and is matched with research based strategies which are appropriate for the 
linguistically diverse learner. Data is collected by the servicing teacher informally as well as formally.  Conference notes, 
authentic student work, projects etc. are used daily as guides to designing instruction. Formally, TC running records and 
individual student progress sheets are collected 3 times a year and used at RTI meetings to collaboratively  discuss progress, 
continue, change or discontinue service.   Students can also be assessed using differentiated/alternate assessments so that 
appropriate measures of progress can be made reflecting their understanding.  When necessary, additional school staff such as 
guidance counselors, SBST,/LAP members, support service providers and parents are invited to collaborate on the decision-
making.   
The EDAT analysis tool has assisted us in identifying 598 at-risk ELL students.  The majority of these students range between 
levels 1-2 (371 students.)  Individual notes on students provide for a more specific profile.    
 

6.  What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? 

([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS].  
The EDAT tool has been one of the most important determiners in evaluating progress and programs.  This analysis tool 
provides both sumative and individual data primarily for our first to fifth grade students. 
Kindergarten  and new admit students, upon entry are assessed using the NYSITELL assessment.    A review of our NYSITELL 
data reflected that the majority of the newcomers tested at the Transitioning and Expanding proficiency levels.  Unlike past 
years, more students are scoring at higher levels.   On the other hand, new admits in the upper grades continue to score 
primarily in the Entering proficiency level. This data can easily be supported by the fact that many of our students and their 
families are new to the country.   
 According to the EDAT summary report, our school has had an increase in our ELL student population by 3%.  Our SIFE status 
and long term ELL's have remained at 0% and our attendance percentages have also remained above the 95% quartile.   
Analysis of the 2017 NYSESLAT data showed progress in that 288 students have advanced at least one proficiency level, 37 
students advanced 2 proficiency levels, 2 students advanced 3 levels and 91 scored commanding out of a total of 998 test 
takers. In comparison to the 2016 school year, 57 more students reached the commanding level.  Progress monitoring has of 
this data has also led us to focus on the students who have regressed.  Of these students, 66 have regressed 1 proficiency level 
and  4 have regressed 2 proficiency levels.  Zero students have regressed 3 or 4 proficiency levels.   More specifically 
weaknesses in the modalities were analyzed.  Data results indicated that the writing modality is a consistent area of weakness 
for all grades.  In addition, the following strengths was noted: 
       In grade one, students excelled in reading. 
       Grade 2, included speaking. 
       Grade 3, fluctuated between reading and speaking 
       Grade 4,  included speaking 
       Grade 5,  included speaking  
 Overall, students fared better in the listening and speaking modality compared to the reading and writing.  There was also 
significant progress made in the Listening and Speaking modality supporting research that students acquire social language 
(BICS) before achieving proficiency in academic language (CALP).  This year, however we noticed an increase in the number of 
students who tested tested out in the fourth.  As in the past, the trend of students in third and fourth grade that "stall" due to 
the increase in complex text and academic language remain.  Of our test takers, 357 students remained at the same 
proficiency level.    
 

7.  What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? 

For the 2017-2018 school year we have chosen to change our literacy program in order to improve core instruction,  rigor and 
time allocations.  Currently our new TC program includes a dally workshop model, specific teaching points, discussion 
techniques that engage ELL's in the necessary multiple opportunities for discussions and application of language content,  as 
well as an "If... Then... curriculum to provide students with additional and targeted support. Grade curriculum maps include a 
pacing of this program and specific accommodations to support our ENL students.  Planning for these scaffolds and additional 
supports are collaboratively designed by lead teachers and teachers of the grade, including ENL and SWD teachers.   This 
program is also coupled with our ENL initiative which includes The 3L's  work in disciplinary literacy piloted by Maryann 
Cucchiarra; based on the research work of Lilly Wong-Fillmore.  This program offers instructional supports for vocabulary 
instruction, language structures and deconstructing complex text.  Additional periods have been allotted within grade 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          93 

 

 

instructional program to implement this work on a 2 to 3 day cycle.  Our read aloud periods and shared reading periods have 
also remained intact to address the modeling of think-alouds, exposure to complex text and fluency. 
Keeping in mind our overall weakness in the writing modality we will continue to implement the Hochman Writing Revolution 
methodology to address this finding.  

 
 
 
Part IV: ELL Programming 
 

Programming and Scheduling Information 

1.  How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented 
as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students 
regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in 
one class]).  

a.  Freestanding ENL program. 

 P.S. 19Q’s student population is comprised of a large number of New  Language Learners (approximately 1100), 
distributed in all grades.  All school-within-school curriculum is structured to afford equal access to college and career 
readiness for students in all subgroups.  Being fully aware of the needs of these students, increasing challenges, 
moving targets and high expectations, we have structured our New Language Learners Instructional program to 
include the stand-alone or integrated model of instruction. Reorganization was also revised to assure students receive 
mandated minutes of instruction as per CR-Part 154.2 by organizing groupings according to proficiency levels. 
Within the two models and keeping in mind the gains and strides these students must achieve in order to reach 
proficiency levels, we begin annually by looking at each student individually using the EDAT, NYSESLAT or 
NYSITELL.  This  determines the mandated number of minutes (stand-alone/integrated), mode of instruction (pull-
out/push-in), alignment and differentiated needs for each student.  ENL teacher schedules reflect the allocated 
number of mandated minutes as labeled, either stand-alone or integrated.  Our stand-alone instruction focuses more 
on the Foundational skills and the anchor standards for speaking, listening and language of the NYS Learning 
Standards.  Our integrated instruction includes the teaching of core content areas (science or social studies) via the 
Disciplinary Literacy cycle.  Instruction will include a focus on academic vocabulary, sentence structures, complex text 
and best practices from the Writing Revolution Program.  Delivery of our Integrated ENL is co-taught between the 
certified teachers. 

b.  TBE program.  If applicable.   

Our kindergarten and two first grade special education bilingual spanish program (TBE), includes a NYS Learning 
standards aligned  ELA , ENL and HLA instruction (bilingual content area) as well as the requirements of CR-Part 154.3 
for our bilingual students with disabilities.  Periods of content area instruction in either social studies or science 
are taught in the home language depending on the model and level of proficiency;  students at the entering and 
emerging levels receive a minimum of 2 core content areas taught bilingually and transitioning and expanding 
students receive a minimum of one content area taught bilingually.  The  program is designed to develop conceptual 
skills in their native language as they learn English. Students are programmed to receive 75% of instruction in their 
home language and 25% in English.  Our goals are that students' literacy skills transfer to their new language while 
acquiring age appropriate literacy skills. To support this goal, a print rich classroom environment in both English and 
Spanish is required and will be established.  In this program, as their English proficiency increases, instructional time 
in the home language decreases eventually transferring to a monolingual English program.   Assessment in both 
languages will be used to determine progress of language and modification of language instruction. 

c.  DL program.  If applicable.    

In response to our parent requests for enrollment in  the Dual Language Program, additional classes have been 
formed.  Since students are encouraged to remain in the program for the duration of their schooling,  future class 
reorganizations will reflect these changes and strive to maintain a 50/50 percent ration of ELL and EPs. More 
specifically, for students currently enrolled in a  Dual Language  Program, a schedule reflecting the 50/50 model of 
side-by-side instruction is followed and reflected in each class' program. In terms of  Instruction, the ENL component 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          94 

 

 

is designed to develop skills in all four modalities.  Content area is also taught in the home language and in the target 
language.  Within these guidelines, ENL instruction for ELLs  is intended to target language objectives which are 
essential in supporting content area instruction for ELLs. Ultimately, these objectives support the achievement 
of bilingual and bi-literate academic skills in both languages. 

2.  How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each 

program model? 

a.  How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 

below)? 

In order to assure that all ENL students are receiving the adequate number of minutes, a class schedule has been developed 
that categorizes students into the corresponding proficiency levels.  This sheet includes the number of students within each 
level, the name of the teacher that is providing these services and the number of periods serviced.   Due to the large number 
of ELL students, in all of our classes (ELLs or Former ELL's), all students receive instructional supports.  The STARS programming 
also ensures that students have been assigned services and mandated minutes.  Additional: see 1A  
 

3.  Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and 

methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core 
Learning Standards.  
Dual Language: 
Content area instruction such as Science and Social Studies, for Dual Language Spanish Program are supported in the native 
languages as evidenced within their schedules and is taught by a Dual Language Bilingual/Social Studies teacher.  Mathematics, 
is also taught in both the primary and secondary language by the classroom teachers.  In order to assure that students are also 
evaluated in their native language, the HLA, teacher created assessments, translated materials, the Spanish LAB and the 
Evaluacion Diagnostica de la lectura  (EDL) assessment is used to monitor student progress.  
Bilingual Instruction: 
Content area instruction for Bilingual Spanish programs are are also supported using the home language.  Language use 
for  units of study are determined by proficiency levels and include the 4 modalities.  Instruction in aligned to the NYS Learning 
Standards and compliments CCLS in the home language.   Word study in the home language is also used to support language 
acquisition and content knowledge.  Considerations for meeting the minimum content area instruction delivered in the home 
language may include: a mini lesson in Spanish and a summary in English and  small group instruction differentiated by 
proficiency levels.  
In order to assure that students are also evaluated in their native language, the HLA, teacher created assessments, translated 
materials, the Spanish LAB and the Evaluacion Diagnostica de la lectura  (EDL) assessment is used to monitor student progress.  
Further details may be found above in 1b. 
In Dual, Bilingual and ESL programs, all currently available at our school, instructional approaches supporting  ENL 
methodology are included.  Content and language objectives, instruction supported with visuals, manipulatives, language 
scaffolds, academic vocabulary instruction, semantic mapping, concept boards, and opportunities for 
discussion  are  integrated within literacy in the TC program and Disciplinary Literacy periods.  
 

4.  How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? 

 In order to assure that students in bilingual and dual language classes are also evaluated in their native language,  teacher 
created assessments, translated materials, the Spanish LAB,  the EDL and the HLA assessments are used to monitor student 
progress.  Peer comparisons also play a role in appropriately evaluating student progress.  We also assess our students 
periodically in English through individual student profiles and in Assessment Pro in order to measure bi-literacy and monitor 
instruction. 
From these and other data sources a history of years or service, three year tracking of NYSESLAT (overall proficiency as well as 
the four communicative modalities: listening, speaking, reading, and writing), State Exam results, subgroup status, and 
NYSITELL scores are monitored in order to track students.       
 

5.  How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? 

a. 

SIFE   

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          95 

 

b.  Newcomer  
c.  Developing   
d. 
e. 

Long Term 
Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status  

Our balanced literacy program, which serves all ELL subgroups includes Teachers College reading and writing 
units  phonics/word work, read-aloud, shared reading, and guided /independent reading.  Each unit is paced on a grade 
curriculum map which includes unit expectations, assessments, rubrics, tasks, TP and additional supports for our SWD and ENL 
students.  This literacy block for grades 1-5,  also includes this years initiative which is disciplinary literacy.  Disciplinary literacy 
depending on the grade, is scheduled for either 2 or 3 periods a week and focuses on the social students or science content 
area.  Strategies within this cycle include the research from Lilly Wong-Fillmore: vocabulary development, demystification of 
complex text and language, a connection to current unit: specific reading skill as a culminating writing activity, and a  bridged 
writing component.  Keeping in mind our need for supports in writing, we are continuing the implementation of our previous 
focus program the Writing Revolution to enhance student reading comprehension and writing skills.  
Within daily lessons, teachers support instruction through a variety of strategies and best practices as suggested in 
the BLUEPRINT FOR ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS (ELLS) SUCCESS and the AAELL report outlining the Nine Common Features 
of Successful ELL's   (language in context, background knowledge, visual and context clues, clarifying vocabulary, critical 
thinking, use of writing to access language acquisition, multiple entry points and high expectations.)  Student need, levels and 
grade benchmarks are also taken into consideration when designing SGI.   
Modes of this instruction may also vary depending on class designation and proficiency levels        
( e.g.collaborative teaching, push-in, small flexible group instruction etc.).  In addition, opportunities for academic discourse  in 
groups or in partnerships allowing  for production of language is expected in every lesson. A key element this year will be to 
include the application of Tier II vocabulary and meaningful discussions  through Accountable Talk, Effective Questioning, 
Feedback Techniques (DL.)  Ultimately, we hope that these opportunities for comprehensible input and output will reflect a 
major component of the Core Curriculum; Point of View and Argument. 
Overall instruction for our school is planned with the understanding that all teachers are teachers of English Language 
Learners  and we are responsible for ensuring that the academic, linguistic, social, and emotional needs of the 
individual student are met. 
 
SIFE 
Currently, we have a total of 0 SIFE students.   Careful monitoring of interrupted schooling and tracking is done during the 
initial interview process.  If a student is suspected of possibly being a SIFE student the Oral Interview Questionnaire 
is administered.  Furthermore, this  flag would be indicated on the BNDC screen  no later than 30 days of initial 
enrollment.   School personnel such as the Guidance Counselor, and LAP team which would address emotional and family 
support, and other related service teachers, would also intervene in the development of instructional tracks to ensure that we 
are focusing  both on the child’s social and instructional development.  
  
Newcomer ELL's: 
As mentioned above, due to the large number of ELL students in our school, instruction for all classes include ENL 
methodology.   Specifically for newcomers, instruction includes addition read alouds and shared reading to further model how 
to interact with complex text.  Metalinguistic skills  are also fostered through explicit strategies such as think aloud, attention 
to vocabulary, analysis of figurative language.  Weekly program also includes 
additional support for phonics and word work which are delivered by our ENL teachers during Stand Alone periods. 
In addition to building on student background knowledge and cultural backgrounds, teachers design instruction that use 
scaffolds, TPR, visual aids and partnerships to provide ENL students access to rigorous and challenging instruction.  
Materials such as leveled libraries that also include a variety (interest and gender) of books in different  home languages  are 
also available to support literacy instruction.   
Fortunately, our classrooms are also equipped with technology that support programs such as I-Ready, RAZ Kids, Fundations, 
Reach into Phonics (K), and Reach Into Reading  (1&2) are among some of the materials that supplement student instruction.   
After school Title III Programs such as Extended Day (Reading/Math), Saturday Academy, Flamenco Dance also allow for us to 
target a selected group of children based on data and student progress.  
Collaboration with home and other school personal if necessary. 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          96 

 

 
Developing ELL's 
Once again a focus is made in uutilizing materials and instructional resources that are linguistically, grade appropriate and are 
aligned to the NYLS.  In addition, in order to address the proficiency levels of our ELL's we incorporate the New Language Arts 
progressions which address the  linguistic demands, indicators of performance and continuum of scaffolds that gradually 
reduce, within all four communicative modalities.  School wide protocols also include engaging and compelling texts, 
discussions that build not only conversational language but also academic as well, and write to build both knowledge and 
language.  
Long Term ELL's: 
Although our school has a large number of ELL students, we currently have only no long term ELL completing their seventh 
year of service.  
  
Former ELL's: 
As always, former ELL’s (for up to two years), ELL’s and Special Education Students are allowed testing accommodations.  In 
order to provide continuing transitional support for proficient students, small group instruction  and differentiated instruction 
are  provided within their class instruction (as per new regulation).  Students also participate in shared reading and close 
reading that includes vocabulary, grammar, language, reading skills and a writing component using non-fiction texts.  This 
balanced literacy cycle is supported by research based methodology.   
 

6.  What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic 

content areas and accelerate English language development?  
Our Special Needs population, has continued to grow within our school community.  Push-in programs work closely with 
the classroom teacher in order to communicate student progress and areas of need.  In order to enrich and provide additional 
support, our AIS reading and mathematics instruction is conducted within small group settings that focus on specifics skills and 
strategies needed according to IEP’s or summative and formative data.  All service providers are given an opportunity to 
familiarize themselves with the students IEP’s (chapter 408) in order to meet goals and provide for modifications.  These 
providers also engage in continuous dialogue with general education teachers and parents in regard to student progress.  
  
ILA (Integrated Language Arts), TPR (Total Physical Response), use of Multiple Intelligences Approach, Cooperative Learning, 
Individualized Instruction, Learning Styles, CALLA (Cognitive Academic Language Learning Approach), Sheltered English 
Approach,  Differentiated Instruction, and Scaffolding Techniques are also amongst the varied and individual strategies also 
used to ensure that  ELL students meet the New York State Learning Standards,  New York State ESL,  NLA Standards and 
achieve proficiency levels as  required for their grade.   
 

7.  How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and 

attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? 
Once the teacher, and all other service providers have familiarized themselves with individual student needs, all attempts are 
made to meet these goals.  When necessary scheduling of service providers can include push-in cooperative teaching.  In 
addition, service providers share information that can lead to student success.  As always, teachers are also encouraged to use 
differentiated instruction that includes different learning styles and adequate pacing.  Any additional resources or materials 
necessary are also made available to support student success. 
  
 

8.  Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups 

targeted).  List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which 
they are offered. 
EDAT data indicates that 2.7% of our ELLs scored below the 25th growth percentile and scored a level 1 or 2 on ELA. Although 
we have decreased (2.8) the percentage of students in this category, there are still 29 ENL students in need of support as 
compared to 19 non-ENL  students.   
Reading: 
During the day, guided reading instruction, provided by licensed Reading Teachers is provided in cycles according to student 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          97 

 

needs.  Once the cycle is complete, student progress is assessed and a determination is made for continuation or 
discontinuation of intervention.  Throughout intervention, classroom teachers are kept aware of student progress and 
successful strategies.   
We will also be using practice books purchased from Attanasio to support ENL students in first time test taking strategy, 
stamina and practice for the NYSESLAT.  
 
Disciplinary Literacy: 
This program supported by the professional development of Mary Ann Cucchiara, for our ENL and planning teams focuses on 
methods of teaching students to understand the academic disciplines necessary in order  to read and write in content 
areas.  Flow of the lesson includes vocabulary instruction, language objective, discussions, and writing to learn 
opportunities.  Program embedded in weekly instructional program.  
  
ELA Title III Programs: 
ELL language Enrichment Saturday Program 
This program, funded by Title III funds will service Ell's and former ELL 3 &4 grade students.  This program is intended to 
further develop academic discourse in both Math and ELA.  ELA resources will be The Common Core Coach Book.   
ELA After School Program 
Grade 3,4,5 ELL and Former Ell students.  This program runs once a week from November to April for 3  rd   graders and 
December to April for fourth and fifth graders.   This program addresses at-risk ELL's at the Advance Proficiency Level on the 
NYSESLAT.  The focus is ENL strategies for specific language structure and vocabulary development.   
1  st   and 2  nd   Grade ELL After School Reading Program  
Two times a week from January to April  
  
After school programs such as Early Bird, Best Practices in Reading, STARS-for first time test takers, READY, )NYS ELA Coach, 
Extended Day: Read, Write, Edit and Listen, Saturday: Read, Write, Edit and Listen. 
Specifics  for current year can be found in Title III document. 
 
Spanish Early Bird Program 
This program services 3,4,5 grade Dual students.  This program is intended to continue to develop native language skills in both 
ELA and Math.  
 
 
EDAT data indicates that 2.7% of our ELL's scored below the 25th growth percentile and scored at level 1 or 2 on the NYS Math 
exam.  Although our percentages remained the same the number of students in this category decreased from 32 to 29.  This 
compares to 22 non-ENL students in the same category. 
Mathematics: 
The Go Math! program includes many activities for language support in Mathematics.  The activities are designed to help 
students acquire math vocabulary and the language and writing skills necessary to communicate and understand math 
concepts.  Each lesson includes a specific strategy for differentiating instruction for ELL students.  These strategies include 
modeling the concept using manipulatives, using visuals (charts/pictures) when teaching the lesson, having students restate 
explanations or ideas in their own words, and using creative grouping.  Each lesson also highlights common errors, which 
students might make due to their level of fluency with the English language.  An ELL Activity Guide which is designed to 
supplement English Language acquisition for English Learners is also part of the program. 
This year we will also be conducted PD sessions beginning on November 7th in "Number Talks."  To facilitate this "talk" 
teachers will learn how to guide students and ask questions that make discussions meaningful and raise levels of critical 
thinking. 
 
In addition, our Title III funds are being used for mathematics for th following programs: 
After School Math Program that services at-risk ELL and former ELLs in grades 3-5.  This program will meet for 1.5 hrs. from 
November to April.  Once again this program focuses on mathematical academic language that would interfere with word 
problems. 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          98 

 

  
ELL language Enrichment Saturday Program 
This program, funded by Title III funds will service Ell's and former ELL 3 &4 grade students.  This program is intended to 
further develop academic discourse in both Math and ELA.  Math resources will be mathematical exemplars. 
  
Spanish Early Bird Program 
Program for Dual Language Students in grades 3,4,5 twice a week from January through April.  The purpose for this program is 
the improvement of content language vocabulary and language structure in Spanish.    
 
Science: 
In order to assist ELL students in science classes,  emphasis is made on the planning of the understanding  key vocabulary. 
Vocabulary cards with illustrations, teacher-made charts, and TPR is use as well as Technology programs such as Brain 
Pop.  These video include closed captions writing allowing for students to access the other modalities of 
language.  Opportunities for partner and group discussions are also included to allow for application and use of both BICS and 
CALPS.   Students are encouraged to use the content vocabulary in their answers and explanations.   Assessments offer 
multiple choice, matching columns and true false answers  giving all students an opportunity to succeed.  
  
 

9.  Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year?    

An analysis of our EDAT data supported our school-wide decision to shift our literacy program to the Teachers College Units of 
Study.  Trends within the past ELA results, have shown that our students are not making sufficient progress to meet grade 
benchmarks.  Materials for this program include necessary revisions such as engaging texts, vocabulary instruction and 
assessment tools alongside opportunities for rich discussion in the workshop model.  In addition, this program also includes 
daily writing tasks which are a crucial platform for fostering developing academic language.  Daily reading and writing tasks 
expand their exposure to oral and written academic language.  To further support this need, the Hochman Writing 
Revolution  will continue to be implemented through writing strategies such as sentence goals, paragraphs and compositions, 
and writing assessments leveled by grade. We have also decided to continue the developed work we started with LIlly Wong 
Fillmore and Maryann Cuchiarra on building learning, language, and literacy (The 3L's.) Implementation of this work has been 
built into the infrastructure of the instructional program. 
 

10.  If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? 

  N/A 
 

11.  How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs?  Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in 

your building. 
Keeping in mind the needs of our large ELL population, extended day programs are selected and customized. There are 
programs that target the newly arrived first time test takers,  and our largest population, the 0-3 years of ESL service sub-
group.  Within these programs instruction, methods, materials and pacing is considered in order to provide all students with 
the differentiation they require.  Due to the fact that our school population, is comprised primarily of ELLS (57.2%) all 
programs afford equal access to  ELL students.  Parents receive notices inviting them to have their children attend these 
programs.  When necessary, further explanation are afforded to the parents by the guidance counselor and assistant 
principal.  Reflection of participation rates indicates, full capacity for all programs.    
 

12.  What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language 

materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. 
 All classrooms are equipped with smartboards, ELMO, and computers (mobile labs for classrooms.)  This technology is used 
for student research and for meeting student individual learning styles.  In an effort to create a high quality literacy learning 
environment, additional resources and materials are used to build background knowledge, connections and 
transference.  Through the use of technology tasks may also be aligned to different proficiency levels, time on task and 
scaffolds. 
Technology has also helped in tracking student progress through the use of E-Journals and/or portfolios. 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          99 

 

Our school has also purchased the I-Ready, Brain POP, RAZ Kids and Lexia  Program which gives student access to both home 
and school instruction.    
 

13.  How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? 

In Literacy, the Dual Language classes are using Calle de la Lectura in Kindergarten and first grade and Senderos in second 
through fifth grades, both CCLS aligned Literacy program for NLA (Spanish) instruction, and all Spanish classrooms and self-
contained Dual Language classrooms contain Spanish leveled and non-fiction libraries.  
This year we have also begun the use of the HLA in K-5 grade and the NLP for assessments 
In Math, the Dual Language classes are provided with Go-Math materials in Spanish for use on the Spanish math instruction 
days.   
 

14.  Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels.  

 All instruction is aligned to the NYS learning standards.  Grade standards are used to create curriculum maps and establish 
benchmarks and expectations.  These expectations are supported for those student who need to develop approaching or 
proficiency levels.  To avoid the repetition of concepts taught in earlier grades, a pre assessment task is administered to 
determine entry level.  As the unit progressed the students are afforded opportunities to revise and apply new learning.  This 
practice allows ENL students to show what they have learned.  
Within teacher study groups, there is also discussion of data reflecting on how students did overall as a grade and what skills 
need to be addressed.  Results from item skill analysis, I-ready skill monitoring and teacher created assessments are recorded 
on a class/grade workbook for manipulation and analysis.  
 

15.  If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the 

ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met?   
Specific service providers such as ENL teachers, guidance counselors, related service,  have been scheduled to service students 
in all three of our co-locations.  As always communication between all service providers are encouraged and  school initiatives 
and goals are identified and implemented.  More specifically, during study group sessions, faculty meetings, professional 
development and inquiry sessions goals and initiatives are communicated and monitored for success.  These meetings are held 
at our main building to assure that all stakeholder can be present. 
 

16.  Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for 

new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, 
parent coordinator).  
During the registration process in the spring semester the parents are given a school created packet that helps them prepare 
for their Kindergarten experience.  Those registering during the school year, are interviewed and greeted by the ENL 
coordinator, Ms. Angela Priovolos at which time they are given the opportunity to ask questions and are guided in next 
steps.  When applicable parents are invited to attend a Parent Orientation session to become familiar with the school, 
personnel and expectations and begin  building  a home school connection.  Funding available, a Title III summer program is 
provided.  
  
Having identified that our ELL population has significant difficulty with the exams, our school is providing ELL students with a 
program that targets these needs.  Using ENL methodology for instruction, the students are given math instruction specifically 
including content area vocabulary to improve their mathematical proficiency levels.   The goals of this initiative is to:  
gain insight into the culture, language development, and mathematics strategies for the ELL population. deepen the 
pedagogical content knowledge in mathematics learn how to develop academic knowledge through classroom mathematical 
decisions.   
 

17.  What language electives are offered to ELLs?  

          N/A 
 

18.  For schools with dual language programs: 

a.  What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day 

(percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          100 

 

 

In which language(s) is each core content area taught? 

b. 
c.  How is each language separated for instruction? 
d. 

Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same 
time (simultaneous)? 

a. The target language is used 35% of the time in grade 2-5 for both EP and ELL students. The target 
language is used 50% of the  time in Kindergarten and first grade. 
b. In grades 1-5 EP's and ELLs are integrated 100% of the instructional day.  In Kindergarten they are 
integrated for 60% of the school day.  Literacy instruction is the only subject area that is separately in 
Kindergarten. 
c. In Kindergarten and first grade language is separated by teacher and classroom for literacy and by 
subject for Science and Social Studies. In grade 3, language is separated by teacher and subject for Math 
and NLA. In grades 2, 4 and 5 language is separated by subject. Kindergarten and first grade ICT dual 
language classes use a self-contained model where language is separated by day and subject. 
d. The side-by-side model is used in Kindergarten, grades 1 and 3. The self-contained model is used in 
grades 2, 4 and 5 with one 5th grade class using a hybrid self-contained/push-in model. 
e. In kindergarten, emergent literacy is taught in child's native language first (sequential) and transitions 
to both languages in grade 1.    
 

Professional Development and Support for School Staff 

1.  Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic 

staff.)  What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs 
as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? 
In order to understand and support teacher's in their professional growth, a professional development plan has been 
developed for our school.  Our objective, to provide teachers with the resources, expectations ands the support they need for 
high quality instruction.  Differentiated professional development will be provided according to teacher developed goals and 
interests.  As prescribed by CR-Part 154, a minimum of fifteen percent of the required professional development hours are 
dedicated to language acquisition for ELLs and best practices for co-teaching.   For ENL and bilingual teachers a minimum of 
50% of their professional development requirements are dedicated to language acquisition, 
 Due to the large number of ELL students, throughout grades K-5, we address ENL initiatives globally.  A considerable number 
of students regardless of their ELL status, are also second language learners and therefore benefit from this additional 
support.   Strategies for ELL support are shared with all personnel, to be implemented as "tool kits" and best practices.    
Pedagogues are given on-going professional development during our weekly study groups, inquiry team meetings, Department 
and Faculty conferences for the purpose of providing teachers with additional strategies for ELL instruction within the units 
and modules incorporating the Common Core Curriculum Standards.   
 
This year the following PD sessions will be offered: 
 
In addition, our self-contained ENL teachers are encouraged to attend off-site workshops that address incorporating Reading, 
Writing and Mathematics Instruction with ELL students.   Additional topics will include:  ENL/Bilingual/Dual Language 
Methodologies, Language Acquisition, Balanced Literacy, Differentiated Instruction, Scaffolding Techniques Cultural 
Awareness,  Math ELL-Initiatives, and the National Dual Language Conference.   
 
 
The Dual Language Administrator will provide on-going staff development, as well as, administrators and school staff.  Our 17 
dual language teachers will receive training administering and analyzing HLA, Spanish running records.  Two teachers will also 
attend workshops for The Estrellita Program and will turnkey information. The professional development program will also 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          101 

 

 

target the needs of our ENL teachers and classroom teacher servicing our ELL population.  Topics will 
include:  ENL/Bilingual/Dual Language Methodologies, Second Language Acquisition, Balanced Literacy, Differentiated 
Instruction, Scaffolding Techniques, use of ENL Methodology during Guided Reading, academic language through content area, 
Cultural Awareness, Math ELL Initiatives and Everyday Math,  Assessment/Data collection, Learning from Students Work, 
Performance Gains, and Skills Item Analysis.   
  
Examples of Topics to be studied: 
Further Implementation of Common Core Standards for Language (K-5) 
Use of texts the are complex and appropriate for grade 
Discussion within Inquiry Teams and study groups which focus on closing the achievement gap for ELL through Building 
Academic  Vocabulary  
Intensive instruction in phonological awareness in order to build decoding skills 
Opportunities for use of sophisticated vocabulary through Accountable Talk opportunities  
Monitoring for Self-Meaning 
Building of stamina and fluency through independent reading 
The use of materials, anchor charts, visual aids to instruction 
Identification of language goals and specific tasks for student assessments and expectations 
Expansion of shared reading cycles for primary grades 
Development of assessment tools for interim monitoring or student progress 
Gain insight into the culture, and language development of the ELL population 
Deepen the pedagogical content knowledge in mathematics 
Learn how to develop academic knowledge through classroom mathematical discussions 
Use manipulatives to model mathematical concepts and provide additional differentiated instruction 
Improve the questions teachers ask during math lessons to include student reasoning and the "Why" 
Form representations of mathematical work 
  
 
 

2.  Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all 
teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include 
how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance).  Refer to ELL Policy and Reference 
Guide, Professional Development section. 
As mentioned above, all professional development follows requirements as prescribed by CR-Part 154.  
Due to the large number of ELL students enrolled in our school, it is urgent that all teachers be updated and trained in current 
ENL methodology.  Keeping this need in mind, our training goes beyond our mandated required training hours.  Long-term and 
short-term training of new strategies and methodologies takes place during weekly study groups, monthly department and 
faculty conferences and outside professional development workshops.  These training sessions are turn-keyed during meetings 
to ensure that everyone is kept up to date and all students have equal access to best practices.  Evidence of these topics and 
dates are found in school meeting agendas and PD schedules.                 
In addition, our self-contained ENL teachers are encouraged to attend off-site workshops that address incorporating Reading, 
Writing and Mathematics Instruction with ELL students.   Additional topics will include:  ENL/Bilingual/Dual Language 
Methodologies, Language Acquisition, Balanced Literacy, Differentiated Instruction, Scaffolding Techniques Cultural 
Awareness, organizations such as Queens Plaza North  and TC, I-Ready, Leader In Me, "The Three L's and the National Dual 
Language Conference provide these conferences.   
 
 
 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          102 

 

Parental Involvement 

1.  How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language 
development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? 
Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent 
orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences?  
Our school, in addition to an early September orientation we have taken full advantage of our Tuesday Parental  Involvement 
Day.  We have been meeting with the parents in the first few months to orient them as to the program selection and and its 
components.  At this time, since the ENL teachers have been in attendance they have met their son/daughters teacher and 
have been able to ask questions with regard to the program. 
As the year progresses, the ENL teachers are planning to offer workshops in which they discuss topics such as strategies for 
specific language proficiency levels, NYSESLAT administration, individual student progress etc.  Additional meetings can be 
scheduled upon request of teacher or parent. 
  
The Parent Coordinator also conducts workshops for parents regarding pertinent topics for review. These workshops focus on 
a variation of Reading, Writing and Mathematics topics which include but are not limited to: 
•     Grade Scope and Sequence 
•     Grade Benchmarks 
•     Home support with literacy, math and other subjects 
•     ENL and Literacy Skills 
•     Leveled Reading  
•     Technology Support 
•     Core Curriculum Standards 
              School Initiatives/ Instructional Focus  
Parent ENL  workshops are also offered during the school day to those parents who wish to learn English.  
 
This year, we plan to once again ask parents to come to a parent articulation meeting.  This meeting, conducted by the 
guidance counselors and 5 th   grade AP, was very successful in helping parents with the transition into middle school.  We also 
conducted an additional meeting in which grade standards for middle schools was addressed.  Fifth grade teachers headed this 
meeting and explained to the parents how their work during the year provided a foundation for middle school standards.   
 
As of last year, we are also implementing student-led conferences at which time students are given an opportunity to speak 
with regard to their progress, goals and achievements.  
 
In addition, parents are informed of additional activities and monthly events through our school information sign (located in 
front of the school), school home connection letter, calendars and school website.   Our school Environment Survey and school 
“Suggestion Box” also help us in identifying and topics and information parents have identified as their needs.   
  
Through our School Leadership Team, Parent Association and "open door" policy, our parents partake in collaborative decision 
making, school wide activities and can communicate the needs ot the parents they represent.  We take great pride in the 
relationship we have established with our parents.  They are an integral part of our daily environment beginning with their 
volunteer work, Learning Leaders projects and other school activities.  With the help of these parents the education of the 
students come full circle is strengthened.   

2.  Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. 
PS. 19,  has had over the years,  a consistent number of parents attending parent meetings.  Our parents are very interested in 
learning more about the education of their students and about the resources we can offer them with our parent 
workshops.  For this reason, we have numerous meetings throughout the year both during and after school.  Upon parent 
inquiry, meetings are scheduled according to parent need or interest.   
As a community learning school we also offer many activities for parents and students that provide parents an opportunity 
to  join the school community.  Partnerships and sponsors offer many activities such as food banks, medical, tutoring and "fun 
Fridays." 
 

 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          103 

 

Additional Information 

Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for 
ELLs.  You may attach/submit charts.   This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted.   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
   
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          104 

Part V: ELL Identification Attestation 

Principal Certification 

2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 
6. 

7. 

8. 

9. 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL 
Policy and Reference Guide, I, Genie Calibar, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered 
to and staff are trained on the following: 
 
1. 

The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for 
students entering with IEPs). 
Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined 
a. 

If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status 
relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level.  

The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue.   
a.  The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services 
are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality 
translation service.   

Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined.   
a. 

If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility 
to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. 

Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible.   
Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language.  
a.  Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. 
If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish 
LAB.  
Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources 
available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-
education-sife.  
If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting.  
a.  Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent 

video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask 
questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided 
throughout the meeting. 

10.  ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected.  

a. 

b. 

If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program 
in accordance with DOE transfer policies. 
If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent 
choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice.   

11.  Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process).  
12.  If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose 

ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 
 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          105 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

Part VI: LAP Assurances 

School Name:   Marino Jeantet School                                                                              School DBN: 24Q019 
Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate.  Names listed in Part A, should align with this 
section.  

Name (PRINT) 

Genie Calibar 

Title 

Principal 

Ivette Casado-Faya 

Assistant Principal 

Carol Zhumi 

Parent Coordinator 

Maria Gatanas, ESL 

ENL/Bilingual Teacher 

Victor Torres 

Parent 

Debbie Kinney/Testing. 
Coord. 

Teacher/Subject Area 

Angela Priovolos 

Teacher/Subject Area 

Kristen Morris, Literacy 

Coach 

Ellen Peruche, Data & Math 

Coach 

Laura Jett 

School Counselor 

Madeline Chan 

Giuvela Leisengang 

Superintendent 
 
Field Support Center Staff 
Member 
               

Justin Thompson, Related 
Serv. 

Other AP 

Carmen Montas, Dual Lang. 

Other AP 

           

Other            

 

Signature 

Date (mm/dd/yy) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

10/31/17 

10/31/17 

10/31/17 

10/31/17 

10/31/17 

10/31/17 

10/31/17 

10/31/17 

10/31/17 

10/31/17 

10/31/17 

10/3/17 

10/31/17 

10/31/17 

  

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          106 

2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS 

Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools 

 

School 
Name: 

 

Marino Jeantet  

Superintendent:  Madeline Chan  

 

 
 

DBN: 

24Q019  

 

 

 
The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. 
If there is more than one LAC, list all. 
 

First Name  

Last Name  

Title  

Has the LAC attended a 

2018-19 training 

The LAC was involved in 
the development of this 

conducted by the Field 

plan? Yes/No  

Language Access 

Coordinator? Yes/No  

(*Primary)Carol 

Zhumi 

Parent Coordinator 

Yes 

NO 

   

 
* The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs 
on translation,  
interpretation, compliance and budget.  
 

School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful 
opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's 
Regulation A-663).  
 
By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and 
interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). 
 
Part A:  Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 
 
1.  Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written 

and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from: 

  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS) 
  Automate The System (ATS) reports 
  Student Emergency Contact cards 
  Surveys conducted by your school. 

 

On the back of the emergency contact card given to each student parents are asked the language they prefer for 
written and oral communication from the school. This information along with an informal survey were used to 
determine the needs for translation. For new students into the school the HLIS is reviewed. This then is entered in 
ATS into The Adult Preferred Language Report (RAPL) which is reviewed and used to analyze the number of and 
breakdown of languages that parents have requested from the school.. The breakdown is provided by grade and 
by language in our Language Allocation Policy.  

 

 
 
2.  List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, 

which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language 
Report (RCPL) ATS report. 
 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          107 

 

Language  

Written Preferred  

Percent Written  

Oral Preferred  

Percent Oral  

2 

1 

36 

1 

0 

4 

312 

2 

2167 

0 

Bengali 

Burmese  

Chinese (any) 

Indonesian 

Mandarin 

Nepali 

English 

Pilipino 

Spanish 

(American) Sign 
Language 

   

 

.13 

.04 

1.41 

.04 

0 

.16 

12.25 

.08 

85.11 

0 

2 

1 

35 

1 

2 

4 

309 

2 

2168 

1 

.13 

.04 

1.37 

.04 

.08 

.16 

12.14 

.08 

85.15 

.04 

3.  From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at 

least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, 
French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. 
 

Spanish, English, Chinese 

 

 
 
Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 
 
1.  List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be 

distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents.  
 

Document Name  

Month/Frequency Distributed to Families   How do you plan to translate? 
Include procedures to ensure 
timely provision of translated 

1 We will distribute agendas/  

Handbooks/  

2 School Newsletter /  

1 in the fall , 

 

 
2 quarterly 

 

documents to parents.  

1 Secretaries have or would 
translated documents 

 

 

2 Teacher Translates 

 

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          108 

 
3 Parent Teacher Conference 
announcements and Parent teacher 
conference(Ongoing),  

 

4 After-School Programs , Promotion 
in Doubt letters (Jan/March/May)  

5 other letters send out for 
announcements of impending 
workshops, information, curriculum , 
or student progress.  

   

 

3 September/November/March and May 
plus any Tuesday 

3 Teacher/Paras or Secretaries 
translate 

 

4 as they are opened through out the 
course of the school year 

4 /5 Same as above unless it need 
to translation unit. 

 

5 As Needed 

 

 

Same as above 

2.  List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as 

parent-teacher  
conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings.  
   

Meeting Name  

Month/Frequency of Meetings  

How does your school plan to 

provide interpretation service(s)?  

1 As Needed 

1 Face to Face- Main Office  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2 Tuesdays PArent Engagement sessions,  

2 Weekly 

 

3 Parent Orientation in September, Parent 
Teacher Conferences 
Novemeber/March/May.  

 

 

3 TImes 

 

1 Personnel available who speak 
Spanish and who are available for 
oral translations at any given time 
during school hours for any parent-
teacher conference. Other 
languages we use the translation 
unit or one or two staff memebers 
that speak Bengali and Chinese. 

 

 

 

2 Teachers request translators on 
appointment book, requesting 
translators 

 

3 Although we have staff that 
translates, the need is so high in 
Spanish that I need to hire a 
number of subs, paras and school 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          109 

 

4 Parent Workshops as scheduled by 
parent coordinator and Coaches, 
Guidance Counselor meetings, and Parent 
Meetings 

4 As needed 

4 Staff or translating unit translates 

 

 

aides to be available to help 
translate during these conferences. 

 

 

   

 

3.  Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of 

a school emergency.  
 

Announcements will be made in several languages both through letters and phone calls- 

 
 

 
 
Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure

 

 
Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and 
what resources are available to meet compliance.  
 

Signs and posts will be placed around the school . The handbook and surveys requesting language of choice will have a 
paragraph informing everyone about this regulation. 

 

 
 
Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services 
 
Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive 
information. Include any: 

  Translated signage 
  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents 
  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) 

 

Parents will be notified through our Newsletter, letters, and meetings of the Bill of Rights about information regarding 
interpretation and translation. Posters will be placed in a visible location in the lobbies of both the main building and 
mini-building 

 

 
 
Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services 
Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the 
language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services?   
 

Prent Survey twice a year  

 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          110 

 
 

2018-19 CEP                                                                                                                                                                                          111 

