 
 

 

 
 

  

 
 
 
 
 
 

2018-19 

SCHOOL COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN 

(SCEP) 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 

DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 

11X144 

School Name: 

J.H.S. 144 MICHELANGELO 

Principal: 

ELLEN BARRETT-KELLY 

 
 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                         

 

 

 1 

 

School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Outline 

 
 
Section 1: School Information Page 
 
 
Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page 
 
 
Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) 
 
 
Section 4: SCEP Overview 
 
 
Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  

  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction 
  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment 
  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers 
  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership 
  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties  

 
 
Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) 
 
 
Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH)   
 
 
Section 8: Title I Program Information  
 
 
Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 
 

 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          2 

 

 

 
School Name: 

BEDS Code: 

Grades Served: 

School Address:  

Section 1: School Information Page 

 

School Information 

 

Michelangelo Junior High School 144 

11X144 

 
321100010144 

 
6-8 

School Number (DBN): 

 

 
2545 Gunther Avenue, Bronx , NY, 10469 

 
718-794-9749 

Phone Number: 

 

718-794-9755 

Fax: 

 

Ellen Barrett 

ebarret2@schools.nyc.gov 

Email Address: 

 

School Contact Person:  

 

Principal: 

UFT Chapter Leader: 

Parents’ Association President: 

SLT Chairperson: 

Title I Parent Representative (or 
Parent Advisory Council 
Chairperson): 

Student Representative(s): 

 

CBO Representative: 
 

Ellen Barrett-Kelly 

 
Karlene Turner 

 
Karen McCormack 

 
Karlene Turner 

 

Karen McCormack 

 

 

 
Renee Sanderson 

 

 

District Information 

 

Geographical District: 

11 

 

Jeremy Kabinoff 

Superintendent: 
1250 Arnow Avenue, Bronx, NY 10469 

 

Superintendent’s Office Address: 

 
jkabino@schools.nyc.gov 

Superintendent’s Email Address: 

 

718-519-2620 

Phone Number: 

 

718-519-2620 

Fax: 

 

 
 

FSC: 

Bronx 

 

Field Support Center (FSC)  

Executive 
Director: 

 

Jose Ruiz 

 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          3 

 

 

Executive Director’s Office 
Address: 

1230 ZeregaAvenue Bronx, NY 

 
Jruiz2@schools.nyc.gov 

Executive Director’s Email Address: 
718-828-2440 

 

Phone Number: 

 

Fax: 

 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          4 

 

Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page 

 

All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this School 
Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to 
support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention 
Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal 
number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with 
Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. 
 
Directions: 

1.  List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 
2.  Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization 
(CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an 
asterisk*. 

3.  SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member 

does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, 
which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT 
member indicates participation in the development of the SCEP, not approval.   

4.  The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file 

in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. 

 

Name 

Position and Constituent Group 

Represented 

Signature 
(Blue Ink) 

Ellen Barrett Kelly 

 
Karlene Turner 

 
Karen McCormack 

 

 

Regina Cunningham 

 

 

 

N/A 

 
Ronald Holmes 

 
Nadia Haughton 

 
Ivonne Lewis Bullock 

 

*Principal or Designee 

*UFT Chapter Leader or Designee 

*PA/PTA President or Designated Co-
President 

DC 37 Representative (staff), if 
applicable 

Title I Parent Representative or 
Parent Advisory Council Chairperson  

Student Representative  
(optional for elementary and middle 
schools; a minimum of two members 
required for high schools) 

Student Representative  
(optional for elementary and middle 
schools; a minimum of two members 
required for high schools) 

CBO Representative, if applicable 

 
Member/ Teacher 

 
Member/ Parent 

 
Member/ Parent 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          5 

 

 

Name 

Position and Constituent Group 

Represented 

Signature 
(Blue Ink) 

Dennis Fallo 

 
TheodoreRivera 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Member/Teacher 

 
Member/ Assistant Principal 

 
Member/ UFTRepresentative 

 
Member/ 
 

Member/ 
 

Member/ 
 

Member/ 
 

Member/ 
 

Member/ 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          6 

 

Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan  

The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) is a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support 
schools in engaging their staff, parents, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, 
setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring 
progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community.  

The process of developing and implementing the SCEP is aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. This section will 
provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding SCEP development aligned with the school’s state 
accountability and informed by New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, 
Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. 

Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools 

The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect 
the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms 
where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity 
and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and 
classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more 
attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and 
Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our 
families and students. 

Strong Schools, Strong Communities  

The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, 
educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school 
prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult.  

The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers 
and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools 
centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school 
leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. 
Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to 
Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students.  

The Framework for Great Schools and SCEP Development 

The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and 
external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase 
learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently 
ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational 
Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous 
improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis 
of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies 
that improve outcomes for students. 
 

Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase 
student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework 
for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members 
concrete ways to improve. 

In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in 
consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to 
participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          7 

 
comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with 
the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all 
the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements 
work together to support student achievement. 

The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools  

Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards 
are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical 
thinking skills. 
Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, 
and challenged by their teachers and peers. 
Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. 
They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous 
improvement. 
Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, 
developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. 
Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by 
welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. 
Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school 
and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value 
each other. 

 
Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools 

In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in 
improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for 
School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets,  the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other 
quantitative and qualitative data tools. 
 
NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets 

To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the 
current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple 
instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent 
statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure 
how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district 
will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus 
Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and 
Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool.  
 
The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an 
effective school and school district across the following six tenets: 

  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity 
  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions 
  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support 
  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions 
  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and 
  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement 
 
 
NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) 

The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by 
coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality 
2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          8 

 
Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 
2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below:  
Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) 

I. 
II.  School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4)  
III.  Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and 
Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) 

 
School Quality Guide  

The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to 
set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to 
accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also 
available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s 
practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. 
For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. 
The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of 
similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set 
based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. 

 
Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 

a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; 
a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) 

Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, 
professional development, and parent and family engagement. 
 
To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in 
improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will 
serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the 
administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish: 
 
 
 
It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School 
Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the 
joint development of the SCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 
1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% 
budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent 
and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the SCEP. For additional guidance 
on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. 
 
Next Steps for SCEP Development 

School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  

  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the 

requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655. 

  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability 

status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year. 

  Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE 

Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) 
School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not 
undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most 
recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data. 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          9 

 

  Step 4: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed 
by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART 
– Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you 
monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school 
community know when you’ve reached your goal. 

  Step 5: Build consensus around activities, strategies and programs to address students’ needs in each action 
plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement. 

  Step 6: Implement at least one USDE Turnaround Principle (e.g., redesign the school day, week, or year; modify 

the instructional program to ensure it is Evidence-based, rigorous, and aligned with State academic content 
standards; provide time for collaboration on the use of) beginning no later than the 2018-19 school year. 

  Step 7: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I 

schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). 

  Step 8: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall 

cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action 
plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. 

 

Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful 
implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to 
accomplishing desired results. 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          10 

 

Section 4: SCEP Overview 

 

1.  What is your school’s mission statement? 
Michelangelo Junior High 144 creates a challenging learning environment that encourages high expectations for 
success through development appropriate instruction that allows for individual differences and learning style. 

 

2.  Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including 

a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. 

Students are engaged in rigorous activities as well as a wide array of extracurricular activities that are offered to all of 
our students. Michelangelo Junior High School has an active Parent Association that works with our Parent 
Coordinator to communicate with parents about various events, including: student celebrations, school 
plays/concerts, Honor Roll breakfasts, Honor Society Night, and Family Nights. Our events allow us to create strong 
family ties. In addition, parents and students can view upcoming assignments on teacher web pages as well as 
monitor their child's progress via Skedula. Parents are guided in the high school application process by our guidance 
counselors, and our graduates have been accepted into many of NYC’s Specialized High Schools. 

 

Michelangelo Junior High School has partnered with the Middle School Quality Initiative (MSQI) and is now a mentor 
school for the 2017-2018 school year. Through this partnership the school has implemented ‘reciprocal teaching’ 
across disciplines and grades. In addition, Word Generation has been integrated as an interdisciplinary approach to 
promote literacy and vocabulary development across the core subjects. There is progress monitoring through the 
Degrees of Reading Power (DRP) assessment across all grades and disciplines. In addition, Tier II and Tier III 
interventions have been established, and progress monitoring by school leaders and teachers occur at each level.  

 

Michelangelo is also partnered with Learning Partners Program (LPP) as a host school. The LPP team works district 
wide to address areas of need while working with different schools to boost their student achievement. Through self 
reflection and communal investment, inter school collaboration moves student growth and teacher practice in an 
Instructional Rounds approach.  

 
3.  Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. 

Michelangelo Junior High School is a middle school with approximately 500 students, servicing grades six through 
grade eight. The school population is comprised of 67% Black, 27% Hispanic, 2% White, and 4% Asian students. The 
student body includes 11% English language learners and 33% special education students. Boys account for 52% of 
the students enrolled and girls account for 48%. The average attendance rate for the school year 2017 - 2018 was 
90.5%. 

 
4.  Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the 

past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. 

In previous years, teachers often were unable to attend all of their preferred in-house Professional Learning (PL) 
sessions due to scheduling conflicts. Now, with dedicated PL time each Monday after school, teachers are able to 
focus more on specific areas of development that are relevant to their current teaching practice and desired areas of 
growth. This will foster a supportive environment amongst staff and allow teachers to collaborate. Both teachers and 
school leaders report that the hands-on role of teachers in designing and delivering PL has increased the overall 
effectiveness of the PL program. During the 17-18 school year it was piloted and it had an effect on teacher growth. 
This was proven in an increase in the teachers' overall MOTP and MOSL data. This will continue into the 2018-2019 
school year. 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          11 

 

Michelangelo Junior High School ’s tailored approach to professional learning has also had a profound effect on school 
culture. By instituting initial and quarterly conferences for discussions of professional growth, the principal has 
encouraged a school culture that empowers teachers to communicate more frequently with school administrators in 
order to receive actionable and resourced feedback on their instructional practices. Teachers also receive 
personalized support based on their observation data. Teachers are easily able to look beyond the evaluative aspects 
of Advance to focus on the critical development opportunities and effective structures the system presents . As they 
prepare for school year 2018-19, the principal and her team have started looking at the data from their 2017-2018 
Measures of Teaching Practice (MOTP) to inform the design and planning of the school’s Professional Development 
menu for the 2018-2019 school year. The focus area this year will be 3b, 3c and 3d.  

 

5.  Identify at least one USDE Turnaround Principle (e.g., redesign the school day, week, or year; modify the 

instructional program to ensure it is Evidence-based, rigorous, and aligned with State academic content standards; 
provide time for collaboration on the use of data) to be implemented in the 2018-19 school year. 

Modified Professional Development Time 

 

 

 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          12 

 

 

School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 11X144 

School Configuration (2018-19) 

Grade Configuration 

06,07,08 

Total Enrollment (2017-
18) 
English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 

492 

SIG Recipient (Y/N) 

Transitional Bilingual 

N/A 

Dual Language 

N/A 

Self-Contained English as a Second 
Language 

Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) 

# Special Classes (ELA) 
# Special Classes (Math) 

# Visual Arts 
# Foreign Language 

% Title I Population 
% Free Lunch 
% Limited English Proficient 

79 
80 

8 
7 

% American Indian or Alaska Native 
% Hispanic or Latino 
% White 

# SETSS (ELA) 
# SETSS (Math) 
Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) 
# Music 
# Drama 
# CTE 
# Dance 

61 
54 

4 
 

# Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) 
# Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) 

School Composition (2017-18) 

76.0%  % Attendance Rate 
73.0%  % Reduced Lunch 
10.6%  % Students with Disabilities 

Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) 

% Black or African American 

0.4% 
32.5%  % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 
4.1% 

% Multi-Racial 

Personnel (2015-16) 

Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) 
% of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate 
% Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 

3.2 
0% 
18% 

# of Assistant Principals (2016-17) 
% Teaching Out of Certification 
Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) 

Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) 

ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 

33.3%  Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 

Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 

N/A 

Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-
17) 

Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) 

ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 
Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 
4 Year Graduation Rate 

Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 

N/A 
N/A 
N/A 

N/A 

Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 
US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 
6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) 
% ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures 
(2015-16) 

Reward 
In Good Standing 
Focus District 

Priority School 

Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) 

No 
No 
Yes 

Recognition 
Local Assistance Plan 
Focus School Identified by a Focus District 

No 

Focus Subgroups 

Hispanic, ED 

Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) 

Elementary/Middle School 

Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) 

American Indian or Alaska Native 
Hispanic or Latino 
White 
Students with Disabilities 
Economically Disadvantaged 

American Indian or Alaska Native 
Hispanic or Latino 
White 
Students with Disabilities 
Economically Disadvantaged 

American Indian or Alaska Native 
Hispanic or Latino 
White 
Students with Disabilities 
Economically Disadvantaged 

American Indian or Alaska Native 
Hispanic or Latino 
White 
Students with Disabilities 
Economically Disadvantaged 

American Indian or Alaska Native 
Hispanic or Latino 
White 
Students with Disabilities 
Economically Disadvantaged 

American Indian or Alaska Native 
Hispanic or Latino 
White 
Students with Disabilities 
Economically Disadvantaged 

N/A 
YES 
N/A 
NO 
YES 

Black or African American 
Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander 
Multi-Racial 
Limited English Proficient 
ALL STUDENTS 

Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) 
Black or African American 
Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander 
Multi-Racial 
Limited English Proficient 
ALL STUDENTS 

N/A 
NO 
N/A 
NO 
NO 

Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) 

N/A 
NO 
N/A 
YES 
YES 
High School 

Black or African American 
Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander 
Multi-Racial 
Limited English Proficient 
ALL STUDENTS 

Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) 

N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 

Black or African American 
Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander 
Multi-Racial 
Limited English Proficient 
ALL STUDENTS 

Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) 
Black or African American 
Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander 
Multi-Racial 
Limited English Proficient 
ALL STUDENTS 

N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 

Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) 
Black or African American 
Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander 
Multi-Racial 
Limited English Proficient 
ALL STUDENTS 

N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 

No 

N/A 

47 
46 

4 
 

90.1% 
2.4% 
27.6% 

60.2% 
2.8% 
0.4% 

4 
32% 
7.4 

22.6% 

31% 

N/A 
N/A 
N/A 

N/A 

N/A 
No 
Yes 

YES 
N/A 
N/A 
NO 
YSH 

NO 
N/A 
N/A 
NO 
NO 

YES 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
YES 

N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 

N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 

N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          13 

 

 

 

 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          14 

 

Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans 

 

Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, 
and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious 
intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) 
 
Part 1 – Needs Assessment   

Part 1a.  Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice 
Tenet 3 Statement of Practice 
Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one.  Place an “X” in the 
appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 
3.2 

The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of 
rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning 
Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. 
Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction 
(DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and 
address student achievement needs. 
The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner 
within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the 
arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. 
Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative 
assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student 
reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 

3.3 

3.4 

3.5 

SOP(s) 

Addressed 

X 

x 

x 

x 

 

 

 

 

Part 1b.  Needs/Areas of Focus: 
Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the 
most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources 
should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, 
NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School 
Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 
 

1.  What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element?  Indicate the data trends, source and 

year. 

2.  What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? 

Indicate the data trends, source and year. 

Reflection: Based on the 2016 and 2017 Quality Review, we received a well developed in curriculum. Thus, we are going 
to continue our practices of using teacher teams and data analysis to inform curriculum changes. Additionally, through 
our work with MSQI we have created a cross curricular curriculum that infuses common literacy skills across content 
areas.  

The school’s curriculum is implemented consistently across all grades, and holds all students accountable to meeting 
learning expectations, including students with disabilities and English language learners, providing additional supports as 
needed. It is one of our strengths that we intend to maintain. To ensure high levels of thinking all teachers apply the 
cognitive rigor matrix to instructional practices as well as in task design. In addition, all students are now programmed 
for reading classes and intervention math courses that requires them to engage in practical analysis of synthesizing, 
justifying and providing and defending their thinking. These ensure that students continuously hone their critical 
thinking skills, thus preparing them for the rigors, challenges and demands of higher education and future success. 
Teachers plan collaboratively across grades and content areas to ensure that tasks are rigorous, CCLS aligned and 
relevant to students' needs. Through a partnership with MSQI, literacy is a focal point throughout all content areas and 
consistent pedagogical practices are used throughout the school. Additionally, there is a school wide assessment system 
that is used which assess students on focus standards as indicated by an item analysis administered in the Fall of 2018. 
Based on the assessments results, curriculum is adjusted to reflect student needs. Furthermore, through teacher teams, 
curriculum is modified to reflect trends aggregated through the data and skill deficits made evident through the data. 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          15 

 

The assessments system provides a quarterly assessment provided every quarter which assess the sum of the quarter's 
standards. Periodically, there are then mastery tests, which are quick, 5 point assessments that assess the specific 
standard being taught. All results are tracked through the Google Cloud system to that teachers, students and 
administration can track progress and identify patterns that emerge. The curriculum consistently changes based on the 
data revealed in our assessments and then discussed during our teacher teams.  

 

Through various initiatives such as Lincoln Center and MSQI, cross curricular curriculum is prevalent throughout JHS 
144. Lincoln Center has co planned lessons that correspond to literacy and social studies topics. Also, programs like 
Word Generations and Debate have instilled academic discourse and language throughout the content areas. As a 
school, JHS 144 was adopted Reciprocal Teaching and Socratic Seminar as a strategy to promote this academic 
discourse and critical thinking across grades and content areas in order to ensure that students are building their 
critical thinking skills in every class.  

 

 

 

 
Part 2 – Annual Goal 

Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this 
element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified 
priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-
bound.  
Throughout the 2018-2019 school year, ELA and Math state exam scores will increase 5% through the use of 
collaborative teacher teams by the end of 2019. School leaders will ensure each collaborative teacher team is utilizing a 
research-based protocol for looking at and analyzing student work and data. Teacher teams will use the collaborative 
inquiry process to identify school-wide and/or individual group needs, and will collaborate on strategies that extend 
higher-order thinking and increase rigor of classroom instruction for all students. The teacher teams will engage in 
seven week cycles. There will be four share fairs where teachers will present their findings and their corresponding data. 
The deficits of student data will be incorporated within the curriculum and the strategies found to be effective will be 
added to the curriculum. The collaborative planning and work conducted by teacher teams will be tracked by school 
administrators through each teacher team’s documentation binder, as well as through our online tracking system. 

 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          16 

 
Part 3a – Action Plan 

Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies 
your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this 
Framework for Great Schools element, including: 

Target 
Group(s) 
Who will be 
targeted? 

Timeline 
What is the 
start and end 
date? 

  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional 

 

development, and/or systems and structures needed to 
impact change. 
Strategies to address the needs of students with 
disabilities, English language learners, and other high-
need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, 
SIFE, STH). 

September 2018, the principal will work with the schools’ 
programmer to schedule and School Programmer Common 
Planning Time, Teacher Team/Inquiry Team and Interdisciplinary 
Team times within the school program as well as institute 
Professional Learning opportunities every Monday along with a 
professional development plan that way rigorous instruction and 
curriculum is embedded into all facets via our programming. 
We've allowed the curriculum changes to happen during those 
designated times.  

All Content 
Teachers 

During the 2018-2019 school-year, the curriculum team will 
provide training and intervisitation opportunities so that teachers 
can learn how to utilize and execute the curriculum using 
researched and selected strategies. (SOP 3.3; 3.4)  

Principal, 
Assistant 
Principal and 
Content area 
Teachers 

During the 
summer of the 
2018-2019 
school-year, the 
principal will 
work with the 
school’s 
programmer to 
embed 
Common 
Planning Time, 
Teacher 
Team/Inquiry 
Team and 
Interdisciplinary 
Team times 
within the 
school program 
and will work 
with the 
Professional 
Learning Plan 
Committee to 
provide 
teachers with 
professional 
learning 
opportunities. 

During 
September and 
October the 
2018-2019 
school-year, the 
curriculum 
team will 
provide training 
sessions on 
modeling 
teacher team 

Key Personnel 
Who is responsible 
for implementing 
and overseeing the 
activity/strategy? 
(include school, 
educational 
consultants and/or 
CBO staff) 

School Principal and 
School Programmer 
will provide 
Common Planning 
Time, Teacher 
Team/Inquiry Team 
and Interdisciplinary 
Team times within 
the school program 
as well as institute 
Professional 
Developments every 
Monday along with a 
Professional 
Development plan 

Curriculum team will 
provide training 
sessions on 
modeling teacher 
team practices and 
protocols. 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          17 

 

On a quarterly basis, the principal and curriculum team will 
analyze and aggregate scores from the mastery and quarterly 
assessment system and the Degrees of Reading Power (DRP) 
assessment by grade, subject, and department in order to share 
findings with teachers and then to adjust curriculum accordingly.  

Content area 
Teachers 

practices along 
with protocols 
as well as 
implement the 
use of the 
Word 
Generation 
program 

During the 
2018-2019 
school-year 
during seven 
week cycles, 
the principal 
and curriculum 
team will 
analyze and 
aggregate 
scores from the 
Degrees of 
Reading Power 
(DRP) 
assessment by 
grade, subject 
and 
department in 
order to share 
findings with 
teachers 

During the 2018-2019 school year, school leaders and teachers 
will develop rigorous units of study during the designated teacher 
team and common planning times. Curriculum will be reflected 
on using the Literacy and Math Instructional rubric. On Mondays 
the findings from the teacher teams will then be addressed in the 
curriculum for that unit and future units of study. Teachers will 
address this as a team and all curriclum findings will be based on 
data. . (SOP 3.3)  

All Teachers  During the 
2018-2019 
school year, 
school leaders 
and teachers 
will develop 
rigorous units 
of study during 
the designated 
teacher team 
and common 
planning 
times.On 
Mondays the 
findings from 
the teacher 
teams will then 
be addressed in 
the curriculum 
for that unit 
and future units 
of study. 
Teachers will 

Principal and 
curriculum team will 
analyze and 
aggregate scores 
from the mastery 
quarterly 
assessment system 
and Degrees of 
Reading Power 
(DRP) assessment by 
grade, subject and 
department and 
findings will also be 
shared with teachers 
and analyzed by 
teacher teams 

Curriculum 
departments, 
teacher teams, 
coaches and 
Assistant Principals 
will develop rigorous 
units of study via the 
teacher team and 
common planning 
time. 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          18 

 

  
 
3b – Parent and Family Engagement 

address this as 
a team and all 
curriclum 
findings will be 
based on data 

How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York 
State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible 
for implementation and oversight. 
During the 2018-2019 school year, the Michelangelo family will utilize its partnership with MSQI to institute Academic 
Parent Teacher Teams (APTT). In September, at the APPT conferences, parents will receive their students' DRP scores 
and teachers will instruct parents on how to read and interpret the data. Then, at follow up parent meetings in 
November, January, March and May teachers will impart different instructional strategies that parents can use with 
their children at home so that they can increase their DRP scores. Also, throughout the school year, there are 
different workshops offered on a monthly basis to parents, hosted by the Parent Coordinator and Teacher Leaders, 
that focuses on different topics such as: "Understanding Common Core", "Reading Strategies", "Regents Prep" etc.  

 

The APTT team is comprised of a Champion which is an MSQI Teacher Leader, a cohort of teacher volunteers, the 
parent coordinator and Assistant Principal. They prepare their sessions throughout the summer of 2018 and host 
meetings for parents after each DRP administration in September, January and May but then also provide sessions to 
work with parents on instructional strategies in November and March.  
 

 
Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 

Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including 
human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 
1. Common planning periods will be embedded into the school day schedule. 

2. 2 Peer instructional coaches to support improving teacher practice 

3. Curricular materials (student texts and documents) to supplement our curriculum  

4. Teacher Team/Inquiry Periods will be scheduled to promote data analysis. 

5. Monday professional development sessions will be scheduled to support enhancing teacher practices from Teach 
Like a Champion . 

6. Common planning periods will be established to support teachers meeting by department to create and implement 
rigorous units of study. 

7. Cabinet meeting times will be scheduled every Tuesday to evaluate calendar of collaborative practices.  

8. 200 hours per session for planning, curriculum development, and data analysis and ATTP planning  

9. Workshops scheduled and planned during summer 2018 to launch ATTP 

 
Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          19 

 

X 

Tax Levy 

 

Title I 
1003(a) 

X 

X 

Title I 
SWP 

Title III 

 

 

Title I TA 

X 

PTA 

Funded 

 

P/F Set-
aside 

SIG 
Grant 

X 

 

21st Century 

School 

Achievement 

Funding 

 

 

C4E 

Other 

 
Part 5 – Progress Monitoring  

Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement 
planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 
 

● Every week, the school principal and school programmer will evaluate Common Planning Time, Teacher 
Team/Inquiry Team and Interdisciplinary Team times within the school program as well as evaluate professional 
developments every Monday along with assessing the Professional Development plans. 

● Every week, the curriculum team will provide training sessions on modeling teacher team practices along with 
protocols as well as implement the use of the Word Generation program. 

● In September 2018, January 2019 and June 2019, the principal and curriculum team will assess and aggregate 
scores from the Degrees of Reading Power (DRP) assessment as well as collect and assess teacher team data by 
grade, subject and departments. 

● Two Tuesdays a month, the principal and administrative team will establish teaming opportunities after-school and 
the curriculum team will provide strategies from Teach Like a Champion to enhance teacher practice and will share 
out best practices. 

● Curriculum departments, teacher teams, coaches and Assistant Principals will develop rigorous units of study via 
the teacher team and common planning time monthly. 

● Principal and Assistant Principal will Implement a quarterly calendar of meetings to address and inform 
collaborative practices 

Timeline:  

● By February 2019 the principal, assistant principal, and department leads will analyze the department quarterly 
data to determine if there is significant improvement compared to the baseline data. We will analyze growth a 
midpoint based on growth in CCLS standards on the baseline to the quarterly. We will also anlayze the subgoups data. 

by January 2019 the principal, assistant principal, and department leads will analyze the DRP data to assess 
improvement. The team will use the SCEP Midpoint Rubric to assess that we are meeting the goals. 

 

 During the 2018-2019 school-year, the principal and programmer will provide Common Planning time, Teacher 
Team/Inquiry Team time, and Interdisciplinary Team times within the school program and will develop a professional 
learning plan with their Professional Learning Committee to provide teachers with a variety of professional 
development opportunities every Monday.  

● During the 2018-2019 school-year, the curriculum team will provide training sessions on modeling teacher team 
practices along with protocols as well as implement the use of the Word Generations program. 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          20 

● IN September 2018, January 2019 and June 2019, the principal and curriculum team will assess and aggregate 
scores from the Degrees of Reading Power (DRP) assessment to assess teacher team data by grade, subject and 
departments. 

● Two tuesdays a month school year, the principal and administrative team and curriculum team will establish 
opportunities after-school to work on strategies from Teach Like a Champion in order to enhance teacher practice 
and to share our best practices. 

● During the 2018-2019 school year, rigorous units of study will be developed by curriculum departments, coaches, 
and Assistant Principals during the teacher team meetings and common planning time. 

During the 2018-2019 school year, the principal and Assistant Principal will implement a quarterly calendar of 
meetings to address and inform collaborative practices. 

 
Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 
JHS 144 has instituted an assessment system called the Quarterly / Mastery System. Each content area designs 
assessments that gauge a student's mastery of the CCLS standards. Quarterlies are administered every quarter and 
masteries are snapshot assessments that indicate progress before the Quarterly is executed. All data is shared on our 
Google Drive so that teachers and leaders can design interventions in a timely and strategic fashion.  

 

The Degrees of Reading Power Assessment (DRP) is given to students in September, January & June to provide 
teachers, families and students with an indication of their reading level. After the September administration, every 
staff member is provided the data and that data is used to create groupings, assign resources and develop goals. A 
mid-point benchmark will be the January DRP data to check progress on scores.  

 

The Math department uses an I-Ready Diagnostic to assess students' mathematical competencies in a similar fashion 
to the DRP. I-Ready provides benchmarks to monitor students' progress with regards to the CCLS standards. A mid-
point benchmark will be the I-ready assessment and the data analysis. 

 

Additionally, Achieve 3000 is used to supplement reading data and interventions for our 6th grade, ELL/ENL and 
Special Needs students. Students participate in a leveled reading program and routinely, assessments are given via 
the program to monitor students' progress.  

 
Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action 
plan, if applicable. 

 

 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          21 

 

Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans 

 
Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and 
school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 
5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) 

Part 1 – Needs Assessment   

Part 1a.  Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice 
Tenet 5 Statement of Practice 
Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one.  Place an “X” in the 
appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 
5.2  The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and 

sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 

5.3  The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional 

developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning 
experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students.  

5.4  All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance 

of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and 
fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health 
supports tied to the school’s vision. 

5.5  The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures 

to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health 
needs.  

x 

x 

x 

x 

SOP(s) 

Addressed 

 

 

 

 

Part 1b.  Needs/Areas of Focus: 
Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the 
most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources 
should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, 
NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School 
Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 
 

1.  What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element?  Indicate the data trends, source and 

year. 

2.  What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? 

Indicate the data trends, source and year. 

3.  What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? 

Based on the 2017 Quality Review School leaders consistently communicate high expectations including elements of the 
Danielson Framework for Teaching to the entire staff. School leaders and staff consistently communicate expectations 
that are connected to college and career readiness to parents. Impact therefore results in a supportive environment 
that results in student progress.  

As a result, there is a system of accountability in place for staff, and parents are aware of their student’s progress 
towards meeting those expectations.  

Supporting Evidence from the 2017 Quality Review state that, "School leaders have created an atmosphere of 
scholarship were students are aware of the high expectations for student success. Parents spoke about the school honor 
roll and the specialized College and Careers Honors Program where students must maintain an 85 average in all core 
subjects. Parents feel that the school has created a competitive scholastic environment that pushes student thinking. 
Parents spoke about positive phone calls from teachers that focused on student performance not just behaviors. 
Parents also stated that they were struggling with Common Core math and as a result the school provided workshops on 
this. Some parents spoke about how the school deliberately prepares their children for high school by suggesting that 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          22 

 

students join the debate team or band so that they can develop skills and become the well-rounded students that high 
schools want to recruit".  

The PBIS will align with the parent feedback on the NYC Quality Review. Parents stated the school has taken students on 
trips to colleges. Parents state that there is transparency is student achievement through Skedula and Pupil Path and 
they can follow their students’ grades and progress. They state that both the parent coordinator and teachers are 
extremely helpful and that teachers have returned emails as late at 1 am. Parents state that there is high visibility and 
communication with school leaders who are readily accessible to parents. They shared that they and their student are 
known personally and the school makes every effort to keep parents apprised of curriculum, expectations, student 
performance and preparing for high school and beyond. By integrating centers, and allowing all parents access to 
curriculum needs through Pupil Path, and integrating PBIS students will be engaged in the curriculum therefore leading 
to a decrease in OORS reports. 

 

 
Part 2 – Annual Goal 

Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this 
element of the Framework for Great Schools –Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified 
priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-
bound.  
By June 2019, school leaders will work to improve the school’s learning environment by integrating Positive Behavioral 
Interventions and Supports (PBIS), student centers, and various student activities in all grades; resulting in a 5% 
decrease in the number of principal and superintendent suspensions for students with a disability. Data from OORS and 
Google Drive reports will be used by school leaders to track progress. During the 2017 school year, one third of the staff 
was trained in Therapeutic Crisis Intervention Training (TCIS). During the 2018-2019 school year, trained staff will 
turnkey this training to all staff memebers and utilize it to assist in the reduction of suspensions.  

 

 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          23 

 
Part 3a – Action Plan 

Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies 
your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this 
Framework for Great Schools element, including: 

Target 
Group(s) 
Who will be 
targeted? 

Timeline 
What is the 
start and 
end date? 

  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional 

 

development, and/or systems and structures needed to 
impact change. 
Strategies to address the needs of students with 
disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need 
student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, 
STH). 

In September 2017, school leaders will update school-wide 
discipline policy and will collect and analyze administrative data to 
identify racial and ethnic disproportionately rates During the 2018-
2019 school year, School Principal, Assistant Principals, School 
Leadership Team and Deans will update school-wide discipline 
policy as well as look at data. (SOP 5.2, 5.5) 

All Staff and 
Students 

In August 2018, the school leader will partner with the Office of 
Safety and Youth Development and will incorporate strategies from 
the Pre-Referral Intervention Manual During the 2017-2018 school 
year, the school leader will partner with Office of Safety and Youth 
Development and will incorporate strategies from the Pre-Referral 
Intervention Manual (SOP 5) 

All Staff and 
Students 

During the 
2017-2018 
school year, 
School 
Principal, 
Assistant 
Principals, 
School 
Leadership 
Team and 
Deans will 
update 
school-wide 
discipline 
policy as well 
as look at 
data. 

During the 
2018-2019 
school year, 
the school 
leader will 
partner with 
Office of 
Safety and 
Youth 
Development 
and will 
incorporate 
strategies 
from the Pre-
Referral 
Intervention 
Manual 

Key Personnel 
Who is responsible 
for implementing 
and overseeing the 
activity/strategy? 
(include school, 
educational 
consultants and/or 
CBO staff) 

Teachers 

Deans 

Assistant Principals 

Principal 

Guidance Counselor 

Teachers 

Deans 

Assistant Principals 

Principal 

Guidance Counselor 

In September 2018, school leaders including the principal, Assistant 
Principals,and deans will align guidance interventions using TCIS 
training and will conduct monthly assemblies to address anti-
bullying behaviorsDuring the 2017-2018 school year, school leaders 
including the principal, Assistant Principals, and Deans will align 
2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          24 

All Students  During the 
2018-2019 
school year, 
school 
leaders 

Teachers 

Deans 

 

guidance interventions and will conduct monthly assemblies to 
address anti-bullying behaviors (SOP 5.2; 5.3; 5.4; 5.5) 

In September 2018, school leaders including the principal, Assistant 
Principals, and Deans will align guidance interventions and will 
conduct monthly assemblies to address conduct and attendance 
patterns. During the 2017-2018 school year, Assistant Principal and 
teachers will develop and conduct a staff mid-year reward for 
attendance and conduct patterns (SOP 5.2; 5.3; 5.4; 5.5)  

Assistant Principals 

Guidance Counselor 

Principal 

including the 
principal, 
Assistant 
Principals, 
and Deans 
will align 
guidance 
interventions 
and will 
conduct 
monthly 
assemblies 
to address 
anti-bullying 
behaviors. 

All Students  During the 
2018-2019 
school year, 
Assistant 
Principal and 
teachers will 
develop and 
conduct a 
staff mid-
year reward 
for 
attendance 
and conduct 
patterns.  

Teachers 

Deans 

Assistant Principals 

Principal 

Attendance Teacher 

Guidance Counselors 

  
 
3b – Parent and Family Engagement 

How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to 
support  the  whole  child?  Include  the  timeline  and  identify  key  personnel  and  stakeholders  responsible  for 
implementation and oversight. 
During open school night in September 2018, as parents visit their child's classrooms, teachers will provide parents 
with their classroom expectations and PBIS plans. Also, by utilizing Skedula parents can receive notifications on 
student behavior to stay constantly abreast and informed of their child's social and emotional development. The 
Parent Coordinator and Guidance Counselors train parents at workshops in September and October on how to utilize 
Skedula. Additionally, the administrative team has created a computer lab for parents so that they can access their 
Skedula and email if they do not have access at home.  
 

 
Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 

Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including 
human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 
Google Drive, Google Chrome, excerpts from Teach Like A Champion as well as material from the Peer Instructional 
Coaches emphasizing Domain 2 from the Danielson Framework. Teacher Incentive Fund Allocations. Peer 
Instructional Coaches, Demonstration Teachers, PBIS team. 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          25 

 

1. Purchase of Skedula 

2. Purchase of Educational Consultants 

3. Per session 

4. Lincoln Center Arts Grant  

5. Advisory periods 

6. Dean/Advisory meetings 

7. Assembly periods 

8. Response to Intervention Team meetings 

9. OORS meetings, once a week with Deans and Assistant Principals 

10. Cabinet meetings with Assistant Principals and Deans on a weekly basis 

11. After-school meetings with Deans with regard to anti-bullying program partnership with Lee Hirsch 

12. Weekly cabinet meetings with Assistant Principals to evaluate and assign roles to the Deans 

13. Quarterly after-school meetings with Phys. Ed. Teacher to plan and implement student incentive carnival 

14. After-noon/lunch time recreation time via the use of the student recreation room and student fitness center 

15. After-school meetings with guidance counselors to implement and evaluate guidance interventions 

16. Use of Skedula to inform parents of student behavior  

17. Use of a computer lab in the main office so that parents have open access to Skedula 

18. Trips to include parents to facilitiy tours to attend workshops with their children.  

 
Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 

X 

Tax Levy 

 

Title I 
1003(a) 

X 

X 

Title I 
SWP 

Title III 

 

 

Title I TA 

PTA 

Funded 

 

 

P/F Set-
aside 

SIG 
Grant 

X 

X 

21st Century 

 

C4E 

School 

Achievement 

X 

Other 

Funding 

 
Part 5 – Progress Monitoring  

Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement 
planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 
 

1. On a monthly basis, school leaders including the principal, Assistant Principals, School Leadership Team and Deans 
will evaluate school-wide discipline policy as well as look at data on disproportionately. 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          26 

 

2. On a yearly basis, the principal will evaluate partnership with Office of Safety and Youth Development as well as 
evaluate strategies from the Pre-Referral Intervention Manual and Teach Like a Champion . 

3. On a monthly basis, School Principal, Assistant Principals, SBST, Guidance and Deans will evaluate guidance 
interventions as well as evaluate monthly assemblies that addressed student behaviors. The the use of the Red Flags 
Data base this will be evaluated.  

4. Assistant Principal, SBST, Guidance and the Deans will do a mid-year evaluation of the Behavioral Response data 
from Google Drive. 

5. Principal and Deans will evaluate and monitor OORS reporting reports and Google Drive for incidents and 
suspensions monthly. By Febrary 2018 OSYD data will be analyzed to confirm a decrease in incidents.  

6. Principal will evaluate the realignment of the roles and responsibilities of the Deans position on a yearly basis. 

7. On a quarterly basis, all staff and faculty will evaluate the excellent conduct in all classes through the school wide 
incentive carnivals.  

8. On a weekly basis, the Phys. Ed. teacher will evaluate the implementation of the Student Recreational Center and 
Student Fitness Center. 

9. Principal, Assistant Principals and Guidance Counselors will evaluate Guidance After-School Programs on a yearly 
basis . 

Timeline:  

1. During February 2019, as a mid-point benchmark, we the administrative team, along with the deans and teachers, 
we will analyze the OORS data (as well do at our monthly meetings) . We will analyze to see if there is a 3% decrease 
in OORS incidents. We will also analyze the conduct role for all three grades. 

During February 2019, as a mid-point benchmark, (as well do at our weekly meetings) we will analyze the attendance 
patterns for all three grades. There will be an increase in student attendance data by 3% as of February. 

During the 2018-2019 school year, school leaders including the principal, Assistant Principals, School Leadership Team 
and Deans will update school-wide discipline policy as well as look at data on disproportionately. 

2. During the 2018-2019 school year, the principal will partner with Office of Safety and Youth Development as well as 
incorporate strategies from the Pre-Referral Intervention Manual and Teach Like a Champion . 

3. During the 2018-2019 school year, school leaders including the principal, Assistant Principals, School Leadership 
Team and Deans will align guidance interventions and will conduct monthly assemblies to address student behaviors 

5. In February 2019 , the administration and Deans will track OORS reports to see a 3% decrease for incidents and 
suspensions. 

6. During the 2018-2019 school year, the principal will realign the roles and responsibilities of the Deans. 

7. Throughout the 2018-2019 school year, all staff and faculty will promote excellent conduct in all classes through 
the school wide incentive carnivals. 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          27 

 

8. Throughout the 2018-2019 school year, the principal, Assistant Principals and Guidance Counselors will create and 
implement the Guidance After-School Program. 

 
Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 
The JHS 144 leadership and SBST team is able to assess progress through routine OORS reports. the measurement 
tool will be the Suspension Report by OSYDDATA. At risk students are further monitored on the Google Drive through 
a shared file called "Red Flags" which indicate not only behavioral issues but academic needs as well. After staff 
members update the Red Flags list, a school leader or staff member is assigned an at risk student to monitor and 
confer with regarding their progress and goals. By February 2019 the Red Flags list will be analyzed to see a decrease 
in the needs of students. 

 
Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action 
plan, if applicable. 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          28 

 

Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans 

Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success 
and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional 
development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices 
and Decisions) 
 
Part 1 – Needs Assessment   

Part 1a.  Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice 
Tenet 4 Statement of Practice 
Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one.  Place an “X” in the 
appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 
4.2  School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized 

around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 

4.3  Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards 

(CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 

4.4  Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning 

environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths 
and needs of all students. 

SOP(s) 

Addressed 

X 

X 

X 

 

 

 

4.5  Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by 
using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, 
and progress monitoring). 
Part 1b.  Needs/Areas of Focus: 
Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the 
most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources 
should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, 
NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School 
Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 
 

X 

 

1.  What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element?  Indicate the data trends, source and 

year. 

2.  What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? 

Indicate the data trends, source and year. 

 

Based on our 2016-2017 Review, we were able to validate that our teacher teams are proficient and lend to a supportive 
and collaborative environment.  

 

 

Our Review Reads: "Teachers stated inquiry not only results in curricular modifications, but also strengthens teacher 
practice. Once teachers develop a hypothesis about student misconceptions, the presenting teacher adopts a strategy 
for the skill or lesson and invites other teachers in the class to see that skill or strategy used on the identified area of 
needs. The visiting teachers take low inference observations and provide the presenting teacher with feedback on the 
skill or lesson. If that strategy or skill is a successful one, it is adopted by all teachers teaching that same lesson or skill. 
This leads to improved teacher practice for all teachers. Additionally, teachers state that they learn from students. One 
teacher stated, “Sometimes you learn a new strategy from students, just by looking at student work. I remember the 
time that all six graders came in and their approach was to use the lattice method for solving all problems. We saw that 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          29 

 

this year’s incoming student did not learn lattice as a problem solving technique. We will teach it now.” This practice has 
yielded an overall 20% gain in many post-test scores.  

 

By investing in our teacher teams so intensely there is a nurturing and supportive environment for our teachers. While 
we were rated proficient we intend to grow to well developed by continuing this practice and allowing teachers to 
intervisit each other so that they might learn from each other. Additionally, the administrative team will conduct focus 
walks that will gather low inference data and provide targeted learning opportunities to address any pedagogical skill 
deficits.  

 

Strengths: Now, with dedicated PL time each Monday after school, teachers are able to focus more on specific areas of 
development that are relevant to their current teaching practice and desired areas of growth. Both teachers and school 
leaders report that the hands-on role of teachers in designing and delivering PL has increased the overall effectiveness 
of the PL program. The principal has noticed improvements in teacher performance over time, as measured by 
observation ratings and data supports this noticing. Teachers are working collaboratively throughout this time to 
promote student achievement.  

Michelangelo Junior High School ’s tailored approach to PL has also had a profound effect on school culture. By 
instituting quarterly conferences for discussions of professional growth, the principal has encouraged a school culture 
that empowers teachers to approach administrators on a more regular basis . Additionally, because teachers receive 
personalized support based on their actual observation data, they have become much more tuned into school-wide 
professional learning opportunities based on the Advance data and focus on the development opportunities the system 
presents .  

 

As they prepare for school year 2018-19, the principal and her team analyzed the data from their 2018-2019 Measures 
of Teaching Practice to inform designing what their PL menu will look like in the upcoming school year. Three elements 
that were identified as needing the most professional learning opportunities to be made available is Questioning and 
Discussion, Assessment, and Planning and Preparation. 

 

 
Part 2 – Annual Goal  

Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this 
element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified 
priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-
bound. 
JHS 144 will increase teacher Measures of Teacher Practice data 5% by facilitating differentiated professional learning 
for all teachers. Teachers will participate in professional learning opportunities and will collaborate on improving their 
classroom strategies and lesson planning. Teacher pedagogical increases due to professional development will be 
tracked through attendance documentation and the 144 Online Observation Tracking Tool. 

 

 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          30 

Key Personnel 
Who is responsible 
for implementing 
and overseeing the 
activity/strategy? 
(include school, 
educational 
consultants and/or 
CBO staff) 

School Principal, 
Professional 
Learning Committee 
and Programmer  

Principal and 
Assistant Principals 
and Professional 
Learning Committee 

 
Part 3a – Action Plan 

Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies 
your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this 
Framework for Great Schools element, including: 

Target 
Group(s) 
Who will be 
targeted? 

Timeline 
What is the 
start and end 
date? 

  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional 

 

development, and/or systems and structures needed to 
impact change. 
Strategies to address the needs of students with 
disabilities, English language learners, and other high-
need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, 
SIFE, STH). 

In October 2018, School Principal and Peer Instructional Coaches 
will provide opportunities for teachers to share best practices to 
raise the level of Tier 1 instruction after conducting low inference 
walk throughs and then design an intervisitation schedule for 
teachers to examine these best practices (based on their exhibited 
need). On the first Tuesday of each month School Principal, 
Professional Learning Committee and Programmer will evaluate 
the opportunities for teachers to share best practices to raise the 
level of Tier 1 instruction (SOP 4.2)  

APs, 
Professional 
Learning 
Committee 
and teachers  

During the 2018-2019 school year, Principal, Assistant Principals 
and Professional Learning Committee will provide targeted 
intervention through a variety of professional learning and 
academic intervention opportunities including Tier 2 and Tier 3 
interventions, emphasis on Reciprocal Reading, and establishing 
protocols/norms for teacher teams to support improved student 
achievement. On the first Tuesday of each month, Principal and 
Assistant Principals will evaluate targeted intervention Professional 
Developments to raise student performance through the use of 
Tier 2 and Tier 3 intervention as well as evaluate the Reciprocal 
Reading strategy as well as evaluate the teacher teams. (SOP 4.2; 
4.5)  

APs, 
Professional 
Learning 
Committee 
and teachers 

On the first 
Tuesday of 
each month 
School 
Principal, 
Professional 
Learning 
Committee 
and 
Programmer 
will evaluate 
the 
opportunities 
for teachers 
to share best 
practices to 
raise the level 
of Tier 1 
instruction 

On the first 
Tuesday of 
each month, 
Principal and 
Assistant 
Principals will 
evaluate 
targeted 
intervention 
Professional 
Developments 
to raise 
student 
performance 
through the 
use of Tier 2 
and Tier 3 
intervention 
as well as 
evaluate the 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          31 

 

Throughout the 2018-2019 school year, teachers and peer 
instructional coaches will collaborate to ensure that the level of 
rigor of questions and student tasks within lessons and units are 
extended to allow all students to engage in higher-order thinking 
aligned to Webb’s Depth of Knowledge (DOK), the Cognitive Rigor 
Matrix, and the Danielson Framework. On a monthly basis, 
Instructional team will evaluate teachers and coaches based on 
unit and lesson planning to ensure the level of rigor and 
questioning is deepened (DOK, Cognitive Rigor Matrix, Danielson 
(SOP 4.3)  

APs, 
professional 
learning 
committee, 
model 
teachers, 
department 
chairs, 
teachers 

APs, coaches, 
department 
chairs, 
teachers 

Teachers, Assistant Principals, and department chairs will 
collaborate to analyze quantitative and qualitative student data, 
quarterly and weekly, and will adjust lessons and unit maps based 
on their data findings. Department chairs and members of the 
professional learning committee will also provide professional 
development on questioning, lesson planning, and other 
instructional practices with an emphasis on the teaching strategies 
outlined in Teach Like a Champion .On a quarterly basis and during 
weekly teacher team meetings, teachers, A.P.’s and Department 
Chairs will evaluate at how teachers look student work(data 
analysis; quantitatively and qualitatively) to adjust lesson plans and 
unit maps as well as Coaches and curriculum team will evaluate 
professional development on questioning, lesson planning, etc. 
with emphasis on the skills addressed in “Teach Like a Champion”. 
(SOP 4.3; 4.5)  

Teachers, 
professional learning 
committee, principal 
and assistant 
principals 

Teachers, A.P.’s, 
Professional 
Learning Committee, 
Principal 

Reciprocal 
Reading 
strategy as 
well as 
evaluate the 
teacher 
teams. 

On a monthly 
basis, 
Instructional 
team will 
evaluate 
teachers and 
coaches 
based on unit 
and lesson 
planning to 
ensure the 
level of rigor 
and 
questioning is 
deepened 
(DOK, 
Cognitive 
Rigor Matrix, 
Danielson 

On a quarterly 
basis and 
during weekly 
teacher team 
meetings, 
teachers, 
A.P.’s and 
Department 
Chairs will 
evaluate at 
how teachers 
look student 
work(data 
analysis; 
quantitatively 
and 
qualitatively) 
to adjust 
lesson plans 
and unit maps 
as well as 
Coaches and 
curriculum 
team will 
evaluate 
professional 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          32 

 

development 
on 
questioning, 
lesson 
planning, etc. 
with emphasis 
on the skills 
addressed in 
“Teach Like a 
Champion”.  

  
 
3b – Parent and Family Engagement 

How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies 
to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and 
identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 
Through the ATTP initiative, parents will get to experience how collaborative teacher teams work as the meetings 
include them in an analysis of data and then the research and use of strategies to address those skill gaps. As the 
initial meeting happens at Open School Nigh t(September) and then at Parent Teacher Conferences( 
November/January & May), the process of collaborative teams will reach parents on a wider scale. The ATTP which 
includes the Champion (Teacher Leader), volunteer teachers, parent coordinator and administration will be involved 
in the ATTP meetings. Also, during School Leadership Team meetings hosted once a month with the UFT chair, Parent 
Coordinator, Parents, Administrators and Teachers the team will discuss the use of teacher teams to move students.  
 

 
Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 

Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including 
human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 
1. Teach Like a Champion text and workbook, Peer Instructional Coaches, Demonstration Teachers, Monday 
Professional Learning time slots, Common Planning Periods, Assistant Principals, Danielson Framework, Generation 
Ready Consultants, MSQI coaching. Common Planning Periods 

2 Teacher Team Periods 

3 Monday professional development sessions 

4 After-School professional development sessions 

5 Differentiated professional development tool 

6 Professional Periods for Inter-visitations 

7 Weekly cabinet meetings 

8. Curriculum team will conduct classroom visits to assess progress of instructional practices throughout the school 

9. ATTP meetings and workshops 

 
Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 

X 

Tax Levy 

X 

Title I 
SWP 

 

Title I TA 

X 

P/F Set-
aside 

X 

21st Century 

 

C4E 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          33 

 

 

Title I 
1003(a) 

X 

Title III 

 

PTA 

Funded 

 

SIG 
Grant 

School 

X 

Achievement 

X 

Other 

Funding 

 
Part 5 – Progress Monitoring  

Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement 
planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 
Weekly the administrative and curriculum team will:  

1.  - Design and evaluate targeted intervention Professional Learning to raise student performance through the 

use of Tier 2 and Tier 3 intervention as well as evaluate the Reciprocal Reading strategy as well as evaluate 
the teacher teams. 

2.  Visit teachers and coaches based on unit and lesson planning to ensure the level of rigor and questioning is 

deepened (DOK, Cognitive Rigor Matrix, Danielson).  

3.  - Facilitate and monitor the weekly teacher team meetings that analyze student data, research strategies and 

plan collaboratively. A Google Form was designed to track teams' progress and allows for administrators to 
track trends across grades and content areas.  

4.  Create and evaluate time/schedule to conduct inter-visitations 

Monthly the school leaders and programmer will: 

- On a monthly basis, administration will evaluate teachers using Advance to conduct frequent observations and 
classroom walk throughs based on the Danielson Framework.  

- Ensure that ELLs and SWDs needs' are being addressed in the curriculum and teachers teams by allowing the ELL and 
SWD teachers to participate fully on teacher teams and to work together to provide shared resources that will aid in 
our students' progress.  

- On a monthly basis, Principal will work alongside the partnerships with MSQI & LPP and participate in Instructional 
Rounds, Lesson Plan Clinics, Instructional Leads workshops, Common Core Task planning.  

 

Timeline:  

1. By November 2018, February 2019, April 2019 and June 2019 the principal and Assistant Principals will hold 
quarterly conferences with the teachers to review their observational data. The principal and assistant principals will 
also compare the teachers' observational data and mastery/quarterly data. 

By February 2019, there will be an increase of 3% in the teachers Advance Data. 

During the 2018-2019 school year,, School Principal and Programmer will provide opportunities for teachers to share 
best practices to raise the level of Tier 1 instruction 

2. During the 2018-2019 school-year, Principal and Assistant Principals will provide targeted intervention Professional 
Developments to raise student performance through the use of Tier 2 and Tier 3 intervention as well as provide 
teachers with an overview of Reciprocal Reading and establishing teacher team and meeting norms. 

3. Throughout the 2018-2019 school year, teachers and coaches will engage staff in unit and lesson planning to 
ensure the level of rigor and questioning is deepened (DOK, Cognitive Rigor Matrix, Danielson) during common 
planning and teacher team time. A mid-point benchmark is to evaluate the teachers' MOTP data in 1a and 1e.  

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          34 

 

4. During the 2018-2019 school year, on a quarterly basis and during weekly teacher team meetings, teachers, APs 
and Instructional Coaches will look at student (data analysis; quantitatively and qualitatively) to adjust lesson plans 
and unit maps as well as Coaches and curriculum team will provide professional development on questioning, lesson 
planning, etc. with emphasis on the skills addressed in Teach Like a Champion .  

5. During the 2018-2019 school year, the principal, school’s programmer and Assistant Principals will provide 
time/schedule to conduct inter-visitations. 

6. During the 2018-2019 school year, principal, school’s programmer and Assistant Principals will provide 
time/schedule to conduct inter-visitations with other schools to share best practices and provide professional 
development on practical strategies for ELLs and students with disabilities . 

7. During the 2018-2019 school year, administration will make use of Advance to conduct frequent observations and 
classroom walk throughs while providing teachers with timely feedback based on the Danielson Framework. 

 

. 

 
Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 
To indicate progress made with regards to professional learning and development, administration is able to use the 
Advance reports to track teacher growth and areas of needs. The instrument of measure will be the Advance data in 
the Advance Reports section of Advance. 

 

Also, throughout the year instructional leads and Peer Instructional Coaches, meet and confer with teachers 
regarding attainable goals and create action plans so that those goals can be obtained.  

 

Through an increase in student data as reflected by our assessment system, the DRP and state tests we can identify if 
the collaborative practices used by teachers has been effective, especially since they track them within their teams 
and share them school wide during Monday Professional Learning time.  

 
Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action 
plan, if applicable. 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          35 

 

Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans 

 

Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and 
nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional 
support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) 
 
Part 1 – Needs Assessment   

Part 1a.  Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice 
Tenet 2 Statement of Practice 
Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one.  Place an “X” in the 
appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 
2.2  The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, 

Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive 
of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational 
Plan (SCEP). 
Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital 
resources. 

2.3 

2.4  The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual 

Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and 
track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 

2.5  Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve 

critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, 
curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; 
and student social and emotional developmental health). 

X 

X 

X 

X 

SOP(s) 

Addressed 

 

 

 

 

Part 1b.  Needs/Areas of Focus: 
Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the 
most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources 
should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, 
NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School 
Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 
 

1.  What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element?  Indicate the data trends, source and 

year. 

2.  What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? 

Indicate the data trends, source and year. 

Based on the 2017 Review it states: 

Findings : School leaders consistently communicate high expectations including elements of the Danielson Framework 
for Teaching to the entire staff. School leaders and staff consistently communicate expectations that are connected to 
college and career readiness to parents.  

Impact : As a result, there is a system of accountability in place for staff, and parents are aware of their student’s 
progress towards meeting those expectations.  

Supporting Evidence  

 

 School leaders have set up an internal Google Drive that houses all communication to teachers as well as 
teacher team minutes and protocols, professional development, curriculum, and school data. Teachers look at 
their data and set professional goals including professional development. Teachers who have been rated highly 
effective in certain areas of the Danielson Framework for Teaching have received training on facilitation skills 
and provide professional development and intervisitations to other teachers to improve pedagogy as part of the 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          36 

 

inquiry process. School leaders observe teachers formally and informally through Danielson observation and 
instructional rounds.  

The 2017 Review also states: 

Findings :Teacher teams consistently analyze assessment data and student work for students they share. Distributed 
leadership structures are in place so that teachers have built leadership capacity.  

Impact :The school has developed a collaborative culture of professional learning where teachers feel empowered to 
make decisions that improve student learning and strengthen teacher instructional practice.  

Supporting Evidence  

 

 All teachers in the school are members of a teacher team and help drive the work of the school in many ways. 
There are 4 major kinds of teacher teams in the school that promote instruction. The school has teachers who 
are Peer Instructional Coaches, Learning Partners Teachers who host other schools interested in the school’s 
practices, Team Leads for the grades and content and finally an Inquiry Teacher Team. These various teams have 
a voice in identifying strong practices at the school related to pedagogy, the use of assessments, data trends and 
making curricular and instructional adjustment to meet identified gaps. The teams work on creating coherence 
at the school through cycles of inquiry and intervistations that include low inference observations and a critical 
friend review  

Through inter visitation, differentiated professional learning and exercising distributive leadership via Teacher Teams, 
MOTP will increase and student achievement will increase as a nurturing and supportive environment is created through 
the Principal's fostering of teacher collaborative practices. The use of technology maintains a constant conversation 
about incidents, curriculum and teacher findings and allows teachers to feel equipped with what they need to plan and 
address matters accordingly.  

 

 
Part 2 – Annual Goal 

Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this 
element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the 
identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART– Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, 
and Time-bound.  
Student DRP and ELA and Math data will increase by 5% by June 2019 through the utilization of teacher team findings, 
targeted professional development and the use of technology and software which allows for a shared and continuous 
discourse regarding student achievement.  

 

 

 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          37 

 
Part 3a – Action Plan 

Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies 
your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for 
this Framework for Great Schools element, including: 

Target Group(s) 
Who will be 
targeted? 

  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional 

 

development, and/or systems and structures needed to 
impact change. 
Strategies to address the needs of students with 
disabilities, English language learners, and other high-
need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, 
SIFE, STH). 

In September 2018, the principal will align budgetary sources to 
purchase hardware: SmartBoards & Chrome Books.  

In September 2018, Principal will align budgetary sources to 
purchase software: Achieve, i-Ready Math/ELA, Rosetta Stone, 
MyOn and Rubicon. These programs will allow for targeted 
instruction amongst our ELLS and SWDs, in order to raise the 
DRP scores. 

 

During the 2018-2019 school year, the principal will provide 
professional development on how to be a Rubicon Atlas, 
(SEptember 2018) as well as data from other online tools, and 
Data Link to analyze data and make curricula decisions. This will 
lead to an increase in DRP scores.  

 

In September 2018, the principal will align budgetary sources to 
implement professional learning opportunities all staff will be 
differentiated based on the data sources from the Data Link 
software/hardware. 

Timeline 
What is the 
start and end 
date? 

Key Personnel 
Who is responsible 
for implementing 
and overseeing the 
activity/strategy? 
(include school, 
educational 
consultants and/or 
CBO staff) 

Whole School  Monthly 

Principal 

Assistant Principal 

Curriculum Team 

Principal 

Assistant Principals 

Curriculum Team 

budget 
meetings will 
take place 
with budget 
personnel to 
implement 
the hardware 
plan of 
action.This 
will continue 
until June 
2018 

CurriculumTeam  Beginning 
September 
2018, the 
school will 
make 
budgetary 
moves 
necessary to 
support the 
curriculum 
team. This 
will continue 
until June 
2019 

Teaching Staff  Monthly 

Principal 

Assistant Principal 

Curriculum Team 

budget 
meetings will 
take place 
with budget 
personnel to 
implement PL 
opportunities. 
This will 
continue until 
June 2019 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          38 

 

On a biweekly basis the administration will host feedback 
sessions to evaluate status of programs and resources.This 
analysis will lead to educational decisions that will allow for an 
increase in DRP scores as the resources used and curriculum 
enacted will directly impact student achievement.  

Teaching Staff 

Bi-weekly 

Principal 

 

Assistant Principal 

Curriculum Team 

  
 
3b – Parent and Family Engagement 

How  will  your  school  engage  parents/families  and  support  their  understanding  of  Effective  School  Leadership  and 
strategies  to  promote  parent  leadership  and  engagement  in  order  to  support  their  children  at  home?  Include  the 
timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 
During SLT meetings, hosted once a month by the Administrative Team, Teachers, Parents and Parent Coordinator, 
parents will receive information on how leadership has leveraged and allocated resources. Parents will hear about the 
budgetary moves made by the school in an effort to boost student achievement such as the purchases with 
technology and software. Also during subsequent SLT and Parent Workshops, the parents will receive information on 
the curriculum and how Rubicon Atlas is utilized to plan the curriculum. Curriculum Night is hosted in October so that 
parents can see what is used in the classrooms and how it is used. Teacher Leaders and teachers host the night to 
inform students and parents on curriculum.  

 

 
Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 

Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including 
human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 
1. Budget meetings will take place with budget personnel to implement the hardware plan of action. 

2. Budget meetings will take place with budget personnel to implement the software plan of action. I-Ready will be 
purchased, as well as MyOn and Achieve. 

3. Budget meetings will take place with budget personnel and Assistant Principals to implement the various after-
school programs.  

4. Budget meetings will take place with budget personnel to implement Professional Learning Opportunities to 
support teacher pedagogy. 

5. Principal, Assistant Principals and coaches will meet on monthly basis to assess impact of the afterschool programs 
as well as software/hardware/library resources. 

Principal and Assistant Principals will sit in on teacher teams to assess the teachers’ practices with regard to analyzing 
data. 

 
Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 

X 

Tax Levy 

 

Title I 
1003(a) 

X 

X 

Title I 
SWP 

Title III 

 

 

Title I TA 

X 

PTA 

Funded 

 

P/F Set-
aside 

SIG 
Grant 

X 

 

21st Century 

 

C4E 

School 

Achievement 

X 

Other 

Funding 

 
Part 5 – Progress Monitoring  

Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement 
planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          39 

 

1. By January of 2018 DRP scores will increase by 2 points at the mid year benchmark on the Part B of the DRP test. By 
May the DRP will increase 3 more points per student. 

2. By the end of the 2018-2019, all classrooms will have SmartBoards, iPads and/or Chrome Books and use them to 
effectively access the Google Drive and access to , Achieve, I-Ready Math/ELA, Rosetta-Stone, MYon Reader and new 
classroom libraries, to reflect the needs and interests as made evident through inquiry. 

3. By the end of the 2018-2019, all students will have been offered opportunities such as Book Clubs, Regents Prep 
program, Specialized High-School test prep, After-school classes, and Saturday and morning programs so that 
students can move their DRP and State Data . 

4. By the end of each quarter, administration will evaluate the impact of all the programs and resources and the 
impact of the teacher team initiatives as well as the Professional Learning opportunities. 

5. During each teacher’s quarterly conference the teachers will provide feedback as to which professional learning 
opportunities were most useful and which professional learning opportunities they would like to receive during the 
next quarter. This feedback will support the Professional Learning Committee’s professional development plan and 
will involve teachers. 

6. All teachers will engage in a teacher team and contribute to the ongoing discourse on increasing student 
achievement as per their updates in Google.  

 
Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 
The JHS 144 leadership and staff is able to assess progress through the benchmark data that is provided through the 
purchased software (Achieve 3000, MyOn and i-Ready). Furthermore, administration is able to view usage and 
contributions made to the programs Skedula and Rubicon Atlas through their notification system. Finally, the DRP 
offered three times a year will indicate if progress is being made. The specific instument of measure will be the NY 
State ELA and Math scores. Finally, the data aggregated in Teacher Teams will speak to their progress as it is 
monitored on a regular basis.  

 
Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action 
plan, if applicable. 
 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          40 

 

Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans 

 
Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a 
welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. 
(Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) 
 
Part 1 – Needs Assessment   

Part 1a.  Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice 
Tenet 6 Statement of Practice 
Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one.  Place an “X” in the 
appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 
6.2  The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their 

high expectations for student academic achievement.  

6.3  The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and 
community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to 
augment learning. 

6.4  The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide 
training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support 
student success. 

6.5  The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school 

community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers 
families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their 
children. 

x 

x 

x 

x 

SOP(s) 

Addressed 

 

 

 

 

Part 1b.  Needs/Areas of Focus: 
Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the 
most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources 
should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, 
NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School 
Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 
 

1.  What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element?  Indicate the data trends, source and 

year. 

2.  What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? 

Indicate the data trends, source and year. 

 

The 2017 Review "Findings" reads: School leaders consistently communicate high expectations including elements of the 
Danielson Framework for Teaching to the entire staff. School leaders and staff consistently communicate expectations 
that are connected to college and career readiness to parents.  

Impact : As a result, there is a system of accountability in place for staff, and parents are aware of their student’s 
progress towards meeting those expectations.  

Supporting Evidence   

 

 Parents feel that the school provides student with rigorous work and students have been trained to think 
critically. They stated that the students are expected to do a great deal of reading, analyzing and writing and 
they feel that these skills are essential for both career and college. Parents stated the school has taken students 
on trips to colleges. Parents state that there is transparency is student achievement through Skedula and Pupil 
Path and they can follow their students’ grades and progress. They state that both the parent coordinator and 
teachers are extremely helpful and that teachers have returned emails as late at 1 am. Parents state that there 
is high visibility and communication with school leaders who are readily accessible to parents. They shared that 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          41 

 

they and their student are known personally and the school makes every effort to keep parents apprised of 
curriculum, expectations, student performance and preparing for high school and beyond.  

Not mentioned in the Review is our communications system: Skedula. We use phone messenger, and Skedula to ensure 
that parents remain in an effective communications link with the school. While most families have internet access at 
home, the Parent Coordinator maintains a fail-safe bank of computers available in her office for any families who may 
need to log on at school. The school artfully uses all these systems to promote parent nights and high school readiness. 
The parent coordinator also hosts and facilitates bi-weekly meetings that aid in boosting student achievement at home. 
Those meetings include resources for parents of ELLs and SWD. The ELL Coordinator sets meetings with parents to 
discuss progress and assistance.  

 

In addition, many students are encouraged to take matriculated courses that enable them to take college credits in their 
junior and senior years of high school thus making even more explicit the connections to high expectations for college 
and career readiness." The principal and the curriculum team will institute SKEDULA. This will be an online grade book, 
as well as parent outreach tool. in addition, the school has school messenger to keep parents informed of school related 
activities.  

 

This year JHS 144 will also pilot a home visit initiative with MSQI to increase relationships amongst parents and to bring 
literacy into the homes. 

 

 
Part 2 – Annual Goal 

Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this 
element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the 
identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, 
and Time-bound.  
Students will increase the passing of their ELA/Math/Science/Social Studies classes by 5% through the transparent 
communication if Skedula and Phone Messenger. School administrators will track that parents and students are using 
Skedula and are receiving important news updates from School Messenger. This will help keep them informed of the 
academic progress of their child. 

 

 

 

 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          42 

 
Part 3a – Action Plan 

Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies 
your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this 
Framework for Great Schools element, including: 

Target 
Group(s) 
Who will be 
targeted? 

Timeline 
What is the 
start and end 
date? 

  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional 

 

development, and/or systems and structures needed to 
impact change. 
Strategies to address the needs of students with 
disabilities, English language learners, and other high-
need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, 
SIFE, STH). 

In September 2018, the principal and various staff members will 
conduct staff trainings on the use of Skedula and provide 
literature and letters to parents explaining the rationale behind 
the program. (SOP 6.5)  

Teachers, 
parents, 
students 

In September 2018 and November 2018, the principal and various 
staff members will conduct and attend parent training sessions 
through the coordination of the Assistant Principals, Deans and 
Parent Coordinator . (SOP 6.2; 6.3)  

Teachers, 
parents, 
students 

In September 
2018, the 
principal and 
various staff 
members will 
conduct staff 
trainings on 
the use of 
SKedula and 
provide 
literature and 
letters to 
parents 
explaining the 
rationale 
behind the 
program. This 
will continue 
throughout the 
school year as 
needed until 
June 2019 

On a monthly 
basis, the 
principal and 
various staff 
members will 
conduct parent 
training 
sessions 
through the 
coordination of 
the Assistant 
Principals, 
Deans and 
Parent 
Coordinator. 
This will 

Key Personnel 
Who is responsible 
for implementing 
and overseeing the 
activity/strategy? 
(include school, 
educational 
consultants and/or 
CBO staff) 

Principal and 
Skedula point 
person will conduct 
staff trainings on the 
use of Skedula and 
provide literature 
and letters to 
parents explaining 
the rationale behind 
the program. 

School Parent 
Coordinator and 
Skedula point 
person will conduct 
parent training 
sessions through the 
coordination of the 
Assistant Principals, 
Deans and Parent 
Coordinator. 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          43 

 

On a quarterly basis, the school’s administrators will monitor the 
use of Skedula and School Messenger. (SOP 6.5  

Teachers, 
parents, 
students 

Throughout the 2018-2019 school-year, the principal will 
coordinate with homeroom teachers; parent submission of emails 
to enroll in the program as well as work with the Parent 
Coordinator to conduct parent technology nights to promote 
online communication program. (SOP 6.3)  

Teachers, 
parents, 
students 

Administration will 
monitor the use of 
Skedula and School 
Messenger 

Principal will 
coordinate with 
homeroom teachers; 
parent submission of 
emails to enroll in 
the program as well 
as work with the 
Parent Coordinator 
will conduct parent 
technology nights to 
promote online 
communication 
program 

continue until 
June 2019 

On a quarterly 
basis, school 
administrators 
will monitor 
the use of 
Skedula and 
School 
Messenger. 
This will 
continue until 
June 2019 

On a monthly 
basis, the 
principal will 
coordinate 
with 
Homeroom 
teachers; 
parent 
submission of 
emails to enroll 
in the program 
as well as work 
with the Parent 
Coordinator to 
provide parent 
technology 
nights to 
promote an 
online 
communication 
program. This 
will continue 
until June 
2019. 

  
 
3b – Parent and Family Engagement 

If  any,  list  the  Community  Based  Organizations  or  other  partnerships  that  support  parent/family  and  community 
engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. 
n/a 

 

 
Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 

Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including 
human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 
1. Bi-Wekly meetings for parents  

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          44 

 

2. Family Nights/Informational Nights (Evening times) 

3. Twice a month, during curriculum meetings  

4. Per Session to allow for home visits after school  

5. Necessary technology (Skedula & Phone Messenger) 

 
Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 

X 

X 

Tax Levy 

Title I 
1003(a) 

X 

X 

Title I 
SWP 

Title III 

 

 

Title I TA 

X 

PTA 

Funded 

 

P/F Set-
aside 

SIG 
Grant 

X 

X 

21st Century 

School 

Achievement 

Funding 

 

 

C4E 

Other 

 
Part 5 – Progress Monitoring  

Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement 
planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 
1. By February 2019, cabinet team and guidance counselors will evaluate red flag data. In addition, this team will 
analyze the first two marking period grades for all students to confirm an 5% increase in marking period grades and 
make contact with those families to promote their success and investment in their schooling.  

2. On a monthly basis, the principal and various staff members will conduct staff trainings on the use of Skedula and 
provide literature and letters to parents explaining the rationale behind the program. 

3.. On a monthly basis, the principal and various staff members will conduct parent training sessions through the 
coordination of the Assistant Principals, Deans and Parent Coordinator. 

4. On a quarterly basis, school administrators will monitor the use of Skedula and School Messenger. 

5. On a monthly basis, the principal will coordinate with Homeroom teachers; parent submission of emails to enroll in 
the program as well as work with the Parent Coordinator will conduct parent technology nights to promote an online 
communication program. 

6. On a monthly basis the Parent Coordinator will look at monthly attendance of parent night activities to inform the 
most strategic way to meet parent needs.  

7. Three times a year a home visit will take place with the pilot class to begin building strong relationships with 
families and the community.  

 
Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 
A decrease in OORS incidents will indicate an improvement with parent engagement. Moreover, an increase in 
invitations to our school PBIS program, the Carnival, will also indicate an improvement with parent engagement. The 
JHS 144 Parent Coordinator, also keeps records on the Google Cloud system that indicates the number or workshops, 
the attendance and any further information that will monitor an increase in parent engagement. A mid-point 
benchmark will be to analyze the overall OORS data in February to confirm a decrease. 

 
Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action 
plan, if applicable. 

 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          45 

 

Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS)  

(Required for All Schools) 

Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services 
(AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records 
need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area 
listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. 
 

Method for delivery 
of service (e.g. small 
group, one-to-one, 
tutoring, etc.) 

When the service is 
provided (e.g. during 
the school day, 
before or after 
school, etc.) 

Type of program or 
strategy (e.g. 
repeated readings, 
interactive writings, 
etc.) 

Wilson Intervention 
Program, Just Words, 
i-Ready, Achieve 
3000, AIS, Reciprocal 
Reading 

 
i- Ready, AIS 

 

Small group, one-to-
one, tutoring 

 

Small group, one-to-
one, tutoring 

 

Regents Preparatory 
Academy, Reciprocal 
Reading 

Small group, one-to-
one, tutoring 

 

 

Reciprocal Reading 

 

Small group, one-to-
one, tutoring 

 

Small group, one-to-
one, tutoring 

 

At-risk counseling, 
Response to 
Intervention, Positive 
Behavior Incentive 
Support Program, 
Student Incentive 
Programs , PPC team, 
PPT (Attendance 
team), At risk 
counseling 
(Counselors and or 
SAPIS), RTI, PIP plans, 
functional behavioral 
counseling, academic 

Type of Academic 
Intervention Service 
(AIS) 

English Language 
Arts (ELA) 

Mathematics 

Science 

Social Studies 

At-risk services (e.g. 
provided by the 
Guidance Counselor, 
School Psychologist, 
Social Worker, etc.) 

Criteria for 
determining AIS 
services (For 
additional guidance, 
refer to NYSED’s 
memo.) 
State exam data, DRP 
data, report card 
information, teacher 
referral, department 
referral 

 
State exam data, DRP 
data, report card 
information, teacher 
referral, department 
referral 

 
State exam data, DRP 
data, report card 
information, teacher 
referral, department 
referral 

 

State exam data in 
ELA, DRP data, report 
card information, 
teacher referral, 
department referral 

 
SBST referral, 
Teacher referral, 
Dean referral, parent 
request, AP referral, 
Principal referral, 
agency referral 

 

Before school day, 
during the school 
day, lunch time, 
after-school, 
Saturday school 

 
Before school day, 
during the school 
day, lunch time, 
after-school, 
Saturday school 

 
Before school day, 
zero intervention 
period, during the 
school day, lunch 
time, after-school, 
Saturday school 

 
Before school day, 
during the school 
day, lunch time, 
after-school, 
Saturday school 

 
Lunch time, regular 
school day, after-
school . 

 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          46 

 

 

counseling, 
Community Outreach 
(AIDP), MDR, 504 
Accommodation for 
At-Risk 
immunization, triage 
as needed, referrals, 
and wellness 
consultations 

 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          47 

 

Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH)  

 

Directions: 
-  All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. 
-  All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. 
 
Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) 
As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the 
federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and 
report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support 
your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: 
http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf   

Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 

 

1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your 
school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE 
systems and may change over the course of the year.) 

We have 
55 STH 
students 
currently 
enrolled.  

 

2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. 

STH students receive advisory sessions with either a guidance counselor or dean. Guidance counselors ensure that 
STH students are equipped for school by providing supplies and offering mentor sessions. STH students and their 
families will also be able to meet with school leadership and guidance to assess their needs and how the school can 
assist in meeting those needs.  

 

Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 

1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school 
(please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 

na 

 

2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          48 

 

na 

 

3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary 
housing.  If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation 
Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question.  If your school did not receive an allocation 
and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. 

na 

 

 

 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          49 

 

 

Section 8: Title I Program Information 

Directions: 
  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1 
  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2 
  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3 
  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  
 

If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can 
be found 

  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage 
 
Part 1: Title I Status 

Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. 

X 

Schoolwide Program (SWP) 

 

Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools  

 

Non-Title I 

 
Part 2: All Title I Schools 

2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) 

Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support 
including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. 
● Job listings included online for specific content area certifications. Then the new teacher training program will be 
conducted by Principal, Assistant Principals, Coaches, Department Chairs and retired Principals (Mentors) 

● Buddy teachers and special emphasis on classroom inter-visitations 

● A program schedule that builds common planning time, departmental conferences, and grade conferences 

● Use of teacher text such as Teach Like a Champion to promote specific classroom/teaching practices 

● Special emphasis on the Depth of Knowledge Wheel and the Cognitive Rigor Matrix to promote rigor and higher 
order thinking tasks/questions 

● Provide ongoing Professional Development for teachers and staff to ensure effective use of strategies, rubrics, 
curriculum maps, unit planning and data analysis 

● Partner with District to provide lesson plan clinics, Instructional Rounds and classroom visits 

● Partner with the Teacher Effectiveness Unit with emphasis on the Danielson Teaching Framework 

● Monthly staff meetings to address teaching practices and data awareness 

● Attend teacher fairs to recruit teachers or other pedagogues  

● Network with other Principals and Assistant Principals with the focus of recruiting teachers or staff members 

● “Aim and Hook” collections to ensure high quality questioning and planning of classroom lessons 

 

 
2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          50 

 

Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and 
paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS).  
1. ELL workshops for Assistant Principals 

2. Teacher Team time that will allow teachers to collaborate on shared lessons and skill deficits that they can address 
for their students  

3. Differentiated professional learning as made evident through Advance data collected through visits from the 
administrative team and the Peer Instructional Coaches 

4. Central led Professional Developments 

5. Lincoln Center for the Arts training for all staff and faculty 

6. MSQI training for administrators and teachers through the strategic planning of one on one coaching.  

 

 
Part 3: TA Schools Only 

3a. Use of Program Resources 

Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 
n/a 

 

 
3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program 

Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., 
providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from 
the regular classroom during regular school day). 
n/a 

 

 
Part 4: SWP Schools Only 

4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only)  

Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary 
school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, 
early intervention services, etc.). 
n/a 

 

 
4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments 

Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate 
multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to 
improve instruction.    
Default on Measures of Student Learning. MOSL committee, which includes eight teacher members formed by model 
teachers, UFT representatives and department chairs. They formed to select local measures of student learning 
(MOSL) for all teachers. Teachers received professional development resources from the borough on using the rubrics 
for NYC performance assessments (MOSL aligned assessments). Professional development on how to use data from 
these assessments is forthcoming from the borough. 

 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          51 

 
 
4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools 

Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and 
Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible 
for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its 
Schoolwide plan (SCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program 
contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the 
intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, 
State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the 
amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met 
the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. 
Program Name 

Fund Source 
(i.e. Federal, 
State or Local) 

Funding Amount 
Indicate the amount 
contributed to 
Schoolwide pool. 
(Refer to Galaxy for 
school allocation 
amounts) 

Place an (X) in Column A below to verify 
that the school has met the intent and 
purposes of each program whose funds are 
consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section 
references where a related program activity 
has been described in this plan. 

Title I Part A (Basic) 

Title I School Improvement 
1003(a) 
Title I Priority and Focus 
School Improvement Funds 

Title II, Part A 

Title III, Part A 

Title III, Immigrant 

Tax Levy (FSF) 

 

Federal 

Federal 

Federal 

Federal 

Federal 

Federal 

Local 

388,537.00 

 
 

 

0  

11,200.00 
 

0  

3,291,949.00 
 

x 

 
 

 

 

x 

 
 

x 

 

Column A 

Verify with an (X) 

Column B 

Section Reference(s) 
1,2,3,4,5,6,7 

 
 

 

 

1,2,3,4,5,6,7, 

 
 

1,2,3,4,5,6,7, 

 

1Explanation/Background: 
Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and 
programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and 
advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools 
may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, 
State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This 
gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students.   
 
Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a 
single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual 
identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool 
to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds 
used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from 
which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to 
combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used 
conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the 
dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds.  
 
Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages: 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          52 

 

  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program 

separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different 
sources when accounting for their use. 

  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the 

statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., 
semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent 
and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended 
beneficiaries are met. 

 
2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as 
follows: 

  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to 
improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes 
provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH). 

  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified 

through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with 
district oversight and included in the DCIP/SCEP.  

  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement 

plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  

  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in 

grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not 
available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional 
program. 

  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, 
develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and 
achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another 
purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-
quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in 
effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the 
participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language 
instruction programs. 

  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of 

English language acquisition and content area achievement. 

 
Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated: 

  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and 
programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent 
representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities 
funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with 
student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. 

  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and 

 

more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. 
IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education 
designed to meet their individual needs. 

  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be 

used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 

 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          53 

 

Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)  

 (Required for All Title I Schools) 

 

Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and 
representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will 
participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I 
program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson 
that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the 
parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school 
will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic 
achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family 
Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. 
 
The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current 
S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent 
Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent 
involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen 
family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy.  
 
Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample 
Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) 
as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. 
 
 

Parent and Family Engagement Policy 

Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. 
The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of 
parents and community in the school. Michaelangelo Junior High, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A 
of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to 
strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s 
policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of 
the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent 
Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. 

 

Michelangelo Junior High will support parents and families of Title I students by: 

Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students 

 

● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., 
literacy, math and use of technology; 

● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision 
making in support of the education of their children; 

● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor 
their child’s progress; 

● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 

● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in 
languages that parents can understand; 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          54 

 

● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve 
outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other 
members of the school community; 

 

 

Parental Involvement and School Quality 

The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all 
parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The 
school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement 
policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school 
surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and 
enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school.  

 

In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the 
school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership 
Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for 
additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: 

● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I 
program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title 
I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; 

● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated 
directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; 

● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as 
described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; 

● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent 
Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support 
and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills;  

● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. 
The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the 
parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and 
inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents 
each month and file a report with the central office.; 

● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability 
grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and 
technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home;  

● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State 
accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, 
Learning Environment Survey Report; 

● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of 
children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          55 

 

the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable 
sections under the ESSA; 

● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning 
or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and 
allow parents to provide suggestions; 

● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed;  

● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and 
workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; 

 

 

The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: 

Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement 

 

● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; 

● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; 

● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher 
Association) and Title I Parent Committee; 

● supporting or hosting Family Day events; 

● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; 

● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; 

● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their 
children’s progress; 

● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school 
activities and student progress; 

● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, 
and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. 

 

 

School-Parent Compact (SPC)  

 

School-Parent Compact (SPC) 

JHS 144 , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is 
implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between 
the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, 
agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          56 

 

improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure 
that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. 

 

Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to 
meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: 

I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum 

 

● using academic learning time efficiently; 

● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; 

● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; 

● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; 

● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the 
Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); 

 

I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships 

Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: 

 

● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be 
discussed as well as how this Compact is related; 

● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students 
participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to 
be involved; 

● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds 
are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; 

● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation 
services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education;  

● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of 
participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; 

● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent 
Involvement Policy and this Compact; 

● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results 
for each child and other pertinent individual school information;  

● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents 
each year; 

 

 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          57 

 

Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: 

I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff 

 

● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited 
English speaking parents;  

● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff 
member; 

● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to 
observe classroom activities; 

● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences;  

 

 

I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents 

Provide general support to parents by: 

 

● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment 
for parents and guardians; 

● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their 
child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of 
parents can attend); 

● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all 
members of the school community; 

● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents;  

● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in 
this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; 

● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and 
consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; 

 

 

 

II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 

● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate 
procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          58 

 

● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and 
his/her age; 

● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; 

● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes);  

● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; 

● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports 
and/or quality family time; 

● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; 

● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; 

● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education;  

● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by 
prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; 

● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; 

● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy 
and this Compact; 

● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn 
more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; 

● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on 
advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams;  

● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; 

 

 

Student Responsibilities: 

 

III. Student Responsibilities 

● attend school regularly and arrive on time; 

● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; 

● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; 

● show respect for myself, other people and property; 

● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          59 

 

 
 

● always try my best to learn. 

 

 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          60 

 

Division of English Language Learners and Student Support 
Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 
52 Chambers Street, Room 209  
New York, New York 10007 
Phone:  212-374-6072 
http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY 
Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components: 

 

 

  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high 

academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas.  

o  The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need 
o  These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154.  
o  Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. 
o  Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.   

  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on 

the teachers’ performance in classrooms.”  

o  Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term 

workshops and conferences.  

  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet 

community needs.   

o  These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process.  

 
NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional 
development, and 20% to OTPS.   
  
For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and 
Performance Specialist.  Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30.   
 

Part A: School Information 
Name of School:            
This school is (check 
one): 
 

DBN:            

conceptually consolidated (skip part E below)                
NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below)     

 

Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information  
The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): 

Before school                After school             

Saturday academy        

Total # of ELLs to be served:            
Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply):  

1       
7       

2       
8       

K       
6       

4         
10       
Total # of teachers in this program:            
# of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers:            
# of content area teachers:            

3       
9       

5 
11       

12 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          61 

 

Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information  
2 
1 
1 

Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the 

rationale 

 
  subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  
  schedule and duration 
 
language of instruction 
  # and types of certified teachers 
 

types of materials  

Begin description here:            
  ELA and Math Afterschool Program 
For the ELLs who are tested after one year of English schooling and all ELLs, we have instituted 
an ELL Academy.  This program builds upon the strength of the school day content area study 
and language development and Math skills in a small group setting.  The ELL Academy will 
service students in grades 6-8 with both a Math Certified Teacher and an ENL certified 
teacher.  There will be one group of 15.  The teachers that will service this group is a certified 
ENL teacher and a certified math teacher.  The program will take place from March 2019 to May 
2019 (specific dates to be determined) for 12 weeks from 2:05-4:05 on Wednesdays & 
Thursdays  for 2 hours each session. This is outside the school day which is conducted between 
7:45-2:05.   
The ENL/Math teachers will differentiate instruction and work with academic language 
development. There will be a supervisor to maintain a safe environment and ensure quality 
instruction.   The supervisor already oversees other after-school programs and is paid from other 
funding sources.  Students will be able to work with a literacy program to enforce their literacy 
skills such as language development, vocabulary development, phonics and reading 
comprehension skills. Students will be prepared for the ELA and Math state assessments.  
After-school ELL Academy, with focus in math and academic language development: 1 math/1 
ENL co-teaching 10-15 ELLs, will take place twice weekly, two hours a day for 12 weeks 
(Hours not to overlap with official school hours).  The cost of Direct Instruction (2 tchrs/12 
wks/2 days/2 hrs @ $55.23) would be $5302. 
 
After-school NYSESLAT/ELA Academy with focus in ELA and NYSESLAT Prep.: 1 ELA/1 
ENL parallel teaching 10-15 ELLs twice weekly, two hours a day for 12 weeks (Hours not to 
overlap with official school hours).  The cost of Direct Instruction (2 tchrs/12 wks/2 days/2 hrs 
@ $55.23) would be $5302. Our after school program will pay for the cost of this program. 
Program will take place on Monday and Tuesday from 2:05-4:05. 
 
The NYSESLAT Academy will service students in grades 6-8.  There will be two groups of 10-
15 students per group. The teacher that will service this group is a certified ENL teacher. The 
other teacher is a trained ELA/Math teacher with pending TESOL training.   
Students will be able to work with literacy programs to enforce their literacy skills such as 
language development, vocabulary development, phonics and reading comprehension skills. This 
program will focus on preparing the students for the NYSESLAT Assessment. A content area 
math teacher will teach a Title III program.  He will be co-teaching and co-planning with a ENL 
certified teacher, compute fluently with multi-digit numbers, find common factors and multiples, 
and apply and extend previous understandings of numbers to the system of rational 
numbers.  The teacher will use NYSCCLS: Mathematical Practices.   
 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          62 

 

 

Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information  
Students will be grouped based on baseline exam of common core aligned mathematics 
questions, as well as proficiency. The instructional focus of the program is that the students will 
be able to achieve the following based on mathematical practices. NYSCCLS: Mathematical 
Practices 
MP.1: Make sense of problems and persevere in solving them. 
MP.2: Reason abstractly and quantitatively. 
MP.3: Construct viable arguments and critique the reasoning of others. 
MP.4: Model with mathematics. 
MP.5: Use appropriate tools strategically. 
MP.6: Attend to precision. 
MP.7: Look for and make use of structure. 
MP.8: Look for and express regularity in repeated reasoning.  
 We will also purchase with Title III funds supplementary materials to support these programs 
such as: 
•     High interest, low reading level Libraries and Guided reading libraries 
•     Content area Libraries 
•     Bilingual Dictionaries 
•     NYSESLAT Student books  
 
-            Needed materials to translate all necessary documents.  
 
-            Technology needed to assist in student leveled reading, translating and interventions.  
 
The school has developed an assessment system that assesses students in the four major content 
areas on CCLS standards. Masteries are given on a bi-weekly basis  and assessments on 
individual standards and Quarterlies are given once a quarter, and assess all standards. The data 
is then discussed during common planning so that teachers can better target and differentiate 
their instruction. Both ELA and Math Common Planning meetings have been added to the ENL 
teacher's schedule so she will have a knowledge of what standards students are struggling with 
and what interventions are taking place during class time. She can then cross reference that with 
NYSESLAT results from Spring '18 to design targeted instruction.  
 
All attendance will be kept on file. 

Part C: Professional Development  
Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as 
other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs.   

rationale 
teachers to receive training  

 
 
  schedule and duration 
 
  name of provider 

topics to be covered 

Begin description here:            
Teachers will participate in on-going training and professional development activities offered 
through our Borough Support Office - Instructional Leads here at JHS 144,  as well as the 
Professional development system offered by the Department of Education.  The focus of 
development and training will be differentiation of instruction and the teaching of literacy 
through content area instruction. Throughout the 2018-19 school year, all teachers will receive a 
minimum of 7.5 hours of ENL based strategy training through professional development days, 
workshops and/or seminars.  The Guided Reading Program has been introduced to teachers who 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          63 

 

 

Part C: Professional Development  
instruct beginning English Language Learners and will continue to be implemented. Professional 
Development, as well, will continue to be offered for writing IEP’s for ELL/Special Education 
students indicating the course of instruction required. 
  
Topic 1: Blueprint for English Language Learners Success 
 
 
Rationale: Teachers will be able to articulate the mission of New York State Education 
Department for all English Language Learners to attain the highest level of academic success as 
well as any new mandates, regulations and expectations set forth by the state and the school.  
Audience: Teachers of English Language Learners 
Date: October 17, 2018 
Provider:  JHS 144 Administration & Instructional Leads  
  
Topic 2: Unlocking the Research on English Learners 
Rationale: Teachers will be aware of what they know- and don't know - about effective 
instruction.  
Audience: Teachers of English Language Learners 
Date:  November 21, 2018 
Provider: ELL Coordinator  
  
Topic 3: Co-Teaching Strategies in the ELL Classroom  
Rationale: To provide teachers and school leaders with a common vision for co-teaching with an 
ELL teacher and content specialist.  
Date: December 12, 2018 
Provider: ELL Administrator  
  
  
Teachers of ELLs will receive site-based staff development throughout the course of the school 
year from the Literacy and Math Coaches as well as the ELL teachers.  Some of these in-house 
Professional Development Sessions are: 
•     ELA/ENL Standards 
•     Math Standards 
•     NYSESLAT Assessment 
•     Differentiated Strategies for ELLs in ELA and Content Area Instruction 
•     Looking at ELL Data 
•     ELL Promotional Policy 

Part D: Parental Engagement Activities   
Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact 
higher achievement for ELLs.  NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as 
parent orientation during ELL identification process.   

rationale 

 
  schedule and duration 
 
  name of provider 
  how parents will be notified of these activities 

topics to be covered 

Begin description here:            
Parents of English Language learners will be invited to visit the ELL Institutes.  Refreshments 
and resource materials will be offered. The ELL institute will be offered on Tuesdays from 2:05-

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          64 

 

 

Part D: Parental Engagement Activities   
3:05 p.m. The ELL Institute will focus on study habits, how to set up a place in the home for 
children to do homework, content support, or high school admissions process. The materials that 
will be distributed will relate specifically to the content of the institute and will be in appropriate 
languages for the parents of our ELLs.  The ELL Institute will be held 9 times during the school 
year - once each month.  The Institute to be conducted by Mr. Rivera (Assistant Principal 
responsible for ENL/ELLs) and Ms. Verrino (licensed ENL teacher) will be approximately 60 
minutes long.   
  
Topic 1: Academic Language Proficiency 
Rationale: Research based opportunities for proficiency 
Name of Provider: Certified ENL teacher 
Audience: Parents of school community 
Time frame:  5:00-6:00 
  
Topic 2: High School Admissions Process 
Rationale: To assist parents with the process of selecting appropriate high schools 
Name of provider: Certified school counselor and Assistant Principal 
Audience: Parents of school community 
Time frame: 5:00-6:00 
  
Topic 3: Rosetta Stone 
Rationale: To assist parents with learning the English language 
Name of provider: Certified technology teacher, as well as certified ENL teacher 
Audience: Parents of school community 
Time frame: 5:00-6:00 
These will continue as necessary, and copies of sign-in sheets and agendas will be kept for each 
in the event of monitoring/auditing. Parents will be notified through the monthly school calendar; 
additional letters will be sent home to ELL parents and follow-up contact with parents will be 
made by the ELL teacher. 

Part E: Budget  
FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY.  Ensure that your 
Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. 
Allocation Amount: $           
Budget Category 

Budgeted Amount 

Professional salaries 
(schools must account for 
fringe benefits) 

           
na 

  Per session 
  Per diem 

Purchased services 

  High quality staff 

and curriculum 
development 
contracts. 

           
           na 

Supplies and materials 

  Must be 

supplemental. 

           
  na 

Explanation of expenditures in this 
category as it relates to the 
program narrative for this title. 
           
    na 

           
           na 

           
na 
         

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          65 

 

 
 
 
 

Part E: Budget  
FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY.  Ensure that your 
Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. 
Allocation Amount: $           
Budget Category 

Budgeted Amount 

Explanation of expenditures in this 
category as it relates to the 
program narrative for this title. 

  Additional 

curricula, 
instructional 
materials. 

  Must be clearly 

listed. 

Educational Software 
(Object Code 199) 
Travel 

Other 

TOTAL 

           
          na 
           
           na 
           
           na 
           
           na 

 

           
          na 
           
          na 
           
           na 
           
          na 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          66 

 

DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT 

GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY 

SUBMISSION FORM 

2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR 

 

DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information 

necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English 

language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a 

part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the 

services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should 

be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily 

available on file in the school.  When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces.  For 

additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. 

Part I: School ELL Profile 

 

 

 
 

A. School Information 

District  11 
School Name   Michaelangelo 

Borough  Bronx 

School Number   144 

 
B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant 

principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. 
 

Principal   Mrs. Ellen Barrett-Kelly 
Coach  N/A 
ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher  
 Ms. Joanne Verrino/ENL 
Teacher/Subject Area Ms. Kaitlin Fehn/ELA & 
ENL 
Teacher/Subject Area Ms. Kristina Cotto/ Math 
& ENL 
Related-Service Provider            
Superintendent Ms. Meisha Ross Porter 

 

Assistant Principal  Ms. Emily Wernau 
Coach N/A 
School Counselor  
Mrs. Cindy Larin 

Parent  Mrs. Latisha Beretervide 

Parent Coordinator Ms. Rhonda Clarke 

Field Support Center Staff Member               
Other (Name and Title)            

C. Teacher Qualifications  
Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section.  Press TAB after each number entered to calculate 
sums and percentages.  
     
Number of certified 
ENL teachers currently teaching in the 
ENL program 

Number of teachers who hold both content 
area/common branch and TESOL certification 

4 

1 

0 

Number of teachers who hold both a 
bilingual extension and TESOL 
certification 

Number of special education teachers 
with bilingual extensions 

0 

0 

1 

0 

Number of certified 
bilingual teachers not currently 
teaching in a bilingual program  
Number of certified foreign 
language/world language teachers 
providing home language arts 
(HLA) to students in bilingual 
programs [applicable to grades 7–
12] 
Number of teachers currently 
teaching a self-contained ENL class 
who hold both a common branch 
license and TESOL certification 
[applicable to grades K–6] 

Number of certified 
bilingual teachers currently 
teaching in a bilingual program 

Number of certified ENL teachers 
not currently  teaching in the ENL 
program  

 

0 

0 

D. Student Demographics  

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          67 

 
Total number of students in 
school (excluding pre-K) 

497 

Total number of ELLs 

49 

ELLs as share of total student population 
(%) 

9.86% 

 
 
 
Part II: ELL Demographics 
 
 
 
 
 
A. ELL Programs 

This school serves the following grades (includes 
ELLs and non-ELLs) 
Check all that apply 

 
 
This school offers (check all that apply): 

K

    1

    2

     3

     4

     5

 

6

   7

     8

    9

     10

     11

    12

 

Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) 

Yes

             No

Dual language program (DL) 

Freestanding ENL 

Yes

             No

Yes

             No

 

 

 

If yes, indicate language(s):            

If yes, indicate language(s):            

 

 
Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a 
separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. 
 

Bilingual Program Breakdown 

School 
Year 

Lang. 

Opened 
(e.g., 2013-14) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

K 

 
 

1 

 
 

3 

 
 

2 

 
 

4 

 
 

         

       

         

         

         

         

         

Program 
TBE 
TBE 
TBE 
DL 
DL 
DL 
Total 
 
 
 
Part III: Assessment Analysis 
 
 

 
 
0 

 
 
0 

 
 
0 

 
 
0 

       

       

       

 
 
0 

5 

         

 
 

       

 
 
0 

6 

0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 

7 

0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 

8 

0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 

9 

10 

11 

12 

         

         

         

         

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

       

       

       

       

 
 
0 

 
 
0 

 
 
0 

 
 
0 

Tot # 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 

After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 

1.  What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, 

teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? 
The assessment tools our school uses to assess literacy skills of ELL's are DRP, WIST, TOSWR (Test of Silent Word Recognition) 
and NYSESLAT.  Students are administered the DRP in September, January, and May.  Based on the text comparison chart, 
teachers are informed of the reading level of the students.  If the student scores are below 45, the student is administered the 
WIST, TOSWR and FP.  This allows administrators to schedule the student for Wilson, Just Words or Guided Reading.  This 
allows students to be tracked by data as to their progress.  These assessments assist staff in identifying the skills and strategies 
that students need assistance with and are used for placement in intervention programs.  This information guides classroom 
instruction and enables teachers to differentiate instruction based on student needs.  School-wide goals as set out in the CEP 
are also developed bases on the identified needs.  The CEP goals reflect the need to focus on and improve ELL achievement. 
There is also a teacher created assessment system where teachers provide skill based mastery assessments and quarterly 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          68 

 

assessments that act as an ELA test diagnostic. The data can be aggregated and itemized to indicate what specific skills ENL/ELL 
learners have strengths and weaknesses with. Teachers can then use the data to impact their lessons and curriculum.  
 

2.  What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 

In teacher teams, once a week teachers use the Quarterly exam data or student work provided from their Culminating Tasks to 
identify skill gaps. They then work collaboratively to close the skill gap using a research based pedagogical practice. They track 
the practice's success during this inquiry cycle. Also, after the DRP is administered, students are grouped and those at a far 
below reading level are provided with an intervention program such as Wilson, Just Words or Leveled Text Reading Group in a 
reading enrichment class.  
 

3.  What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL 

Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? 
  
Through the use of Mastery assessments, Quarterly exams, culminating tasks in subject areas and NYSESLAT scores, we have 
evaluated the success of our program.   Results of the NYSESLAT and NYS Math, ELA and Science exams are used to determine 
whether we are meeting AYP.   We also administer the Degrees of Reading Power Assessment three times a year to gauge the 
improvement of students reading levels. This assessment is also a predictive for the ELA state test. After the NYSESLAT is 
analyzed and indicates students' performance level, students are then placed in a class that allows for ENL integrated teaching 
or a class with a teacher that is certified in both the content and ENL/ELL education.  
 

4.  What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered?  

Our Mastery system is designed such that if a student does not achieve mastery on the assessment, that there then needs to 
be an intervention executed to assist the child in mastering the standard. After the intervention is administered by the 
teacher, the students are then re-tested to see if they have a better understanding afterwards. The success rate, intervention 
and re-test are recorded on our shared Google tracker sheet. Also, in teacher teams, once a week teachers use the Quarterly 
exam data or student work provided from their Culminating Tasks to identify skill gaps. They then work collaboratively to close 
the skill gap using a research based pedagogical practice. They track the practice's success during this inquiry cycle. Also, after 
the DRP is administered, students are grouped and those at a far below reading level are provided with an intervention 
program such as Wilson, Just Words or Leveled Text Reading Group in a reading enrichment class.  
 

5.  How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-
5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.]  
  Our school has created rigorous curriculum that is not only cross curricular but completely CCLS aligned. The curriculum is 
evaluated during our Teacher Team time and Common Planning. Teachers meet twice a week to analyze student work and to 
identify skill gaps. Then, teachers use research based strategies to address the skill gaps during their class time. JHS 144 has a 
school wide assessment system that offers four CCLS aligned assessments (1 per quarter) and masteries (small snapshot 
exams) that occur before each quarterly. Those masteries provide a  quick assessment of a students mastery of a particular 
standard. If the student does not meet the benchmark score then an intervention is provided that targets the 
standard.  Students are then offered a retest. For students that require intensive intervention (as indicated by their masteries 
or DRP) they are invited to our after school program and Saturday Academy for more one on one support. Also, during their 
stand alone sessions they are provided with more individual support.  Our school uses the RTI framework to ensure that the 
ELL students are receiving appropriate interventions and supports to ensure their academic success. If a child does not exhibit 
mastery on an assessment then they are given an intervention that would best suit their needs so that they can better grasp 
the various standards. The The data is shared in a Google Cloud site so that various teachers are abreast to the child's progress 
and can support in their respective classes. Additionally, after taking various screeners and diagnostics at the beginning of the 
year, enrichment classes are offered to students for both ELA and Math. In those classes, students are offered small group 
instruction alongside interactive programs like i-Ready and Achieve3000.  
 

6.  What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? 

([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS].  

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          69 

 

 

Many of our students demonstrate strong speaking skills, however, there is need for improvement in Listening, Reading and 
Writing as revealed through the NYSESLAT.   According to the test,0 % of grade 8 students scored as commanding on the 
2017 NYSESLAT, 40% were Expanding,  25% were Transitioning,  38% were Emerging,  .04%  were Entering.  .05% of grade 7 
students scored as commanding on the 2017 NYSESLAT, 18% were Expanding,  29% were Transitioning,  24%were 
Emerging.  17%   were Entering.  0% of grade 6 students scored as commanding on the 2017 NYSESLAT, 33% were 
Expanding,  26% were Transitioning,  20% were Emerging,  .06%   were Entering.  All teachers of ENL/ELL students receive the 
NYSESLAT data and create SMART goals that are shared with the student and the parent to ensure that students are tackling 
the competencies that they need to in order to better their academic performance.       
 

7.  What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? 

Through our inquiry team, teachers examine data and hypothesize on a high leverage skill gap. Then, they research 
various pedagogical strategies that will close the skill gap. They work collaboratively to plan lesson with these practice then 
execute the lessons. They keep data to ensure that students are progressing in a shared tracking tool on Google. Also, there 
are Data Deep Dive professional learning session during Monday PD time. Teachers receive data and then must identify 
patterns or implications. From those, they then create next steps so that they can adjust programs accordingly to suit students' 
needs.    

 
 
 
Part IV: ELL Programming 
 

Programming and Scheduling Information 

1.  How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented 
as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students 
regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in 
one class]).  

a.  Freestanding ENL program. 

The Freestanding Model is comprised of a stand alone and integrated model. At Michelangelo we have a stand alone 
and integrated program for all ESL students.  Students receive small group instruction during the stand alone time in 
Ms. Verrino's class and integrated support during regular class time. The stand alone model is 
heterogeneously grouped students according to their level but the structure is such that the ENL teacher is able to 
utilize flexibile grouping in order to have students support each other or so that they can receive 
homogeneous supports. During that time, students become familiarized with different modalities and practice them 
while gaining exposure to the NYSESLAT.  The services are provided in each grade and according to their NYSITELL and 
NYSESLAT results.  Classroom libraries are available in the students' native languages and content area resources are 
also available for ELL students. Technology is also available for students to use to not only support translation but to 
utilize different programs such as i-Ready, Achieve3000 and MyOn. ENL/ ELL students are grouped in a 
homogeneous class for integrated instruction and receive their mandated minutes in ELA and in some instances Social 
Studies, depending on their level as indicated by the EDAT. Then, during the week students are pulled out depending 
on their minutes and provided more support where the ENL teacher can utilize the flexible grouping in stand alone.  

b.  TBE program.  If applicable.   

N/A 

c.  DL program.  If applicable.    

N/A 

 

2.  How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each 

program model? 

a.  How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 

below)? 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          70 

 

          
Our school assures that the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in its 
program model.  Entering students receive 360 minutes  of ENL support (180 stand alone ENL class and 180 integrated in ELA). 
Emerging students receive 360 minutes of ENL support (90 minutes of ENL stand alone, 180 of integrated ELA and 90 min of 
flexibility where students can receive integrated support in other content areas). Transitioning students receive 180 minutes of 
support (90 minutes of integrated ELA and 90 minutes of stand alone or integrated in another content areas). Expanding 
students receive 180 minutes of integrated support in one of their core content areas. Finally, commanding students receive 
90 minutes of integrated support in any content area.  
 

3.  Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and 

methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core 
Learning Standards.  
   All content areas are taught in English and supported in the stand alone and integrated models. This is done through block 
programming models. Instruction is differentiated for the ELL subgroups.  All ELL students follow the school-wide block 
program for content area instruction.  Content area vocabulary and concepts are reviewed and reinforced. During stand alone 
time, apriori teaching is used to ensure some background before attending the integrated class. During the integrated class, 
visuals, graphic organizers, glossaries and manipulatives are used to modify for ELL students.    All students also participate in 
the school-wide Word Generation program which aids in language acquisition.  Students are grouped according to their 
NYSESLAT levels as well as their DRP levels.  Lessons are focused on both independent levels as well as their instructional 
levels.  All units of study are Common Core aligned.  Students get push in support in accordance with their mandated 
requirements and then pull out sessions for more intense support. Additionally, students receive MyOn and Achieve3000 
software access. These programs are used in the integrated class and at home to strengthen and deepen their reading skills. 
The software automatically levels texts based on a diagnostic and increases in difficulty based on on assessments. Content 
area teachers receive recommended modifications in their curriculum or ELL students that include recommended websites, 
leveled texts and graphic organizers to ensure that all students can access the content and participate in class activities and 
discussion.          
 

4.  How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? 

   Students may take the NYS math and science exam in their native language if the translated version is available.  Students 
also use bilingual dictionaries when taking any exam. If students speak a low incident language we provide translation 
services.  
 

5.  How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? 

SIFE   

a. 
b.  Newcomer  
c.  Developing   
d. 
e. 

Long Term 
Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status  

6a. Our SIFE students receive ESL instruction based on the LAB-R and NYSESLAT scores.  SIFE students are given the 
opportunity to join all SES programs, including IEP (Inoovative Educational Programs) specifically targeted to the ELL 
population. We engage students in challenging theme-based curricula to develop academic concepts. We draw on students' 
backgrounds, their experiences, cultures, and languages. 
6b. Base on their NYSESLAT and LAB-R scores ELL's in U.S. schools less than 3 years will be offered Extended Day services. We 
strive to create confident students who value school and value themselves as learners. We organize the classroom to ensure 
that conversation between peers develops academic concepts and language.  
6c. Our plan of service for ELL's receiving service 4-6 years, is a pull-out model. We have continuous ESL instruction based on 
the needs of the child, as well as based on the NYSESLAT scores. Vocabulary is repeated naturally as it appears in different 
content area studies. 
6d. Long-Term ELL's (those who have completed 6 years) continue with their ESL instruction based on NYSESLAT 
scores.  Language support is   provided for these students in the ESL classroom. We organize collaborative activities and 
scaffold instruction to build students academic English proficiency. Content areas are interrelated. Again, vocabulary is 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          71 

 

repeated naturally as it appears in different content area studies.  Students use the English 3D program targeted toward long-
term ELL's. 
6e.  For up to 2 years after testing proficient, former ELLs receive extended time and separate testing location 
accommodations for all NYS Exams (ELA, Math and Science). Also, they receive 90 minutes of integrated ELA each week to 
ensure their continued success.  
  
 

6.  What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic 

content areas and accelerate English language development?  
For ELL students with disabilities, differentiated activities are provided based on the baseline assessment, Spring NYSESLAT 
scores, DRP, periodic assessments and needs outlined in the student IEP.  After reviewing test scores and IEP mandates 
students are placed in the class setting with supports outlined in their IEPS.  Students are also part of the ESL pullout program, 
receiving services in accordance with test results and their IEPs.  New textbooks adapted for ELLs will be used this year to align 
instruction with the Common Core Learning Standards.    If students are able, they can also receive Wilson or Just Words 
training or a reading level appropriate group in a book club during their enrichment period.        
 

7.  How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and 

attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? 
  
ELL's identified as having special needs are provided with ESL instruction and all mandated services based on the needs 
outlined in their IEP.  All pedagogues have access to student IEPs through SESIS and are aware of each students needs based 
on the IEP and NYSESLAT.  All students are placed in the least restrictive environment as determined by their IEP.  Placement in 
an ICT class is based on the evaluation by the School Based Support Team. Our school uses flexible scheduling to provide Just 
Words intervention for our ELL student with IEPs. Also, integrated ENL is provided to students as per the EDAT restrictions with 
teachers that are both SPED and ENL certified. Thus, teachers are strategically programmed to provide support in both 
veins.       
 

8.  Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups 

targeted).  List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which 
they are offered. 
Our targeted intervention programs for ELL's in ELA, Math, and other content areas include Sports & Arts and homework 
assistance after-school services.  For ELA, the Wilson Reading program is available for those who test into the program.  All 
services are delivered in English.  Students who, based on their NYS exam scores, are identified as in need of assistance are 
mandated to attend 0 period Intervention support services Monday through Friday.  In addition, these students are 
encouraged to attend after-school programs that provide homework assistance.  After school instructional programs are 
staffed by certified content area teachers.   We also offer transitional support for two years for ELL's reaching proficiency on 
the NYSESLAT. Students receive extended time on the state exams and are tested in a separate location.  They are also offered 
extended day support service.  Targeted ELA and Social Studies instruction include guided practice as well as reciprocal 
reading.  Teachers in ELA, Social Studies, Science and Math administer Mastery exams based on skills.  These 5-point mastery 
exams allow for mastery with an 80% on the exam.  If students do not achieve mastery, interventions during class time are put 
into place and the exam is re-administered to the student to check for mastery            
 

9.  Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year?    

Our school has purchased Achieve 3000, iReady and MyOn to support ELL students by providing them with on level texts that 
are interactive and provide linguistic and vocabulary support while reading. Also, both programs contain listening features that 
may increase listening comprehension.  We have created reading enrichment classes where students can read high interest, at 
level books in literature circles so that they can create a literacy experience that is enjoyable and skill building in a social and 
collaborative space.   
 

10.  If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? 

N/A 
 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          72 

 

11.  How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs?  Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in 

your building. 
ELLs are afforded equal access to all school programs.  They are encouraged to participate in all activities by their classroom 
and ESL teachers.  After-school programs  provide content area support to ELLs.   The ELL Coordinator speaks to ESL students 
with ESL students to explain the programs offered and encourage them to attend.   The after-school SES providers are self-
funded.  All supplemental services are offered in after-school programs.   
 

12.  What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language 

materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. 
Instructional materials used to support our ELLs include Wilson Reading and Just Words.  They identify and target individual 
students needs and level of instruction.  Also, Fountas and Pinnell is used to gather information on ELL students' fluency, 
comprehension and reading levels.  Guided reading is provided according to student needs.  Spanish language texts are 
available for students in Science.  Bilingual content area glossaries are available for all content areas.  We have invested in i-
Ready, Achieve 3000 and MyOn programs to support students at their various levels. All programs offer auditory support and 
can read to the children, visual support and are leveled to support all readiness levels. Additionally, every cluster has been 
provided with Google Chrome Books which students can use for translation and to access the various programs.  
 

13.  How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? 

Native Language support is delivered through the use of native language dictionaries, translated state tests (where 
appropriate). We encourage beginner students to write in their native language and then translate. 
 

14.  Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels.  

J.H.S. 144 is a grade 6-8 Middle School.  All resources correspond with the ELL's ages and grade levels.  Materials are leveled to 
match the students' proficiency levels and content is grade and age appropriate.            
 

15.  If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the 

ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met?   
JHS 144 is a shared location. Both schools are able to provide the adequate space needed for classes and out reach. As both 
schools are MSQI schools, many of the resources used are alike and supported by respective coaches, through the initiative. 
The 144 campus does have a collegial and supportive relationship should there be any needs that arise, school leaders work 
together to best support ELLs. Instructional materials used to support our ELLs include Wilson Reading and Just Words.  They 
identify and target individual students needs and level of instruction.  Also, Fountas and Pinnell is used to gather information 
on ELL students' fluency, comprehension and reading levels.  Guided reading is provided according to student needs.  Spanish 
language texts are available for students in Science.  Bilingual content area glossaries are available for all content areas.   
 

16.  Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for 

new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, 
parent coordinator).  
Support is offered for ELL's who are transitioning to middle school with a Parent orientation in September, as well as through 
the sixth grade transition program that allows school support staff to advise and meet with students.           
 

17.  What language electives are offered to ELLs?  

Students in Grades 6- 8 are offered Spanish language instruction.    
 

18.  For schools with dual language programs: 

a.  What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day 

(percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. 
In which language(s) is each core content area taught? 

b. 
c.  How is each language separated for instruction? 
d. 

Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same 
time (simultaneous)? 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          73 

Dual Language is not offered at J.H.S. 144.      
 

 

 

Professional Development and Support for School Staff 

1.  Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic 

staff.)  What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs 
as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? 
ELL personnel receive differentiated professional learning based on his or her needs as indicated by observations. Some of 
which include: Engaging students, Assessing students and how to use various software such as MyOn and Achieve 3000. Also, 
ELL personnel receive professional learning on using Data such as the DRP, NYSESLAT and Item Analysis from the State Test to 
create data driven instruction. ELL personnel also receive training on co teaching to support their roles in integrated 
classrooms. Twice a week teachers meet in collaborative planning groups to create and revise curriculum and to analyze 
student work. During this time, the staff is able to create shared resources that can be used to modify for ELL students within 
their classrooms. MSQI has also created a toolkit and resources to support ELL students so that they too can participate in class 
discussion. Teachers are shared with this information and trained in how to use it.  Office personnel and non-pedagogues 
receive professional development regarding compliance via turnkey sessions or the borough support center. Also, through 
MSQI our Parent Coordinator has received parent outreach training as it pertains to ENL/ELL families and our literacy 
initiatives.  The ENL supervisor or coordinator keeps an attendance log of the various professional developments both 
attended and offered.  
 

2.  Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all 
teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include 
how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance).  Refer to ELL Policy and Reference 
Guide, Professional Development section. 
   
1. Professional development is offered through the BFSC and in house through instructional leaders.  Workshops are offered 
on a monthly basis to all teachers and staff members who work with ELLs.  Topics covered include areas such as how to adapt 
vocabulary in the content areas.  The entire staff will receive ongoing professional development at the monthly faculty 
meetings.  Also, during weekly Common Planning and Inquiry times, there are opportunities for content area teachers to 
participate in staff development about instruction for ELLs in the content area.  September: establishing teacher teams, 
outlining DRP administration, Word Generation PD; October: Units of study and ELL accommodations; November: Achieve 
3000 and DRP data; December: Word Generation rubrics, analyzing student work, key strategies for teachers; January: 
analyzing mastery data for ELLs; February: learning walks among teachers and text complexity observation tools, analyzing 
upcoming units of study with ELL accommodations, analyzing student achievement data and DRP; March: analyzing text 
dependent questions; April: learning walks of text complexity; May: reviewing needs of ELA; June: analyzing data from online 
components. 
2. ENL teachers attend workshops offered by the BFSC and the Department of Education to help develop curriculum and 
stratedgies to support ELLs as we transition to the Common Core Learning Standards.   
  
3. The ELL coordinator works with staff, including classroom teachers and guidance counselors, to provide appropriate support 
ELL's who are transitioning to middle school.  The ELL coordinator meets with the guidance counselors to support the 
transition of 8th grade students as they apply to high schools.  Speakers from high schools which have programs targeted for 
ELLs are invited to come speak to ELLs during ESL periods, which allow the ESL teacher to provide additional support to 
students as they fill out their high school applications.  A Parent orientation is held in the summer and there is a sixth grade 
transition program.  
4. In addition to the monthly workshops and to insure that all staff members receive the minimum 7.5 hours of ELL training, a 
New Teacher Academy is held for new teachers who may benefit from additional training.  All agendas and records of 
attendance which are kept in the Compliance Binder.   Workshops focus on modifying assignments and assessments to meet 
the needs of the English language learners at various levels of proficiency.  There are also workshops on how to modify 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          74 

 

 

instruction practice to accommodate ELLs in the mainstream content classroom.   
  
Specifically, our 7.5 hours of workshops include: Using Data to Group and Find Resources for our ELL Students, Ways to Assesss 
ELL Students, Integrated Co-Teaching (3 part series), Using Technology to Support ELL students (MyOn, Achieve 300, MSQI Tool 
Kit), Engaging ELL Students in Discussion (MSQI Toolkit)  
Professional Learning records are kept in the Professional Learning Binder that contains all offered PL throughout the year and 
in the ESL/ENL professional learning folder. Also, digital copies are distributed to teachers so that they can reference all 
materials.  
    
 
 

Parental Involvement 

1.  How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language 
development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? 
Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent 
orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences?  
Every Tuesday teachers have the ability to schedule meetings with parents. Ms. Verrino will use that time to schedule 
meetings with parents of ELL students so that she can provide them information on their students' progress and goals. She will 
provide progress regarding their language acquisition as well as their progress in the content areas. Since we use Skedula (an 
online grade book) reports are easily accessed. Furthermore, parents can receive updates through Skedula as Ms. Verrino sees 
fit. Skedula can be translated into any language. Should the parent need translation services, an in house Spanish Speaker 
(such as Ms. Larin) can be present or the over the phone translation service can be used. Also, the reports can be translated so 
that a written document can be generated. For one-to-one meetings, the ENL Coordinator keeps a log of letters that went 
home to parents and then attendance sheets of their attendance which will be shared with administration.  

2.  Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. 
Our Parent Coordinator, Ms. Clarke, offers different workshops throughout the year on topics that range from studying skills to 
high school matriculation and transition. If a parent who needs translation services RSVPs to the event she can request a 
translator to attend. Additionally, JHS 144 hosts a multi-cultural night to foster an inclusive community within our school. In 
the Spring, student led test prep sessions are held where students teach their parents the different aspects of the test and how 
to solve various problems. Again, translation services can be requested.  
 

 

 

Additional Information 

Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for 
ELLs.  You may attach/submit charts.   This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted.   
          N/A 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          75 

Part V: ELL Identification Attestation 

Principal Certification 

2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 
6. 

7. 

8. 

9. 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL 
Policy and Reference Guide, I, Ellen Barrett-Kelly, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are 
adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 
 
1. 

The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for 
students entering with IEPs). 
Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined 
a. 

If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status 
relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level.  

The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue.   
a.  The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services 
are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality 
translation service.   

Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined.   
a. 

If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility 
to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. 

Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible.   
Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language.  
a.  Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. 
If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish 
LAB.  
Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources 
available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-
education-sife.  
If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting.  
a.  Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent 

video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask 
questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided 
throughout the meeting. 

10.  ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected.  

a. 

b. 

If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program 
in accordance with DOE transfer policies. 
If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent 
choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice.   

11.  Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process).  
12.  If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose 

ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 
 

 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          76 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

Part VI: LAP Assurances 

School Name:   Michaelangelo                                                                              School DBN: 11X144 
Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate.  Names listed in Part A, should align with this 
section.  

Name (PRINT) 

Ellen Barrett 

Title 

Principal 

Emily Wernau 

Assistant Principal 

Rhonda Clarke 

Parent Coordinator 

Joanne Verrino/ ENL 

ENL/Bilingual Teacher 

Latisha Beretervide 

Parent 

Kristina Cotto/ ENL & Math 

Teacher/Subject Area 

Kaitlin Fehn/ ENL & ELA 

Teacher/Subject Area 

N/A 

N/A 

Coach 

Coach 

Cindy Larin 

School Counselor 

Meisha Ross-Porter 

Pierre Wladimir 

Superintendent 
 
Field Support Center Staff 
Member 
               

n/a 

n/a 

n/a 

Other            

Other            

Other            

 

Signature 

Date (mm/dd/yy) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

6/30/17 

6/30/17 

6/30/17 

6/30/17 

6/30/17 

6/30/17     

6/30/17 

N/A 

N/A 

6/30/17 

6/30/17 

6/30/17 

n/a 

n/a 

n/a 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          77 

 

 
 

2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS 

Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools 

 

DBN: 

144  
 

School 
Name: 

Michaelangelo  
 

Superintendent:  Meisha Porter  

 

 
The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. 
If there is more than one LAC, list all. 
 

First Name  

Last Name  

Title  

Has the LAC attended a 

2018-19 training 

The LAC was involved in 
the development of this 

conducted by the Field 

plan? Yes/No  

Language Access 

Coordinator? Yes/No  

Rhonda 

Clarke 

Parent Coordinator 

Yes 

Yes 

   

 
* The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs 
on translation,  
interpretation, compliance and budget.  
 

School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful 
opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's 
Regulation A-663).  
 
By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and 
interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). 
 
Part A:  Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 
 
1.  Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written 

and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from: 

  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS) 
  Automate The System (ATS) reports 
  Student Emergency Contact cards 
  Surveys conducted by your school. 

 

During the initial interview and registration the ENL/ELL teacher distinguishes the language spoken at home. Also, 
after the collection of the Language Identification Survey the languages used at home are discovered and 
resources and materials are then provided in the languages needed. Other data includes: ATS reports that are run 
that detail the languages spoken by the students, blue cards indicate the language spoken at home and teacher 
surveys that are given at the onset of the year to determine different aspects about the students including their 
native language.  
 

 
 
2.  List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, 

which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language 
Report (RCPL) ATS report. 
 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          78 

 

Language  

Written Preferred  

Percent Written  

Oral Preferred  

Percent Oral  

50% 

75% 

0 

0 

Spanish 

Arabic 

Urdu 

Hausa, Soninke, 
Chinese 

   

 

50% 

75% 

0 

0 

50% 

75% 

0 

0 

50% 

75% 

0 

0 

3.  From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at 

least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, 
French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. 
 

N/A 

 

 
 
Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 
 
1.  List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be 

distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents.  
 

Document Name  

Month/Frequency Distributed to 

How do you plan to translate? 

Families  

Calendars are issued every month 
(calendars include conferences and 
state testing dates) 

The first week of every month 

After School applications are 
distributed in September and 
periodically to newly enrolled students 

August 2017 

Memo issued by Administration  

As needed 

Include procedures to ensure timely 
provision of translated documents 

to parents.  

Prior to distribution the LAC will 
translate the document using DOE 
provided templates for provided 
language. for any languages the DOE 
does not provide for, the DOE will 
contact and hire a DOE approved 
translation vendor to create the 
translated document. 

Prior to distribution the LAC will 
translate the document using DOE 
provided templates for provided 
language. for any languages the DOE 
does not provide for, the DOE will 
contact and hire a DOE approved 
translation vendor to create the 
translated document. 

Prior to distribution the LAC will 
translate the document using DOE 
provided templates for provided 
language. for any languages the DOE 
does not provide for, the DOE will 
contact and hire a DOE approved 
translation vendor to create the 
translated document. 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          79 

 
Progress reports and data regarding 
student achievement and performance  

Once a quarter  

Prior to distribution the LAC will 
translate the document using DOE 
provided templates for provided 
language. for any languages the DOE 
does not provide for, the DOE will 
contact and hire a DOE approved 
translation vendor to create the 
translated document. 

   

 

2.  List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as 

parent-teacher  
conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings.  
   

Meeting Name  

Month/Frequency of Meetings  

How does your school plan to provide 

interpretation service(s)?  

The initial interview, ELL orientation,   September 2017/ Throughout the year  We use bi-lingual staff, over the phone 

Open School Night 

September 2017 

interpretation and the use of a 
translation vendor if needed. 

We use bi-lingual staff, over the phone 
interpretation and the use of a 
translation vendor if needed. 

Parent Teacher Conferences 

November 2017, March 2018, May 2018  We use bi-lingual staff, over the phone 

Parent Engagement Time on 
Tuesdays  

Throughout the year 

   

 

interpretation and the use of a 
translation vendor if needed. 

We use bi-lingual staff, over the phone 
interpretation and the use of a 
translation vendor if needed. 

3.  Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of 

a school emergency.  
 

During the 2017-2018 school year, we will begin using language line and train staff in its use in the event of an 
emergency.  

 
 

 
 
Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure

 
Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and 
what resources are available to meet compliance.  
 

During our Monday Professional Learning time,the LAC will turnkey all of the policies and services available to 
translate for our families. Additionally, the ENL coordinator will distribute translation kits to the teachers so that all 
teachers are able to offer translation to their parents.  

 

 

 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          80 

 
 
Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services 
 
Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive 
information. Include any: 

  Translated signage 
  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents 
  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) 

 

Parents will obtain translated materials by visiting the website: 
http://schools.nyc.gov/RulesPolicies/ChancellorsRegulations and obtaining the material in their native language. Staff 
may print the necessary documents and distribute as needed. If further translation services are needed an in house 
Spanish Speaker can assist or the phone translation service can be used. Also, a vendor can be contracted to assist in a 
low incident language.  
 

 
 
Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services 
Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the 
language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services?   
 

On Tuesday's JHS 144 participates in parent outreach. The ENL teacher will reach out to parents and ensure that their 
needs are being delivered in their home language and if they require any other outreach or support. She will issue a 
survey that asks parents id their needs are being met. Mid-year a focus group of parents inclusive of all cultures and 
languages represented in our school will provide feedback on services provided thus far. She will offer a survey to all 
LEP parents that gauges their feelings and needs regarding the translation services provided by our school.  
 

 

2018-19 SCEP-FF                                                                                                                                                                                          81 

