 
 

 

 

 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

2018-19 

SCHOOL COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN  

(SCEP) 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 

DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 

10X246 

School Name: 

P.S. 246 POE CENTER 

Principal: 

ANDREA JOHNSON 

 
 

2018-19 SCEP-FL                                                                                                                                                                                                              1 
 

 

School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Outline  

 
 
Section 1: School Information Page 
 
 
Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page 
 
 
Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) 
 
 
Section 4: SCEP Overview 
 
 
Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  

  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction 
  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment 
  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers 
  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership 
  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties  

 
 
Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) 
 
 
Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH)   
 
 
Section 8: Title I Program Information  
 
 
Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 
 

 

 
 
2018-19 SCEP-FL                                                                                                                                                                                                           2 

 

 

 
School Name: 

BEDS Code: 

Grades Served: 

School Address:  

 
718-584-6764 

Phone Number: 

 

Section 1: School Information Page 

School Information 

 

PS 246 Poe Center 

 

321000010246 
 
K-5 

School Number (DBN): 

 

10X246 

 
2641 Grand Concourse, Bronx, NY 10468 

718-584-7005 

Fax: 

 

Andrea Johnson 

ajohnso21@schools.nyc.gov 

Email Address: 

 

School Contact Person:  

 

Principal: 

UFT Chapter Leader: 

Parents’ Association President: 

SLT Chairperson: 

Title I Parent Representative (or 
Parent Advisory Council 
Chairperson): 

Student Representative(s): 

 

CBO Representative: 
 

Andrea Johnson 

 
Steve Bilder 

 
Vivian Ortiz 

 
Samantha Camejo 

 

JonnelyClaro 

 

N/A 
 

 
Michelle Cuello 

 

 

District Information 

 

Geographical District: 

10 

 

Superintendent’s Office Address: 

Maribel Hulla 

Superintendent: 
1 Fordham Plaza, Room 846, Bronx, NY, 10468 

 

 
mhulla@schools.nyc.gov 

Superintendent’s Email Address: 

 

718-741-5852 

Phone Number: 

 

718-741-7098 

Fax: 

 

 
 

FSC: 

Bronx 

 

Field Support Center (FSC)  

Executive 
Director: 

 

Jose Ruiz 

 

 
 
2018-19 SCEP-FL                                                                                                                                                                                                           3 

 

Executive Director’s Office 
Address: 

1 Fordham Plaza, Bronx, New York, 10468 

 
JRuiz22@schools.nyc.gov 

Executive Director’s Email Address: 
718-828-7776 

 

Phone Number: 

 

718-828-6280 

Fax: 

 

 
 
2018-19 SCEP-FL                                                                                                                                                                                                           4 

 

Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page  

 

All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this School 
Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to 
support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention 
Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal 
number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with 
Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. 
 
Directions: 

1.  List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 
2.  Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization 
(CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an 
asterisk*. 

3.  SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member 

does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, 
which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT 
member indicates participation in the development of the SCEP, not approval.   

4.  The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file 

in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. 

 

Name 

Position and Constituent Group 

Represented 

Signature 
(Blue Ink) 

Andrea Johnson 

 
Steve Bilder 

 
Vivian Ortiz 

 

 

JonnelyClaro 

 

 

 

Michelle Cuello 

 
Maria Lebron 

 
Elsa Santiago 

 

*Principal or Designee 

*UFT Chapter Leader or Designee 

*PA/PTA President or Designated Co-
President 

DC 37 Representative (staff), if 
applicable 

Title I Parent Representative or 
Parent Advisory Council Chairperson  

Student Representative  
(optional for elementary and middle 
schools; a minimum of two members 
required for high schools) 

Student Representative  
(optional for elementary and middle 
schools; a minimum of two members 
required for high schools) 

CBO Representative, if applicable 

 
Member/Parent 

 
Member/Parent 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
2018-19 SCEP-FL                                                                                                                                                                                                           5 

 

 

Name 

Position and Constituent Group 

Represented 

Signature 
(Blue Ink) 

DarianGranville 

 
Samantha Camejo 

 
Kalliope Zoulis 

 
Maria LeBron 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Member/Teacher 

 
Member/Teacher 

 
Member/Teacher 

 
Member/Parent 

 
Member/  

 
Member/  

 
Member/  

 
Member/  

 
Member/  

 
Member/  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
2018-19 SCEP-FL                                                                                                                                                                                                           6 

 

Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan  

The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) is a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support 
schools in engaging their staff, parents, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, 
setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring 
progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community.  

The process of developing and implementing the SCEP is aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. This section will 
provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding SCEP development aligned with the school’s state 
accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong 
Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools 

Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools 

The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect 
the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms 
where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity 
and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and 
classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more 
attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and 
Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our 
families and students. 

Strong Schools, Strong Communities  

The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, 
educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school 
prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult.  

The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers 
and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools 
centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school 
leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. 
Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to 
Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students.  

The Framework for Great Schools and SCEP Development 

The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and 
external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase 
learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently 
ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational 
Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous 
improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis 
of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies 
that improve outcomes for students. 
 

Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase 
student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework 
for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members 
concrete ways to improve. 

 
 
2018-19 SCEP-FL                                                                                                                                                                                                           7 

 
In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in 
consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to 
participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a 
comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with 
the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all 
the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements 
work together to support student achievement. 

The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools  

Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards 
are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical 
thinking skills. 
Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, 
and challenged by their teachers and peers. 
Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. 
They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous 
improvement. 
Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, 
developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. 
Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by 
welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. 
Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school 
and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value 
each other. 

 
Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools 

In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in 
improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for 
School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets,  the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other 
quantitative and qualitative data tools. 
 
NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets 

To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the 
current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple 
instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent 
statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure 
how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district 
will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus 
Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and 
Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool.  
 
The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an 
effective school and school district across the following six tenets: 

  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity 
  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions 
  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support 
  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions 
  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and 
  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement 

 
 
2018-19 SCEP-FL                                                                                                                                                                                                           8 

 
 
NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) 

The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by 
coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality 
Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 
2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below:  
Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) 

I. 
II.  School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4)  
III.  Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and 
Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) 

 
School Quality Guide  

The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to 
set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to 
accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also 
available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s 
practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. 
For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. 
The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of 
similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set 
based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. 

 
Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 

a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; 
a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) 

Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, 
professional development, and parent and family engagement. 
 
To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in 
improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will 
serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the 
administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish: 
 
 
 
It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School 
Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the 
joint development of the SCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 
1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% 
budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent 
and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the SCEP. For additional guidance 
on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. 
 
Next Steps for SCEP Development 

School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  

  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the 

requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655. 

  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability 

status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year. 

 
 
2018-19 SCEP-FL                                                                                                                                                                                                           9 

 

  Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE 

Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) 
School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not 
undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most 
recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data. 

  Step 4: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed 
by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART 
– Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you 
monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school 
community know when you’ve reached your goal. 

  Step 5: Build consensus around activities, strategies and programs to address students’ needs in each action 
plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement. 

  Step 6: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I 

schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). 

  Step 7: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall 

cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action 
plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. 

 
Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful 
implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to 
accomplishing desired results. 

 
 
2018-19 SCEP-FL                                                                                                                                                                                                           10 

 

Section 4: SCEP Overview 

 

1.  What is your school’s mission statement? 

The mission statement of P.S. 246 is embedded in our school's culture. Each morning students from K - 5 recite the 
mission statement as part of the morning message. Our mission statement is as follows: "Our primary focus is to 
create a learning environment where children, in partnership with their parents, actively participate in their education 
so they can be challenged to their fullest potential. We envision methodologies that allow for individual differences 
and learning styles. Our ultimate goal is to make all children successful learners". 

 

2.  Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, 

including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented.  

PS 246, Poe Center is an elementary school located in the Kingsbridge Section of the Bronx, on the corner of the 
Grand Concourse and East Kingsbridge Road.  

The school serves students, from Kindergarten to Grade 5. In 2018-2019 the school population of 738 includes 53% 
males, and 47% females. The latest school Economic Needs Index (2017) was 87.5%. The attendance rate was 92%.  

Students and their families have culturally diverse backgrounds. The latest student ethnicity data shows 83% Hispanic, 
9% Black, 4% White, 3% Asian, and 1% Other.  

The school’s focus is on educating the whole child and providing a broad, appropriately challenging curriculum in a 
safe, supportive environment. The school leadership and community promotes a culture of high expectations and 
establishes partnerships between the school, families and the wider community. School leaders provide support for 
the staff, students and families to meet those expectations and provide ways for parents to understand their 
children’s progress. 

Students have many opportunities to participate in academic and creative activities both in school and out of school 
time. For example: art, music, technology, science, physical education, and math are taught as specialist areas within 
the school day. For the 2018-2019 school year we are adding a STEM and a Project Based Learning specialist to embed 
inquiry based thinking throughout the school day.  

Through After School, Saturday Academy and a Clubs program students can participate in many exciting and creative 
opportunities such a band, martial arts, video game creation, dance and art. For the 2018-2019 school year we will be 
adding fencing and animation creation to the list of enrichment opportunities for our students.  

School/Community Partnerships: 

The school has many partnerships with the community including -  

Good Shepard Services:  

Montefiore Hospital:  

Lehman College:  

Poe Park:  

Renaissance Youth Center:  

 
 
2018-19 SCEP-FL                                                                                                                                                                                                           11 

 

Vision Media and Education:  

Asphalt Green:  

The Brooklyn Conservatory: 

School Initiatives for 2018-2019: 

1. A focus on providing students with a variety of online learning experiences has been enhanced with a a large 
investment in iPads, laptops, and subscriptions to adaptive software for reading and math being introduced. Every 
classroom has also been updated to Promethean boards providing students with enriched learning experiences that 
makes differentiated learning much easier because teachers are able to accommodate different learning styles. Visual 
learners are able to observe the whiteboard, while tactile learners can learn by touching the board. The touchscreen 
option allows teachers to run programs with the tap of their finger. 

2. The creation of AIS intervention periods for second and third grade students from 1:45-2:30 pm will continue in the 
2018-2019 school year. Students in both grades will be grouped according to their reading levels and reading 
behaviors. Teachers will be assigned to teach reading level groupings of no more than two reading level bands (ex. 
Ms. Flannery will teach students who are an A/B in her classroom). Students will then be assigned to teachers on their 
grade according to their reading levels and receive intensive guided reading instruction. Groups will be fluid and will 
be reviewed every 6 weeks. 

3. Fifth grade clubs: Teachers in every classroom in the fifth grade will create clubs that includes dance, probability 
games, strategy games, chess and sign language. Students will be given autonomy to sign-up for the clubs of their 
choice. Clubs will meet every Friday afternoon from 1:45 to 2:30 pm. Clubs will be changed every two months.  

4. The creation of teacher driven committees around professional development, curriculum, hiring of staff members, 
health and wellness and parent engagement will continue in 2018-2019 to give teacher a voice in the instructional 
practices and social emotional development of the school community.  

 

3.  Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. 

English Language Learners 

English Language Learners (ELL) comprise 34% of the student body. Our English Language Learner’s represent over 9 
countries and 12 different languages. Spanish speakers make up the largest group of ELLs and come from Honduras, 
Mexico, Puerto Rico, and the Dominican Republic. There are growing numbers of Arabic, French (African), Bengali, 
and Vietnamese speakers joining the school community. The Arabic speakers are from Yeman and Sudan.  

With a variety of cultural differences, our ELL students exhibit challenges that are often unique to their individual 
backgrounds. 

Overall, the common areas that our ELLs struggle are reading, writing and math problem solving. In 2017 the average 
Proficiency Level for ELL students on the New York State Test for ELA was 2.17 and in Math 2.24. 

In 2017 38% of our ELLs made progress as per their NYSESLAT scores. This was a 27% increase, compared to 11% of 
them making progress in 2016. Following is a breakdown of Language Proficiency Levels for 2018: Entering - 6%, 
Emerging - 16%, Transitioning - 30%, Expanding - 36%, Commanding - 12%. 

 
 
2018-19 SCEP-FL                                                                                                                                                                                                           12 

 

We want our ELL students to be independent readers and math problem solvers through structured and purposeful 
activities. Our students need multiple opportunities in their classrooms to:  

  engage in structured, academic talk 
  experience early, explicit, and intensive instruction in phonological awareness and phonics to develop their 

decoding skills.  

  develop sophisticated vocabulary knowledge including strong academic language 
 

read challenging narrative and expository texts and improve their fluency and comprehension strategies 
through  

  experience increased exposure to print with a good reader-text match 
  participate in math problem solving where they learn to read, draw and write to solve word problems 

We use data to guide instruction for ELLs within a Response to Intervention (RtI) Framework that includes 3 Tiers of 
Instructional Support. 

The first tier involves the provision of rigorous curriculum and instruction in the general classroom. All ELL students 
are included in the Common Core Learning Standards aligned curriculum in all subject areas. Teachers are expected to 
provide appropriate scaffolds, supports, and appropriate data-driven differentiation to help all students (including 
ELLS) access the rigorous demands and expectations. Fountas & Pinnell Assessments & Diagnostic Assessments, State 
Tests (Summative), and NYSESLAT are used to drive instruction. 

The 2nd tier of intervention includes small group work, provided both by the classroom teacher, and additional 
support personnel assigned to the classes (including AIS teacher, SETTS teacher and ESL teacher). Guided Reading, in 
addition to the Reading Block, Fundations/Wilson and Small Group Instruction, and Reading Recovery are scheduled. 
More frequent assessments are administered to monitor students’ progress. 

The 3rd tier of intervention involves one-on-one instruction and tutoring. Conferring and individualized instruction 
occur both during the school day and after-school. This instruction is very intensive and targeted through the 
following programs; ENL teacher, Fundations/Wilson, and SETTS. 

Students with Disabilities 

In 2017 21% of our school were Students with Disabilities (SWD) and had Individualized Education Plans (IEP). They 
have a range of disabilities including  

Students with Disabilities receive special education services including Special Education Teacher Support Services 
(SETSS), Integrated Co-Teaching (ICT) classes, and instruction in self-contained classes. Services include speech and 
language, counseling, and adaptive physical education.  

Our Students with Disabilities require various entry points in the lesson in order to approximate or master the task at 
hand. Teachers of self-contained, ICT and general education classes weave the following explicit instructional 
practices into their lesson planning: 

1.  Setting the Stage for Learning 
2.  Clear explanation of what to do 
3.  Modeling the process  
4.  Guided Practice  
5. 
6.  Assessment/Closure (informal or formal) 
7.  Use of varied resources to address learning styles and multiple intelligences 

Independent Practice  

 
 
2018-19 SCEP-FL                                                                                                                                                                                                           13 

 

8.  Accountable talk strands 

Students in Temporary Housing (STH) 

Students in Temporary Housing comprise x% of the student population. Their specific needs include a need for stable 
schooling and social emotional support.  

 

4. 

Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over 
the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. 

The NYS Accountability Report (2017) shows the school remains a “Focus School” in 2018-2019 because we are not 
meeting AYP with our subgroups on the New York State tests. 

In the 2017 Quality Review Report, the school was rated Well Developed in Teacher Support and Supervision and High 
Expectations; Proficient in Curriculum, Assessment, and Teacher Teams; and Developing in Pedagogy. The Framework 
for Great Schools Report (2018), shows PS 246 is meeting the target for Strong Family-Community Ties. The school is 
approaching targets in Rigorous Instruction, Collaborative Teaching, Supportive Environment, Effective School 
Leadership, and Trust. 

School Strengths and Areas of Growth: 

Strong Family-Community Ties, High Expectations and Supportive Environment - The school leadership, and faculty 
have worked together to develop a culture of accountability for high expectations, and parent partnerships are in 
place to help support student progress toward these expectations. They are participating in an on-going focus to 
coordinate social emotional learning and incorporate a whole school approach to developing a positive, inclusive 
learning environment that supports student success. 

Activities to extend parent participation in the school are designed to advance educational, and social emotional 
goals. Open visitation of families into classrooms, and rubrics aligned to goals for moving students toward the next 
level are embedded into the school structure. Students self-assess to measure their progress and restate next-level 
goals. 

Regularly communicating high expectations to students and families has helped parents become more involved in 
student learning. It has also helped students take more initiative and have more responsibility over their own 
learning. 

Supportive Leadership - School Leaders are focused on promoting distributive leadership throughout the school. 
School Leaders and teachers work collaboratively on making curricular decisions to promote student progress, and 
impact the quality of instruction across classrooms. They are also collaborating in staff selection, and provision of 
Professional Learning Communities run by members of the Instructional Cabinet. 

Rigorous Instruction - Pedagogy, and teacher reflection on their practice has been elevated by the use of rubric-
aligned observations and feedback systems to support professional growth throughout the school. Staff work 
together to understand and use Danielson’s Framework for Teaching, and through consistent written and verbal 
communication from administrators know the instructional and professional expectations established by the school. 

A culture exists across the school where everyone is mutually accountable to improve student learning outcomes, and 
pedagogy. 

School Challenges: 

 
 
2018-19 SCEP-FL                                                                                                                                                                                                           14 

 

Area of Focus - The school continues to build the instructional capacity of teachers. Shared leadership structures have 
strengthened capacity and work continues in this area. Staff are working to align pedagogy to curricula and 
incorporate the use of scaffolding, effective questioning, and multiple entry points, to develop student work products 
and deepen discussions that reflect high levels of thinking and participation. 

Academic Performance vs Progress - Achievement is a point-in-time measure that evaluates how well students 
perform against a standard. In contrast progress is measured by how much "growth" students make over time, 
typically from one year to the next. Both these measures are important, but they provide different information. 

Buildings - Previously, a residence for the blind, the building presents challenges as it was converted into a school 
building housing irregular sized rooms that are not conducive to occupation as mandated by the DOE. Many 
classrooms are restricted in the way they can be organized for teaching and learning. For example, due to size 
limitations, we house 18 students in a kindergarten room which should have 25 students. There is no gymnasium or 
auditorium in our building. 

 

 

 

 

 
 
2018-19 SCEP-FL                                                                                                                                                                                                           15 

 

School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 10X246 

School Configuration (2018-19) 

Grade Configuration 

0K,01,02,03,04,05,0
6 

Total Enrollment (2017-
18) 
English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 

736 

SIG Recipient (Y/N) 

Transitional Bilingual 

YES 

Dual Language 

N/A 

Self-Contained English as a Second 
Language 

Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) 

# Special Classes (ELA) 
# Special Classes (Math) 

# Visual Arts 
# Foreign Language 

% Title I Population 
% Free Lunch 
% Limited English Proficient 

22 
22 

38 
 

% American Indian or Alaska Native 
% Hispanic or Latino 
% White 

# SETSS (ELA) 
# SETSS (Math) 
Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) 
# Music 
# Drama 
# CTE 
# Dance 

70 
64 

 
 

# Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) 
# Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) 

School Composition (2017-18) 

94.0%  % Attendance Rate 
92.4%  % Reduced Lunch 
37.5%  % Students with Disabilities 

Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) 

% Black or African American 

0.4% 
83.2%  % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 
4.2% 

% Multi-Racial 

Personnel (2015-16) 

Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) 
% of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate 
% Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 

1.1 
0% 
18% 

# of Assistant Principals (2016-17) 
% Teaching Out of Certification 
Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) 

Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) 

ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 

18.3%  Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 

Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 

69% 

Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-
17) 

Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) 

ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 
Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 
4 Year Graduation Rate 

Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 

N/A 
N/A 
N/A 

N/A 

Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 
US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 
6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) 
% ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures 
(2015-16) 

Reward 
In Good Standing 
Focus District 

Priority School 

Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) 

No 
No 
Yes 

Recognition 
Local Assistance Plan 
Focus School Identified by a Focus District 

No 

Focus Subgroups 

Hispanic, ED 

Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) 

Elementary/Middle School 

Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) 

American Indian or Alaska Native 
Hispanic or Latino 
White 
Students with Disabilities 
Economically Disadvantaged 

American Indian or Alaska Native 
Hispanic or Latino 
White 
Students with Disabilities 
Economically Disadvantaged 

American Indian or Alaska Native 
Hispanic or Latino 
White 
Students with Disabilities 
Economically Disadvantaged 

American Indian or Alaska Native 
Hispanic or Latino 
White 
Students with Disabilities 
Economically Disadvantaged 

American Indian or Alaska Native 
Hispanic or Latino 
White 
Students with Disabilities 
Economically Disadvantaged 

American Indian or Alaska Native 
Hispanic or Latino 
White 
Students with Disabilities 

N/A 
NO 
N/A 
NO 
NO 

Black or African American 
Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander 
Multi-Racial 
Limited English Proficient 
ALL STUDENTS 

Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) 
Black or African American 
Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander 
Multi-Racial 
Limited English Proficient 
ALL STUDENTS 

N/A 
NO 
N/A 
NO 
NO 

Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) 

N/A 
NO 
N/A 
N/A 
NO 
High School 

Black or African American 
Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander 
Multi-Racial 
Limited English Proficient 
ALL STUDENTS 

Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) 

N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 

Black or African American 
Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander 
Multi-Racial 
Limited English Proficient 
ALL STUDENTS 

Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) 
Black or African American 
Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander 
Multi-Racial 
Limited English Proficient 
ALL STUDENTS 

N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 

Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) 
Black or African American 
Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander 
Multi-Racial 
Limited English Proficient 

N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 

No 

N/A 

73 
75 

 
 

91.7% 
1.4% 
21.7% 

8.3% 
3.4% 
1.0% 

4 
2% 
10.4 

18.4% 

N/A 

N/A 
N/A 
N/A 

N/A 

N/A 
No 
Yes 

YES 
N/A 
N/A 
NO 
NO 

NO 
N/A 
N/A 
NO 
NO 

N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
YES 
NO 

N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 

N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 

N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 

 
 
2018-19 SCEP-FL                                                                                                                                                                                                           16 

 

 
 

Economically Disadvantaged 

N/A 

ALL STUDENTS 

N/A 

 

 
 
2018-19 SCEP-FL                                                                                                                                                                                                           17 

 

Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  

 

Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, 
and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious 
intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) 
 
Part 1 – Needs Assessment   

Part 1a.  Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice 
Tenet 3 Statement of Practice 
Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one.  Place an “X” in the 
appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 
3.2 

The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of 
rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning 
Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. 
Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction 
(DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and 
address student achievement needs. 
The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner 
within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the 
arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. 
Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative 
assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student 
reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 

3.3 

3.4 

3.5 

SOP(s) 

Addressed 

X 

X 

X 

 

 

 

 

Part 1b.  Needs/Areas of Focus: 
Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the 
most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources 
should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, 
NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School 
Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 
 

1.  What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element?  Indicate the data trends, source and 

year. 

2.  What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? 

Indicate the data trends, source and year. 

Needs Assessment - Rigorous Instruction 

Data Sources: Quality Review Report (2017), NYSED Assessment Data (2018), School Quality Guide (2016-2017) 

1. Quality Review Report 2017: Indicator 1.1 -Proficient 

The Quality Reviewer (2017) noted: The school has a coherent curricula alignment to the common core, standards for 
practice, instructional shifts, assessments, and learning plans and activities have resulted in a well-structured 
instructional framework so that all learners can demonstrate their thinking.  

Quality Review Report 2017: Indicator 1.2 -Developing (Area of Focus) 

The Quality Reviewer (2017) noted: Pedagogy is aligned to the curricula and reflects a coherent set of beliefs about 
student learning. Teaching strategies are beginning to provide multiple entry points into the curricula. Impact: The 

 
 
2018-19 SCEP-FL                                                                                                                                                                                                           18 

 

alignment of pedagogy to curricula and the use of scaffolding and effective questioning strategies, along with scaffolding 
and multiple entry points, enable some but not all learners to be engaged in appropriately challenging tasks.  

Quality Review Report 2017: Indicator 2.2 -Proficient 

The Quality Reviewer (2017) noted: Across classrooms teachers use or create assessment, rubrics, and grading policies 
that are aligned with the school’s curricula. The school uses common assessments to determine students’ progress 
toward goals and to check for understanding. Impact: Assessment practices provide students and teachers with 
actionable feedback regarding progress and achievement.  

2. Grade 3-5 NYSED Assessment Data (data.nysed.gov) 

Grade 3-5 ELA Test Results (2018) 

The NYSED notes test results should not be compared from 2017 to 2018 due to changes to the test. 

At PS 246 the average number of students achieving proficiency (Levels 3 and 4) in ELA was 18% in 2018, compared to 
33% of students in District 10, and 45% across the state.  

The subgroups showed the following changes in their ELA performance at Levels 3 and 4 from 2017 to 2018: 

  Girls changed from 18% to 23% (+5%). 
  Boys remained the same with 15% performing at Levels 3 & 4. 
  African American/Black students results changed from 25% to 19% (-6%). 
  Hispanic/Latino students changed from 13% to 19% (+6%). 
  General Ed students changed from 20% to 22% (+2%).  
 
  Non-English Language Learners changed from 20% to 25% (+5%). 
  English Language Learners maintained 5% for both years (+0%). 
  Economically disadvantaged students changed from 15% to 19% (+4%) 

Students with Disabilities changed from 1% to 5% (+4%).  

Grade 3-5 Math Test Results (2018) 

At PS 246 the average number of students achieving proficiency (Levels 3 and 4) in Math was 18% in 2018, compared to 
27% of students in District 10, and 45% across the state.  

The subgroups showed change in their Math performance: 

  The subgroups showed the following changes in their Math performance at Levels 3 and 4 from 2017 to 2018: 
  Girls changed from 15% to 18% (+3%). 
  Boys changed from 21% to 18% performing at Levels 3 & 4 (-3%). 
  African American/Black students results changed from 19% to 24% (+5%). 
  Hispanic/Latino students changed from 17% to 18% (+1%). 
  General Ed students remained on 22% (+0%).  
 
  Non-English Language Learners changed from 24% to 25% (+1%). 
  English Language Learners changed from 6% to 7% (+1%). maintained 5% for both years (+0%). 
  Economically disadvantaged students remained at 19% for both years (+0%) 

Students with Disabilities changed from 5% to 7% (+2%).  

3. School Quality Guide (2017, 2018 data) 

 
 
2018-19 SCEP-FL                                                                                                                                                                                                           19 

 

Student Attendance- 

  Approaching target range.  
  Attendance for 2017-2018 was 92% - 73% of students attend school 90%+ of the time 

Student Lateness and Chronic Absence- 

 

Is closely monitored to target those frequently late (3 out of 5 days a week) because of the impact on learning. 
27% of students were chronically absent in 2017-2018. 

Student Achievement Rating-  

ELA and Math- Approaching target range. 

The priority needs addressed by the goal and action plan in Section 5a: Rigorous Instruction will focus on: 

  Through the introduction of Reciprocal Teaching in ELA and Math students, including ELLs and Students with 

 

Disabilities, will be supported by broadening the variety of scaffolds, strategies, and multiple entry points into 
tasks and lessons. 
Increased use of online software programs that use a variety of approaches and entry points to engage students 
in improving their reading comprehension in ELA and their understanding of concepts, procedures and problem 
solving in Math. 

 

 
Part 2 – Annual Goal 

Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this 
element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified 
priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-
bound.  
By June 2019, there will be a 5% increase in the number of Grade 3 - 5 students who perform at Levels 3 and 4 on the 
2019 NYS ELA Test, and a 3% increase in the number of students who perform at Levels 3 and 4 on the 2019 NYS Math 
Test compared to the 2018 NYS ELA and Math Tests.  

 

 
 
2018-19 SCEP-FL                                                                                                                                                                                                           20 

 
Part 3a – Action Plan 

Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies 
your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for 
this Framework for Great Schools element, including: 

Target Group(s) 
Who will be 
targeted? 

Timeline 
What is the 
start and 
end date? 

Key Personnel 
Who is responsible 
for implementing 
and overseeing the 
activity/strategy? 
(include school, 
educational 
consultants and/or 
CBO staff) 

Grades K-5 

Sept 2018-
May 2019 

K-2 Literacy Coach 

  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional 

 

development, and/or systems and structures needed to 
impact change. 
Strategies to address the needs of students with 
disabilities, English language learners, and other high-
need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, 
SIFE, STH). 

The school will introduce new online diagnostic tests and 
systems for monitoring student progress, and looking at student 
data. 

Throughout the year teachers will collaborate to set and assess 
strategic goals, track student progress, and make adjustments to 
curriculum plans as needed from the data analysis. 

Students will have opportunities to work towards their goals, 
track their progress and develop independence and ownership of 
their own learning. 

Professional Learning Communities (PLCs) will run across the 
year to introduce all teachers to a variety of new, and engaging, 
classroom practices that will impact student learning in ELA and 
Math. 

The school will continue to use online reading and math 
resources for the 2018-2019 school year. The school leadership 
and teachers have targeted the use of technology to provide 
engaging, aligned online resources to enhance literacy and math 
learning and teaching. Each program has been selected because 
they are adaptive, able to be adjusted to suit the school's needs, 
and are aligned to the common core standards. 

Teachers have found the students are engaged in the content, 
and are provided with suitable scaffolds and entry points. They 
enjoy the variety of the programs. 

1. PLCs - Cycles of Learning 

The same 6 PLCs will run in 6 week cycles across the school year 
to allow all teachers and paraprofessionals to attend each one in 
the course of the year. Teacher leaders and assistant principals 
will be responsible for running one of the PLC Cycles of Learning.  

Support teachers 

Paraprofessionals 

 

K-5 classroom 
teachers 

K-2 Universal 
Reading Coach 

3-5 Literacy Coach 

K-2 Math Coach 

3-5 Math Coach 

Assistant Principal K-
2 

Assistant Principal 3-
5 

Generation Ready 
Literacy Consultant 

Generation Ready 
Math Consultant 

Instructional Cabinet 
members 

Generation Ready 
Literacy Consultant 

 
 
2018-19 SCEP-FL                                                                                                                                                                                                           21 

 

The topics covered are Explicit Instruction, Advanced Literacy, 
Reciprocal Teaching, Visual Thinking Strategies, Feedback 
(Conference Binders), and Growth Mindsets. 

2. iReady Reading and Math Diagnostics-  

The online programs deliver student instruction, performance 
diagnostics and progress reports based on the K-12 Common 
Core State Standards (CCSS) in English Language Arts (Reading) 
and Math. 

Students begin the program in October by taking the adaptive i-
Ready Reading and Math diagnostics over 90 minutes (2 x 45 
mins). The assessments vary in difficulty based on the student’s 
previous answers. 

The diagnostic assigns each student a profile group based on 
their diagnostic grade level, which is useful for small group 
activities and delivering differentiated instruction. 

Following the diagnostic, students work on customized online 
instruction that includes an interactive lesson, example problems 
and practice problems. 

Reading and Math sub-skills cover the Common Core Standards. 
The school is able to adjust iReady to follow the EngageNY ‘A 
Story of Units’ modules and the Teachers College Reading units 
for each grade level. 

During the year teachers will use the reports on each student’s 
diagnostic performance, including their overall grade-level and 
sub-skills, to monitor growth. Teachers can also download 
lessons to complement online instruction. 

Students have access to iReady at home, and parents can log on 
to view student progress and scores on lessons.  

The diagnostic will be re-administered in January and again in 
May as a progress monitoring tool. The reports include the Lexile 
levels in Reading and Quantile levels in Math, number of 
students on target for grade-level, as well as the number of at-
risk students by school, grade or class. The school specific reports 
include the number of students on target for grade-level as well 
as the number of at-risk students by school, grade or class. 

Classroom teachers will access reports in real-time and use them 
to support students. The Literacy and Math coaches, and 
members of the Instructional Cabinet, will use reports to monitor 
progress and determine trends and ways to address them across 
the year. 

Grade 2-5 
teachers 

Oct 2018- 
May 2019 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

K-2 Literacy Coach 

3-5 Literacy Coach 

K-2 Math Coach 

3-5 Math Coach 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
2018-19 SCEP-FL                                                                                                                                                                                                           22 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Grade K-2 

AIS teachers 

Sept 2018- 
June 2019 

K-2 Universal 
Reading Coach 

 

3. ELA Online Programs 

a) HeadSprout is an online reading program for Grades K-2 where 
students complete interactive online episodes that continually 
teach critical foundational reading skills and comprehension 
strategies.  

The program was introduced to Grades K and 1 in 2017-2018 and 
will continue to be used as a resource to push students reading 
levels in 2018-2019. This year it will also be used by Grade 2 
students during AIS every Tuesday and Thursday for 50 minutes. 

The program's instruction adapts to each student's specific needs 
and learning pace. It teaches early readers phonemic awareness, 
phonics, fluency, and critical thinking. 

Data reports generated from the software will be used by 
coaches, and classroom teachers to form Guided Reading groups. 

b) Raz-Kids is an online reading program utilized by our K-2 
classes for the last two years and has been purchased again for 
the 2018-2019 school year. 

Grade K-5 
Classroom 
teachers 

Sept 2018- 
June 2019 

K-2 Literacy Coach 

3-5 Literacy Coach 

Our kindergarten through fifth grade population will have access 
for enjoyment, and as a resource to grow readers. 

It is being utilized independently and in small groups in the ELA 
block for 15 minutes 3 times a week, at home. 

 
 
2018-19 SCEP-FL                                                                                                                                                                                                           23 

 

It will also be used by each student for 20 minutes during the 24 
week Saturday Academy.  

Kindergarten, Grade 1 and 2 students use it to read for 
enjoyment at home or on the go.  

Grade 3 students use the program during small group work, 
Academic Intervention Services, Saturday Academy, home 
assignments, and as leisure reading. 

Grade 4 and 5 students are using Raz-Kids for independent 
reading, small group (station work), during Saturday Academy, 
and at home or on the go. 

Digital management and reporting tools allow teachers to easily 
track individual and class-wide reading progress. Teachers will 
also create assignments for their students based on their 
individual needs, and monitor their progress.  

c) Imagine Language & Literacy- A small number of licences were 
purchased in 2017-2018 and used very successfully with Grade 3 
Bilingual students.  

There was marked growth in student reading levels in Grade 3, 
so we purchased the license for Grades 2-5 Bilingual classes for 
2018-2019.  

The program will also be used in the ELL Academy so students 
get more access time.  

It will be used four days a week for 40 minutes to support the 
large percentage of students entering from overseas with little to 
no English, or who have attended school but come to Grade 3 
with poor English language skills. 

Each child receives explicit, targeted instruction with an 
individualized learning path that continually adjusts to their 
needs. They are taught critical language and literacy concepts 
such as reading and listening comprehension, basic vocabulary, 
academic language, grammar, phonological awareness, phonics, 
and fluency. 

Reports will regularly be monitored to assess student growth and 
the program's effectiveness. 

Grades 3-5 
Bilingual teachers 

Oct 2018- 
June 2019 

ELL Coordinator 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

ELL academy 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
2018-19 SCEP-FL                                                                                                                                                                                                           24 

 

 

 

d) The Reading Achievement Program (RAP) developed by our 
Universal Reading Coach will be used by Kindergarten, and Grade 
1, in their classrooms this year. 

Grade K-1 
teachers 

Jan 2018- 
May 2019 

K-2 Universal 
Reading Coach 

Students will be supported by eight teachers and will use the 
program daily for 30 minutes. Student growth will be reviewed in 
6 week cycles.  

The focus will be on using the reading behaviours captured by 
the program to coach students based on what they are actually 
doing as they read. 

4. Math Online Programs 

 

 

 

a) Reflex Math focuses on developing math fact fluency. The 
software provides resources that have engaging formats, Spanish 
support, suitable scaffolds and entry points for a variety of 
student abilities. 

Classroom, and SETTS teachers will allocate 15-20 minutes per 
student at least 2 times a week to the program. 

Students will also be able to access the program at home. 

The Reflex system consistently rewards students for their effort 
and progress toward automaticity; is based on a fact family 
approach and builds on and reinforces important mathematical 
concepts. Research shows students who understand conceptual 
connections between facts, progress to automaticity much 
faster. 

Reflex fluency development games require students to engage in 
increasingly complex and fast-paced decision making. 

Grade 1-5 
teachers, 

Oct 2018- 
June 2019 

K-2 Math Coach 

3-5 Math Coach 

SETTS teachers 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

b) Zearn is an online program supporting the school's use of 
EngageNY 'A Story of Units'. 

Grade K-5  

Classroom 
teachers 

Sept 2018-
June 2019 

K-2 Math Coach 

3-5 Math Coach 

 
 
2018-19 SCEP-FL                                                                                                                                                                                                           25 

 

It provides independent digital lessons, materials for teacher-led 
instruction, reports, and assessments. 

Math Specialist 

It is being used by classroom teachers to reinforce and build on 
the lessons they are providing in the classroom. 

  
 
3b – Parent and Family Engagement 

How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York 
State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible 
for implementation and oversight. 

  Engage families in monthly classroom, and workshop activities to develop their understanding of ways to 

support reading comprehension at home by encouraging their children to log in to, and use, the online 
reading programs. 

  Parents will also have access to regular math workshops to introduce the software and teach about the 

 

strategies being used in the programs and the classrooms. 
Invite families via the Parent Coordinator to meet with Teacher Teams on Tuesdays to participate in 
classroom activities with their children that develop reading comprehension and math strategies. 

 

 
Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 

Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including 
human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 

  Tax Levy, Title 1 funds will be used to pay teachers per session for after school/Saturday PD. To support 

students with additional instruction. 

  21st Century funds will be used to fund the online software programs being used in 2018-2019. 

 
Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 

X 

Tax Levy 

 

Title I 
1003(a) 

 

 

Title I 
SWP 

Title III 

 

 

Title I TA 

PTA 

Funded 

 

 

P/F Set-
aside 

SIG  
Grant 

X 

 

21st Century 

School 

Achievement 

Funding 

 

 

C4E 

Other 

 
Part 5 – Progress Monitoring  

Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement 
planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 

  On the January, 2019 iReady diagnostic reading and math diagnostic, 65% of Grade 3-5 students will show 

progress when compared to their results on the October, 2018 iReady reading and math diagnostics.  

 
Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 

 
 

iReady reading diagnostic assessment 
iReady math diagnostic assessment 

 

Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action 
plan, if applicable. 

 

 
 
2018-19 SCEP-FL                                                                                                                                                                                                           26 

 

Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans 

 
Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and 
school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 
5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) 

Part 1 – Needs Assessment   

Part 1a.  Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice 
Tenet 5 Statement of Practice 
Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one.  Place an “X” in the 
appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 
5.2  The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and 

sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 

5.3  The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional 

developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning 
experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students.  

5.4  All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance 

of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and 
fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health 
supports tied to the school’s vision. 

5.5  The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures 

to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health 
needs.  

X 

X 

X 

X 

SOP(s) 

Addressed 

 

 

 

 

Part 1b.  Needs/Areas of Focus: 
Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the 
most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources 
should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, 
NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School 
Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 
 

1.  What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element?  Indicate the data trends, source and 

year. 

2.  What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? 

Indicate the data trends, source and year. 

3.  What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? 

Needs Assessment  

School Quality Report 2018: School Conditions and Practices  

  58% of teachers responded that a lot or all the adults at their school have access to school based supports to 

assist in behavioral/emotional escalations compared to 78% in District 10. 

  60% of teachers say that adults at their school recognize disruptive behavior as social-emotional learning 

opportunities compared to 80% in District 10. 

  67% of teachers say that adults at their school teach students the skills they need to regulate their behavior (by 

focusing their attention, controlling their emotions, or managing their thinking, behavior, and feelings) 
compared to 82% in District 10. 

Suspension/Incidents (OORS) 

 
 
2018-19 SCEP-FL                                                                                                                                                                                                           27 

 

 

Attendance Data (ATS RYMA report) 

 

The priority needs addressed by the goal and action plan in Section 5b: Supportive Environment will focus on: 

  All school stakeholders will continue to receive PBIS professional development, and work together to naturally 

foster social-emotional skills in students through modeling the type of behaviors we want, and monitoring 
student's interpersonal, and student-centered instructional interactions throughout the school day. 
School leaders will continue to establish systems that staff will use to regularly monitor data sources to respond 
to specific student social-emotional needs. 
Students will be provided with programs that develop their 21st Century skills of problem solving and 
collaboration as well as experiences that develop their resilience and social emotional learning. 

 

 

 

 
Part 2 – Annual Goal 

Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this 
element of the Framework for Great Schools –Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified 
priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-
bound.  
By April 2019, the percentage of positive responses by teachers on the School Conditions and Practices Survey to the 
questions about Supportive Environment- Social Emotional measures will increase by 15% when compared to the 
responses to the same questions on the 2018 survey. 

 

 
 
2018-19 SCEP-FL                                                                                                                                                                                                           28 

 
Part 3a – Action Plan 

Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies 
your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for 
this Framework for Great Schools element, including: 

Target Group(s) 
Who will be 
targeted? 

  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional 
development, and/or systems and structures needed 
to impact change. 
Strategies to address the needs of students with 
disabilities, English language learners, and other high-
need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, 
SIFE, STH). 

 

1. Growth Mind Sets PLC-  

2. Second Step PBIS Curriculum- An on-going focus for all school 
stakeholders is to develop a common understanding of the 
importance of positive contributions in creating a school 
community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fosters a 
sense of ownership for students.  

Timeline 
What is the 
start and 
end date? 

Key Personnel 
Who is responsible 
for implementing 
and overseeing the 
activity/strategy? 
(include school, 
educational 
consultants and/or 
CBO staff) 

K-5 classroom 
teachers, 

Oct 2018- 
May 2019 

K-2 Assistant 
Principal 

Support teachers 

K-2 Math Coach 

Paraprofessionals 

K-5 classroom 
teachers, 

Mar 2018- 
Mar 2019 

Grade Leaders 

Support teachers 

Paraprofessionals 

Guidance Team 

 

Actions have been chosen to engage students in taking 
responsibility for their own learning, and develop their resilience 
and emotional intelligence. 

 

From March 2018 we have worked with the Behavior Specialist 
Administrator of the Regional Special Education Technical 
Assistance Support Center to train grade leaders, guidance team 
and administration on how to implement PBIS as a whole school 
initiative.  

PBIS not only improves achievement by an average of 11%, but it 
also increases pro-social behaviors (such as kindness, sharing, 
and empathy), improves student attitudes toward school, and 
reduces depression and stress among students. 

As a school we can naturally foster skills in students by modeling 
the type of behaviors we want, and monitoring student's 
interpersonal, and student-centered instructional interactions 
throughout the school day.  

The team has put behavioral resources and instructional 
supports (the Second Step PBIS curriculum) in place to promote 
use of teacher practices that provide students with emotional 
support, and create opportunities for students' voice, autonomy, 

 
 
2018-19 SCEP-FL                                                                                                                                                                                                           29 

 

and experiences that promote student engagement in the 
educational process.  

Research shows that students are supported when our 
interactions with them result in positive student-teacher 
relationships, enable teachers to model social-emotional 
competencies for students, and promote student engagement. 
In 2018-2019 all classroom teachers will teach Social Emotional 
Learning lessons from the Second Step Curriculum every Friday 
from 1:45-2:30 pm.  

3. PBIS School Aides and Asphalt Green's Recess Enhancement 
Program (REP) will continue in 2018-2019 through the on-going 
training of paraprofessionals and school aides who supervise 
lunch periods in the school. 

REP focuses on increasing physical activity rates for children 
through organized and safe recess in school. 

Students will be engaged during recess with a bank of more than 
150 games and activities that are appropriate for different ages 
and spaces inside and in the school yard. 

PS 246 staff will learn from an Asphalt Green Play Coach about 
how to tailor games to any student, space or situation so no one 
is left out. 

The Play Coach will be at the school to support staff 2-4 days per 
week for 35 weeks in 2018-2019. 

Paraprofessionals, 
School Aides 

Sept 2018 - 
June 2019 

Asphalt Green Play 
Coach 

4. Computer Science for All (CS4A) and Software Engineering 
Project Junior (SEPJr) participation. 

Selected teachers 

Sept 2018 - 
June 2019 

STEM Coordinator 

 

 

SEPJr is a computer science program that balances rigorous and 
meaningful direct instruction with open-ended creative 
computing. In 2018-2019 we are adding a STEM cluster teacher 
who will introduce this program to students in Grade 1-5. Two 
periods a week (a total of 90 minutes) will be spent on the 
program's activities.  

Students will increase their use of terminology, and problem 
solving related to programming. We hope they will improve 
their critical thinking, build perseverance and resilience, and 
apply this to other subject areas. 

Students will be involved in using the 21st Century skills of 
collaboration and problem solving. They will develop interest, 
and confidence in computer science.  

The year will culminate with a Computer Science 4 All Big Day. 
Students will share the joy and experience of learning about 
Computer Science with other students, parents and families. 

 
 
2018-19 SCEP-FL                                                                                                                                                                                                           30 

 

5. Provide a variety of engaging Enrichment Programs through 
the 23 week Grades 3-5 Saturday Academy to build  

Grade 3-5 
students 

Oct, 2018- 
Mar 2019 

Renaissance Youth 
Center 

  Programs include Band, Martial Arts , Fencing, 

Animation and Video Game Creation in addition to 
Reading and Math centers.  

  The CBOs Renaissance Youth Center, and Vision Media 
will present their programs to students in Grades 3-5, 
and at a PTA meeting to explain what students will 
experience if they attend. 

  
 
3b – Parent and Family Engagement 

Vision Media 

How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to 
support  the  whole  child?  Include  the  timeline  and  identify  key  personnel  and  stakeholders  responsible  for 
implementation and oversight. 

  Grade Leaders and the Guidance Team engage families in monthly classroom, and workshop activities to 

 

develop their understanding of the social-emotional strategies being introduced by staff across the school and 
the behaviors being encouraged. 
Invite families via the Parent Coordinator to meet with Teacher Teams on Tuesdays to participate in 
classroom activities with their children that show the interpersonal, and student-centered instructional 
interactions being encouraged. 

 

 
Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 

Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including 
human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 

  Tax Levy, Title 1 funds will be used to pay teachers per session for after school/Saturday PD. To support 

students with additional instruction. 
SEPJr s funded through grant from the NYCDOE 
Saturday Enrichment Program is funded through the Community School Initiative.  

 
 

 
Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 

X 

Tax Levy 

 

Title I 
1003(a) 

X 

X 

Title I 
SWP 

Title III 

 

 

Title I TA 

PTA 

Funded 

 

 

P/F Set-
aside 

SIG 
Grant 

 

 

21st Century 

 

C4E 

School 

Achievement 

X 

Other 

Funding 

 
Part 5 – Progress Monitoring  

Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement 
planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 
By December 2019, at least 70% of teachers will respond positively to the three focus questions asked in a school 
based survey, and related to the School Conditions and Practices Survey on Supportive Environment- Social Emotional 
measures that will be administered by the NYCDOE in March-April 2019.  

 
Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 

 
 
2018-19 SCEP-FL                                                                                                                                                                                                           31 

 

 

  A school based survey in December will use three questions from the School Conditions and Practices Survey 

on Supportive Environment- Social Emotional to measure progress toward the goal. 

Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action 
plan, if applicable. 

 
 
2018-19 SCEP-FL                                                                                                                                                                                                           32 

 

Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans 

Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success 
and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional 
development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices 
and Decisions) 
 
Part 1 – Needs Assessment   

SOP(s) 

Addressed 

 

 

 

Part 1a.  Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice 
Tenet 4 Statement of Practice 
Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one.  Place an “X” in the 
appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 
4.2  School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized 

around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 

4.3  Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards 

X 

(CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 

4.4  Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning 

environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths 
and needs of all students. 

4.5  Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by 

X 

using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, 
and progress monitoring). 
Part 1b.  Needs/Areas of Focus: 
Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the 
most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources 
should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, 
NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School 
Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 
 

 

1.  What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element?  Indicate the data trends, source and 

year. 

2.  What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? 

Indicate the data trends, source and year. 

Needs Assessment 

Quality Review Report 2017: Indicator 4.2 -Proficient  

Engage in structured professional collaborations on teams using an inquiry approach that promotes shared leadership 
and focuses on improved student learning  

The reviewer noted: 

  The majority of teachers at the Poe Center participate in inquiry-based professional collaborations and analyze 

 

student work to identify standards-based next steps for the classroom. 
Inquiry-based professional collaborations and analysis of student work to identify next steps have supported 
student achievement by promoting the implementation of common core aligned lessons and activities, 
strengthening teacher practice and building teacher leadership opportunities. 

  Across classrooms, there is inconsistency in providing multiple entry points into the curricula. 
 

Student work products and discussions reveal uneven demonstration of higher order thinking skills and uneven 
levels of participation. 

 
 
2018-19 SCEP-FL                                                                                                                                                                                                           33 

 

  Danielson feedback should be more impactful on teacher practice. 

School Quality Report 2016-17: School Conditions and Practices Survey  

  The overall rating for Collaborative Practice for 2016-2017 is not available at this stage. However under the the 

school Survey Measures for Collaborative Practice Professional Development received a 62% positive rating. 
69% of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that overall, their professional development experiences this year 
have included enough time to think carefully about, try, and evaluate new ideas. 29% of teachers agreed or 
strongly agreed that overall, their professional development experiences this year have included opportunities 
to work productively with teachers from other schools. 

Grade 3-5 ELA Test Results (2018 data.nysed.org) 

The NYSED notes test results should not be compared from 2017 to 2018 due to changes to the test. 

At PS 246 the average number of students achieving proficiency (Levels 3 and 4) in ELA was 18% in 2018, compared to 
33% of students in District 10, and 45% across the state. The school is approaching it's target in ELA. 

 

 
Part 2 – Annual Goal  

Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this 
element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified 
priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-
bound. 
By June 2019 there will be a 10% improvement on the Measures Of Teacher Practice on Danielson's Domain 3c 
Engagement, compared to the 54% of teachers who received a rating of effective in 2018. 

 

 

 
 
2018-19 SCEP-FL                                                                                                                                                                                                           34 

 
Part 3a – Action Plan 

Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies 
your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this 
Framework for Great Schools element, including: 

Target 
Group(s) 
Who will be 
targeted? 

Timeline 
What is the 
start and 
end date? 

  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional 

 

development, and/or systems and structures needed to 
impact change. 
Strategies to address the needs of students with 
disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need 
student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, 
STH). 

Key Personnel 
Who is responsible 
for implementing 
and overseeing the 
activity/strategy? 
(include school, 
educational 
consultants and/or 
CBO staff) 

PLCs Visual Thinking Strategies and Conferencing and Feedback 

 

Instructional 
Staff 

2x 
Workshops 
Nov 6, 2018  

Lead Teacher for 
Project- 3-5 Literacy 
Coach 

June 6, 2019 

 

 

Teacher Team (10 
members) 

 

6 week PLC-  
Visual 
Thinking 
Strategies  
Oct 2018-
Dec 2018 

All teachers will participate in 2 PLCs- Visual Thinking Strategies, and 
Conferencing and Feedback by June 2019, resulting in at least MOTP 
student engagement By scheduling two PLCs one for and 
Conferencing and Feedback that all teachers will participate in from 
October to May  

 

Continue a 2 year initiative with The National Writing Project – 
Assignment Matters 2.0 funded through the National Writing 
Project. 

The aim is to build and support teacher networks in sharing 
Common Core-aligned tools and practices. The grant provides an 
opportunity for our teachers to use Literacy Design Collaborative 
(LDC) tools. It supports our teachers in making, using, and sharing 
high quality writing assignments. The process is cross curricular, 
applying equally to all content areas and all grade levels. 

The assignments produced are student-centered, deep, rich, 
significant, and specifically tailored to carefully identified cognitive 
tasks.  

The core principles of the program are:  

  Teachers at every level, from kindergarten through college, 
are the agents of reform; universities and schools are ideal 
partners for investing in that reform through professional 
development.  

  Writing can and should be taught, not just assigned, at every 

grade level. Professional development programs should 
provide opportunities for teachers to work together to 

 
 
2018-19 SCEP-FL                                                                                                                                                                                                           35 

 

understand the full spectrum of writing development across 
grades and across subject area. 

  Knowledge about the teaching of writing comes from many 

 

sources: theory and research, the analysis of practice, and 
the experience of writing. 
For the school year 2018 – 2019 our teacher team of ten 
members, led by the 3-5 Literacy coach, will attend 2 full 
day sessions NWP workshops on November 6th & June 6th 
and conduct a 6 week PLC from Oct 2018-Dec 2018 

  
 
3b – Parent and Family Engagement 

How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies 
to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and 
identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 

  Engage families in monthly classroom, and workshop activities to develop their understanding of the writing 

 

strategies being introduced by staff involved in the National Writing Project. 
Invite families via the Parent Coordinator to meet with Teacher Teams on Tuesdays to participate in activities 
with their children that show the writing behaviors being encouraged. 

 

 
Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 

Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including 
human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 
The National Writing Project is funded through Grant from Lehman College and scheduled during Chancellor's 
calendar day and Monday Professional development sessions.  

 
Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 

X 

Tax Levy 

 

Title I 
SWP 

 

Title I 
1003(a) 

X 

Title III 

 

 

Title I TA 

PTA 

Funded 

 

 

P/F Set-
aside 

SIG 
Grant 

 

 

21st Century 

School 

Achievement 

Funding 

 

 

C4E 

Other 

 
Part 5 – Progress Monitoring  

Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement 
planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 
Progress will be measured across content, and sub-groups as follows: 

  ESL- students will be able to label objects and important events thus providing students with an opportunity 

to learn new vocabulary which is then used again in the writing 
Social Studies - Students can map historical events and times. 
 
Literature - Students can map a character’s journey or an important time in a character’s life.  
 
Science - Students can prepare a map of a habitat, an environmental issue, or a food chain. 
 
  Math - Students can create a map of a word problem, a math concept/operation, or a unit. 

 
 
2018-19 SCEP-FL                                                                                                                                                                                                           36 

 

Survey participating teacher's about their understanding, and use of mapping as a writing across the curriculum 
strategy in October 2018, again in February 2019, and in June 2019 seeing a 60% growth by March and a 90% growth 
in June.  

Analyze student work samples as a team at regular intervals across the project to assess impact and areas of need. 

 
Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 

 
 

Internal teacher survey x 3 December, March, and June 2019 
Student work samples 

 

Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action 
plan, if applicable. 

 
 
2018-19 SCEP-FL                                                                                                                                                                                                           37 

 

Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans 

 

Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and 
nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional 
support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) 
 
Part 1 – Needs Assessment   

Part 1a.  Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice 
Tenet 2 Statement of Practice 
Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one.  Place an “X” in the 
appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 
2.2  The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, 

Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive 
of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational 
Plan (SCEP). 
Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital 
resources. 

2.3 

2.4  The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual 

Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and 
track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 

2.5  Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve 

critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, 
curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; 
and student social and emotional developmental health). 

X 

X 

X 

SOP(s) 

Addressed 

 

 

 

 

Part 1b.  Needs/Areas of Focus: 
Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the 
most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources 
should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, 
NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School 
Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 
 

1.  What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element?  Indicate the data trends, source and 

year. 

2.  What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? 

Indicate the data trends, source and year. 

Needs Assessment 

Quality Review Report 2017: Indicator 3.4 - Well Developed  

  The Reviewer noted: The majority of teachers are engaged in structured, inquiry-based professional 

collaborations that promote the achievement of school goals. Leadership structures provide a means for 
teachers to have input on key decisions about curricula and teaching practices. The work of teacher teams has 
strengthened the instructional capacity of teachers. Shared leadership structures build capacity that positively 
affect student learning across the school. 

Quality Review Report 2017: Indicator 5.1 - Proficient 

  Evaluate the quality of school- level decisions, making adjustments as needed to increase the coherence of 

policies and practices across the school, with particular attention to the CCLS 

 
 
2018-19 SCEP-FL                                                                                                                                                                                                           38 

 

School Quality Report 2016-17: School Conditions and Practices  

  The overall rating for Effective School Leadership for 2016-2017 is not available at this stage. However under the 

the School Survey Measures for Effective School Leadership Teacher Influence received a 64% positive rating. 
37% of teachers reported that they have a moderate to great deal of influence over school policy in selecting 
instructional materials used in classrooms. 62% of teachers reported that they have a moderate to great deal of 
influence over school policy in developing instructional materials. 
In the Additional Survey Questions section 17% of teachers reported that they have a moderate to great deal of 
influence over school policy in the of hiring new professional personnel. 17% of teachers reported that they 
have a moderate to great deal of influence over school policy in the planning how discretionary school funds 
should be used. 

 

 

 
Part 2 – Annual Goal 

Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this 
element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the 
identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART– Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, 
and Time-bound.  
By June 2019 80% of staff will be participate in a committee so there can be direct staff input into decision making 
processes. Committees will recommend decisions that have an impact on the way the school functions and decision 
making around resources.  

Practices survey 

 

 

 
 
2018-19 SCEP-FL                                                                                                                                                                                                           39 

 
Part 3a – Action Plan 

Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your 
school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this 
Framework for Great Schools element, including: 

Target 
Group(s) 
Who will be 
targeted? 

Timeline 
What is the 
start and 
end date? 

  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional 

 

development, and/or systems and structures needed to 
impact change. 
Strategies to address the needs of students with 
disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need 
student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, 
STH). 

We value the voice and input of each and every member of our 
school community and so a number of committees will be 
established to allow input into decision making from all staff. 
Committees will recommend decisions that have an impact on the 
way the school functions and decision making around resources. All 
committees will meet on a rotating basis on Tuesdays from 3:00 – 
3:55 pm.  

Key Personnel 
Who is responsible 
for implementing 
and overseeing the 
activity/strategy? 
(include school, 
educational 
consultants and/or 
CBO staff) 

All Staff 

Sept 2018 - 
June 2019 

Ms. Johnson 

Ms. Rivera 

All staff will join one of the committees (they can also suggest 
committees that they would like to see at PS 246). Members will 
vote on who will chair the committee they are on. 

All staff 

Sept 2018 -
June 2019 

Ms. Johnson 

Ms. Rivera 

The following committees have been established:  

  Curriculum Committee: The Curriculum Committee’s 

primary purpose is to continuously improve the educational 
program, in line with NYCDOE Framework for Great schools 
and PS 246’s vision and mission via research, curriculum 
development, and a review of recommendations for 
changes in curriculum and/or primary learning materials 
brought to the committee by grade liaisons and/or 
coaches/specialists. A member of administration, literacy 
coach(s), math specialist(s) and at least one teacher from 
each grade and out of classroom specialist are encouraged 
to serve as committee members.  

  Health and Wellness Committee: The School Health and 

Wellness Committee serves as an advisory group concerned 
with the health and wellbeing of staff and students. The 
committee will assess current healthy initiatives in the 
school and make recommendations and/or changes and 
suggest activities to promote school wide mental, social and 
emotional health. The committee will comprise of an 
administrative team member and up to five staff members.  

  Professional Development Committee: The professional 
development committee will consist of the UFT chapter 
leader and an equal number of members chosen by the 
union and by the principal. The committee will meet 
regularly with administration to plan and review 

 
 
2018-19 SCEP-FL                                                                                                                                                                                                           40 

 

professional development activities based on data driven 
needs of teachers.  

  Parent Engagement Committee: The purpose of Parent 
Involvement Committees is to support, encourage and 
enhance meaningful parent involvement activities and 
programs to improve student achievement and well-being.  
Social Committee: This committee is comprised of any 
interested staff member. The committee purpose is to 
maintain a sense of community among staff through the 
creation of a variety of staff functions.  

 

Selected staff will join a Hiring Committee so there is a staff voice in 
making recommendations to the Administration Team around 
appropriate new hires to the school. 

Selected 
teachers 

Sept 2018 -
June 2019 

Ms Johnson, 

Ms Rivera 

  
 
3b – Parent and Family Engagement 

How  will  your  school  engage  parents/families  and  support  their  understanding  of  Effective  School  Leadership  and 
strategies  to  promote  parent  leadership  and  engagement  in  order  to  support  their  children  at  home?  Include  the 
timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 
The creation of these committees serve as a point of holistic professional development for our staff. Professional 
development ensures that educators have the knowledge, skills, and opportunity to engage and collaborate with 
parents, families, and other community members as active partners in children’s education. Indicators: 

  Professional development provides opportunities for educators to develop communication and collaboration 

skills that enable them to build partnerships with parents, guardians, and the community. 

  Professional development enhances educators’ knowledge of varying cultural backgrounds of students, 

families, and the community, and of how the diversity of these cultural backgrounds can serve as foundations 
and resources for student learning and success. 

  Professional development includes opportunities for educators to develop skills and strategies that use 

technology to strengthen partnerships with parents, families, and the community. 

 

 
Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 

Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including 
human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 
Teachers will meet on Tuesdays from 3:15 to 3:55 on a bi-weekly basis to address the tasks of each respective 
committee. We will use book clubs, on-line webinars and surveys to support our goals.  

 
Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 

 

 

Tax Levy 

Title I 
1003(a) 

 

 

Title I 
SWP 

Title III 

 

 

Title I TA 

PTA 

Funded 

 

 

P/F Set-
aside 

SIG 
Grant 

 

 

21st Century 

 

C4E 

School 

Achievement 

X 

Other 

Funding 

 
Part 5 – Progress Monitoring  

Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement 
planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 

 
 
2018-19 SCEP-FL                                                                                                                                                                                                           41 

 

 

  Resources are provided to plan and conduct ongoing evaluation of impact of committees. 
  The evaluations will use multiple measures to assess effectiveness of the knowledge and skill acquired in 

improving professional practice and student learning (such as the use of new learning in instructional 
planning, the use of student data for the development and adaptation of teaching strategies, or the enhanced 
student performance following the application of a different teaching strategy). 

  Committee evaluation will include the use of multiple methods and techniques that provide information to 

ensure ongoing improvements in the quality of the professional development experience (such as participant 
reactions, surveys, focus groups, interviews, reflective journals, portfolios, or information about student 
behavior or performance). 

  Evaluation results are reported to the administrative team and all staff in a manner that promotes effective 
use of the evaluation data for improving both individual educator practice, student academic and emotional 
growth and building professional development plans.  

 
Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 

 
 

Lesson plans showing use of new learning in instructional planning, 
Student data used for the development and adaptation of teaching strategies, or the enhanced student 
performance following the application of a different teaching strategy. 

  Participant reactions, surveys, focus groups, interviews, reflective journals, portfolios, or information about 

student behavior or performance indicting quality of professional development and effectiveness of 
committees. 

  Evaluation results are reported to the administrative team and all staff in a manner that promotes effective 
use of the evaluation data for improving both individual educator practice, student academic and emotional 
growth and building professional development plans.  

 
Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action 
plan, if applicable. 

 
 
2018-19 SCEP-FL                                                                                                                                                                                                           42 

 

Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans 

 
Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a 
welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. 
(Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) 
 
Part 1 – Needs Assessment   

Part 1a.  Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice 
Tenet 6 Statement of Practice 
Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one.  Place an “X” in the 
appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 
6.2  The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their 

high expectations for student academic achievement.  

6.3  The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and 
community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to 
augment learning. 

6.4  The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide 
training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support 
student success. 

6.5  The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school 

community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers 
families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their 
children. 

X 

X 

SOP(s) 

Addressed 

 

 

 

 

Part 1b.  Needs/Areas of Focus: 
Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the 
most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources 
should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, 
NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School 
Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 
 

1.  What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element?  Indicate the data trends, source and 

year. 

2.  What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? 

Indicate the data trends, source and year. 

Needs Assessment 

Quality Review Report 2017: Indicator 3.4 -Well Developed  

School leaders consistently communicate high expectations to the entire staff and to families and provide support for 
the staff to meet those expectations and ways for parents to understand their children’s progress. Due to the clear 
communication of high expectations for all, staff and families support each other towards student achievement and 
college and career readiness. 

  The reviewer shared: Every parent at the parent meeting gave examples of how they communicate with or 

receive information from the school (newsletter, calls, fliers, making an appointment with the teachers). They all 
spoke about how open the teachers were to supporting their children at home. One parent said through a 
translator “my child needed help with math and the teacher gave her some websites she could use at home”. 

School Quality Report 2016-17: School Conditions and Practices  

 
 
2018-19 SCEP-FL                                                                                                                                                                                                           43 

 

 

  The overall rating for Strong Family and Community Ties for 2016-2017 is not available at this stage. However 
under the the School Survey Measures for Strong Family and Community Ties Outreach to Parents received an 
87% positive rating. 73% of parents/guardians agreed or strongly agreed that they are invited to visit classrooms 
to observe instruction. 52% of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that, at their school, parents/guardians are 
invited to visit classrooms to observe the instructional program.  

  Under the the School Survey Measures for Strong Family and Community Ties Parent Involvement in School 58% 

of parents/guardians responded that, since the beginning of the school year, they have been asked or had the 
opportunity to volunteer time to support their school (for example, spent time helping in classrooms, helped 
with school-wide events, etc.) sometimes or often. 

 
Part 2 – Annual Goal 

Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this 
element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the 
identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, 
and Time-bound.  
By June 2019, we will increase the level of parental involvement in our school, as measured by 1) a 30% increase in 
attendance at bi-monthly parent workshops in literacy and math and 2) Sign-in and feedback forms indicating, the 
workshops met the needs of parents. 

 

 

 
 
2018-19 SCEP-FL                                                                                                                                                                                                           44 

Key Personnel 
Who is responsible 
for implementing 
and overseeing the 
activity/strategy? 
(include school, 
educational 
consultants and/or 
CBO staff) 

Administration,  

Parent Coordinator,  

Guidance Counselor,  

Social Worker, and 
Instructional 
Coaches, Specialists,  

Consultant 

 
Part 3a – Action Plan 

Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your 
school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this 
Framework for Great Schools element, including: 

Target 
Group(s) 
Who will be 
targeted? 

Timeline 
What is the 
start and 
end date? 

September 
2018 – June 
2019 

Parents, 
guardians 
and students 
within the 
school 
community 

  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional 

 

development, and/or systems and structures needed to 
impact change. 
Strategies to address the needs of students with 
disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need 
student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, 
STH). 

Ongoing workshops will be offered to parents to inform and educate 
in the following areas, but not limited to: 

  Provide training and materials for parents with students in K 

– 5 on how to improve children’s study skills, or learning in 
various academic subjects, 

  Provide a directory of community resources and activities 

that link to student learning skills and talents, including 
summer programs for students, 

  Offer workshops to inform families of the high expectations 
and standards children are expected to meet in each grade 
level covered by the NYS Common Core Standards. Provide 
ways for families to support the expectations and learning at 
home, 

  Engage families in opportunities to work with their children 
in setting their annual academic goals in math and reading. 
  Through school-community partnerships, facilitate families’ 
access to community-based programs (e.g., health care and 
human services) to ensure that families have resources to 
be involved in their children’s education. 

  Provide Grade 5 families with information on Middle School 

 

articulation, and Drop-Out prevention 
Invite community partners to share resources at annual 
open houses or parent-teacher conferences. 

  Offer workshops covering social media issues, social and 
emotional development, bullying prevention, health and 
nutrition, and mental illness. 

  On a weekly basis, allot time for teachers to call, e-mail or 
have face-to-face conference with parents to discuss their 
child’s social and/or academic progress. 

Parents and 
Students 

September 
2018 – June 
2019 

Administration, 
Teachers,  

  Monthly open forum titled “Parent Talk” to network and 

discuss various pertinent issues regarding parenting, social 
issues and educational issues. 

Parents and 
Students 

September 
2018 – June 
2019 

Guidance Counselor 

Administration,  

Parent Coordinator, 
Guidance Counselor 

 
 
2018-19 SCEP-FL                                                                                                                                                                                                           45 

 

  Monthly newsletters from the Parent Coordinator, grade 

level, teachers, and guidance counselors to update parents 
on teaching, learning, resources, and social services. 

Parents and 
Students 

September 
2018 – June 
2019 

Administration,  

Parent Coordinator, 
Guidance Counselor 

  
 
3b – Parent and Family Engagement 

If  any,  list  the  Community  Based  Organizations  or  other  partnerships  that  support  parent/family  and  community 
engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. 
N/A 

 

 
Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 

Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including 
human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 
Title I TA, Per session for teachers facilitating workshops, materials needed to distribute, consultant fees and supplies. 

 

Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 

 

 

Tax Levy 

Title I 
1003(a) 

 

 

Title I 
SWP 

X 

Title I TA 

Title III 

 

PTA 

Funded 

 

 

P/F Set-
aside 

SIG 
Grant 

 

 

21st Century 

School 

Achievement 

Funding 

 

 

C4E 

Other 

 
Part 5 – Progress Monitoring  

Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement 
planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 

  By February 2019, the parent coordinator will check attendance monthly to analyze parent participation at all 

events and determine if the school is on track to meet our goal. 

  Review/prioritize feedback provided on workshop evaluation forms monthly, and adjust planned workshops 

as necessary. 

 
Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 
In February 2019, review sign-in sheets and feedback forms to determine progress towards meeting the annual goal 
and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable 

 

Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action 
plan, if applicable. 

 

 
 
2018-19 SCEP-FL                                                                                                                                                                                                           46 

 

Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS)  

(Required for All Schools) 

Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services 
(AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records 
need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area 
listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. 
 

 

Type of Academic 
Intervention Service 
(AIS) 

English Language 
Arts (ELA) 

Type of program or 
strategy (e.g. 
repeated readings, 
interactive writings, 
etc.) 

1. SMART Writing 

Academy 

 

2. Writing analysis. 

 

3. Reading Rescue a 
K-1 a Guided Reading 
& Reading by trained 

Paraprofessionals 

4. RTI 

 

Criteria for 
determining AIS 
services (For 
additional guidance, 
refer to NYSED’s 
memo.) 
1. TargetLowest 1/3, 
Level 1 and 2 
students based on 
the NYS ELA 2018 
data and September 
Baseline 

 

2. To prepare 
students to address 
increasingly 
demanding content 
and sources 
instruction allows 
students to 
demonstrate 
increasing 
sophistication in all 
aspects of language 
use, from vocabulary 
and syntax to the 
development, and 
organization of ideas. 

 

3. Focuson the lowest 
1/3 from TC Running 
Records data 

 

Method for delivery 
of service (e.g. small 
group, one-to-one, 
tutoring, etc.) 

When the service is 
provided (e.g. during 
the school day, 
before or after 
school, etc.) 

Small group 
instruction (Grades 
3–5)  

During School day - 

Saturday Academy 

 

 

 

 

 

During the school 
day 

During the school 
day 

Small group 
instruction (K – 5) 

During the school 
day 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
2018-19 SCEP-FL                                                                                                                                                                                                           47 

 

 

 

 

 

Small group 
instruction and 
tutoring 

 

 

 

Small group 
instruction (K – 5) 

 
Small group 

During school day, 

Instruction (Grade 3- 

Saturday Academy 

 

5) 

 

 

Mathematics 

1. TargetLowest 1/3, 

SMART Academy, 

 

Level 1 and 2 
students based on 
the NYS Math 2017 
data and September 
Baseline  

 

2. Small group 
instruction helps 
studentsto access 
concepts from 
different perspectives 
demonstrating 
conceptual 
understanding of 
core math concepts. 
Students learn to 
apply these concepts 
to new situations 
andwrite and speak 
about their 
understanding. 

 

 
 
2018-19 SCEP-FL                                                                                                                                                                                                           48 

 

Science 

Services are 

Explorer’s Academy 

recommended based 

provide students with 

on MoSL data, 

the opportunity to 

Small group 
Instruction 

(Grade K-5) 

 

After school 
collaboration with 
Good Shepherd 
Services 

 

Social Studies 

At-risk services (e.g. 
provided by the 
Guidance Counselor, 
School Psychologist, 
Social Worker, etc.) 

teacher noticings and 

construct new 

recommendations, 

knowledge and 

prior identified needs 

problem-solving skills 

 

Services are 
recommended based 
on MoSL data, 
teacher noticings and 
recommendations, 
prior identified needs 

 

The guidance team 

meets regularly with 

small groups of 

students who have 

been identified by 

the administrators, 

teachers, family and 

others. 

 

through the process 
of creating, testing 
and evaluating 
hypothesis through a 
series of open-ended, 
hands-on science 
activities 

 
Integration of social 
studies components 
into the ELA, and 
various content 
areas, in order to 
support authentic 
learning.  

 
Through the 
utilization of 
structured 
intervention 
methodologies 
students are engaged 
in social/emotional 
activities focused on 
strengthening coping 
skills, improving 
interpersonal 
relationships, solving 
problems, improving 
academic 
performance, and 
building on one's 
strengths. Progress 
monitoring is done 
through collection of 
data both in and 
outside of the 

Group and individual 
counseling sessions 

During the school 
day 

 

 

Group and individual 

Grade K – 5 during 

counseling sessions 

school day 

 

 

 
 
2018-19 SCEP-FL                                                                                                                                                                                                           49 

 

 
 

counseling 
environment 

 

 
 
2018-19 SCEP-FL                                                                                                                                                                                                           50 

 

Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH)  

 

Directions: 
-  All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. 
-  All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. 
 
Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) 
As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the 
federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and 
report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support 
your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: 
http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf   

Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 

 

1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your 
school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE 
systems and may change over the course of the year.) 

PS 246 
currently 
has 136 
Students 
in 
Temporary 
Housing 
(STH). 

 

2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. 

The school offers the following to students and their families: 

Free donations of book bags with school supplies 

 
  Huge discounts on uniforms 
 
 
  Grade 5 senior dues 
  Parents are offered workshops on understanding what to expect when moving children from one school to 

Free school trips 
Families are also supplied with the fixings for Thanksgiving 

another so they realize that the curriculum across the city is similar from school to school.  

 

Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 

1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school 
(please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 

N/A 

 

2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 

 
 
2018-19 SCEP-FL                                                                                                                                                                                                           51 

 

N/A 

Free donations of book bags with school supplies 

Free school trips 
Families are also supplied with the fixings for Thanksgiving 

  Huge discounts on uniforms 
 
 
  Grade 5 senior dues 
  Parents are offered workshops on understanding what to expect when moving children from one school to 

another so they realize that the curriculum across the city is similar from school to school.  

 

3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary 
housing.  If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation 
Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question.  If your school did not receive an allocation 
and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. 

N/A 

137 students $14, 000 

 

 

 
 
2018-19 SCEP-FL                                                                                                                                                                                                           52 

 

Section 8: Title I Program Information  

Directions: 
  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1 
  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2 
  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3 
  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  
 

If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can 
be found 

  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage 
 
Part 1: Title I Status 

Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. 

X 

Schoolwide Program (SWP) 

 

Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools  

 

Non-Title I 

 
Part 2: All Title I Schools 

2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) 

Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support 
including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. 
We employ a rigorous interview process at our school in order to attract HQT. Initial interviews are conducted by 
assistant principal, followed by principal interview. Candidates are then asked to conduct a demonstration lesson 
before decision is made. 

  Attending citywide or District 10 recruitment fairs, whenever offered 
  Use DOE’s Open Market staffing function to collect a wide range of resumes when filling vacancies  
  Collect and review candidates who submit resumes from outside of the DOE, for shortage areas such as 

Special Education and ESL 
  We hire Teaching Fellows 
  We utilize the open market hiring system.  
  We reach out to colleges for specialty licenses, and interns and student teachers are utilized. 

 

 
2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development 

Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and 
paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS).  
Staff are supported by an ELA coach, Math specialist teachers, Administrative Team, in school mentors and 
Generation Ready and Teachers College consultants in further developing their skills. 

The Principal and teachers set and monitor collaborative goals using the competencies from the Danielson Framework 
for Teaching  

  Use 5% set aside as required under Title I to Improve Teacher Quality  
  Use BEDS survey data to track teacher progress towards “highly qualified” as defined by NCLB  
  Mentors are assigned to support, new, struggling and under-qualified teachers  
  Monthly Mentor/Mentee meetings with Assistant Principal and consultant to support new teachers  
  Mentors/Mentees meet 2 periods per week to discuss teaching and learning  
  Teachers are assigned to their area of certification.  
  Mentor teachers are utilized for new staff members.  
  Parents are notified when a non-highly qualified teacher teaches their child for more than four weeks.  

 
 
2018-19 SCEP-FL                                                                                                                                                                                                           53 

 

 

  We provide counseling for non-highly qualified staff. 

 
Part 3: TA Schools Only 

3a. Use of Program Resources 

Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 
N/A 

 

 
3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program 

Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., 
providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from 
the regular classroom during regular school day). 
N/A 

 

 
Part 4: SWP Schools Only 

4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only)  

Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary 
school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, 
early intervention services, etc.). 
 

Smart Start Program offers incoming kindergartners and their parents a preview of school, routines and curriculum 

  Offered 2 days in late June early July 
  Extensive parent/ child interviews 
  Parent workshops 
  Classroom participation/observation 
  Observation of student interaction 

 

 

 
4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments 

Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate 
multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to 
improve instruction.    

  MOSL committee selects local measures 
  Grade level professional learning community meetings discuss resources and assessments per units of study 
  Professional development is decided via results of survey responses 

 

 
4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools 

 
 
2018-19 SCEP-FL                                                                                                                                                                                                           54 

 

Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and 
Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible 
for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its 
Schoolwide plan (SCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program 
contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the 
intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, 
State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the 
amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met 
the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. 
Program Name 

Fund Source 
(i.e. Federal, 
State or Local) 

Funding Amount 
Indicate the amount 
contributed to 
Schoolwide pool. 
(Refer to Galaxy for 
school allocation 
amounts) 

Place an (X) in Column A below to verify 
that the school has met the intent and 
purposes of each program whose funds are 
consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section 
references where a related program activity 
has been described in this plan. 

Column A 

Verify with an (X) 

Title I Part A (Basic) 

Title I School Improvement 
1003(a) 
Title I Priority and Focus 
School Improvement Funds 

Title II, Part A 

Title III, Part A 

Title III, Immigrant 

Tax Levy (FSF) 

 

Federal 

Federal 

Federal 

Federal 

Federal 

Federal 

Local 

636,735 

 
16,979 

 
107,956 

 
137,887 

 
32,846 

 
0 

 
4,731,102 

 

X 

 
x 

 
x 

 
x 

 
X 

 
N/A 

 
X 

 

Column B 

Section Reference(s) 
5A, 5E 

 
5D 

 
5B, 

 
5B 

 
5B, 5C,5D 

 
N/A 

 
5A, 5B, 5C,5D 

 

1Explanation/Background: 
Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and 
programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and 
advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools 
may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, 
State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This 
gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students.   
 
Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a 
single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual 
identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool 
to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds 
used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from 
which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to 
combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used 
conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the 
dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds.  
 
Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages: 
 
 
2018-19 SCEP-FL                                                                                                                                                                                                           55 

 

  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program 

separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different 
sources when accounting for their use. 

  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the 

statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., 
semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent 
and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended 
beneficiaries are met. 

 
2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as 
follows: 

  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to 
improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes 
provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH). 

  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified 

through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with 
district oversight and included in the DCIP/SCEP.  

  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement 

plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  

  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in 

grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not 
available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional 
program. 

  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, 
develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and 
achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another 
purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-
quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in 
effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the 
participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language 
instruction programs. 

  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of 

English language acquisition and content area achievement. 

 
Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated: 

  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and 
programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent 
representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities 
funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with 
student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. 

  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and 

 

more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. 
IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education 
designed to meet their individual needs. 

  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG or SIF funds: These funds 

must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant 
application. 

 

 
 
2018-19 SCEP-FL                                                                                                                                                                                                           56 

 

Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)  

 (Required for All Title I Schools) 

 

Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and 
representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will 
participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I 
program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson 
that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the 
parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school 
will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic 
achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family 
Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. 
 
The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current 
S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent 
Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent 
involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen 
family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy.  
 
Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample 
Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) 
as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. 
 
 

Parent and Family Engagement Policy 

 

Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. 
The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of 
parents and community in the school. PS 246 Poe Center, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the 
Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to 
strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s 
policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of 
the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent 
Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. 

 

The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all 
parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The 
school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement 
policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school 
surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and 
enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. 

 

 

Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students 

PS 246 Poe Center will support parents and families of Title I students by: 

 
 
2018-19 SCEP-FL                                                                                                                                                                                                           57 

 

 

  providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, 

e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; 

  providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and 

 

decision making in support of the education of their children; 
fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and 
monitor their child’s progress; 

  providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 
 

sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and 
in languages that parents can understand; 

  providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve 
outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and 
other members of the school community; 

Parental Involvement and School Quality 

In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the 
school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership 
Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for 
additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: 

 

actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s 
Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of 
the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; 

  engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated 

directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; 

  ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and 

 

strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; 
support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the 
Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing 
technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; 

  maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and 
families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the 
assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school 
environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of 
events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; 
conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational 
accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and 
support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; 

 

  provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State 

accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review 
Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 

  host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise 

parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right 
to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 
and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act; 
schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the 
morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the 
Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; 
translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; 
conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and 
workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; 

 

 
 

 
 
2018-19 SCEP-FL                                                                                                                                                                                                           58 

 

 

The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: 

Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement 

  holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; 
  hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school 

year; 

  encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-

Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; 
supporting or hosting Family Day events; 

 
  establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; 
  encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; 
  providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their 

children’s progress; 

  developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about 

school activities and student progress; 

  providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a 

format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. 

 

School-Parent Compact (SPC) 

 

P.S. 246 Poe Center, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is 
implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between 
the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, 
agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 
improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure 
that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. 

 

Standards and Assessments by: 

I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum 

respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; 
implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; 

  using academic learning time efficiently; 
 
 
  offering high quality instruction in all content areas; 
  providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required 

by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); 

 

I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships 

Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: 

 

 

 

 

conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be 
discussed as well as how this Compact is related; 
convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students 
participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their 
right to be involved; 
arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and 
funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; 
respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation 
services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; 

 
 
2018-19 SCEP-FL                                                                                                                                                                                                           59 

 

 

  providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents 
of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; 
involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent 
Involvement Policy and this Compact; 

 

  providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment 

results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 

  ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with 

parents each year; 

I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff 

Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: 

  ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited 

English speaking parents; 

  notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff 

 

member; 
arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and 
to observe classroom activities; 

  planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; 

 

 

Provide general support to parents by: 

I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents 

 

 

 

creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful 
environment for parents and guardians; 
assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor 
their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that 
the majority of parents can attend); 
sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all 
members of the school community; 
supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; 

 
  ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as 

 

described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; 
advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and 
consistent with the Title I requirement for the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; 

 

Parent/Guardian Responsibilities: 

II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 

  monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the 

appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; 

  ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child 

and his/her age; 
check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; 
read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); 
set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; 

 
 
 
  promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports 

and/or quality family time; 

 
 
2018-19 SCEP-FL                                                                                                                                                                                                           60 

 

 

volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; 

  encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; 
 
  participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; 
 

communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by 
prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; 
respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; 

 
  become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement 

Policy and this Compact; 

  participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department 

learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; 
take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on 
advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; 
share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; 
 

 

 
 

Student Responsibilities: 

III. Student Responsibilities 

 
 
 
 
 
 

attend school regularly and arrive on time; 
complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; 
follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; 
show respect for myself, other people and property; 
try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; 
always try my best to learn. 

 

 
 

Addendum: Community School Partnerships 

Directions: The Community School (CS) strategy is directly aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. Community 
Schools bring schools and community partners together and integrate academics, health, youth development, and 
family engagement to provide students with the tools and opportunities they need to succeed.  The Core Services in 
Community Schools are Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & 
Wellness. 
 
Part 1 – Community School Partnerships Goal(s) 

How is the CS strategy integrated into academic instruction at your school, and what impact has it had on student 
academic outcomes?  
Good Shepherd Services (GSS) will be the lead CBO at P.S. 246. The Community School Director (CSD) will work in 
collaboration with the entire school in an effort to improve attendance. A Success Mentor Program will be 
implemented to increase attendance, in particular with the chronically absent cohort. The CSD will work in 
collaboration with the School social worker, guidance staff and teachers to case conference and ensure students’ 
needs are being met. The CSD will also work to increase the parent involvement within the school by offering services 
such as support groups, resources and whatever else is determined to be of need through a parental survey. As 
requested by administration, Good Shepard afterschool staff will be integrated into weekly ELA and math prep to 
strengthen their skills in order to effectively assist students academically. With these strategies in place, GSS will help 
to improve students’ individual attendance, class grades and parent involvement.  

 
Indicate the summative goal(s) of the Community School for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to 
be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound.   

 
 
2018-19 SCEP-FL                                                                                                                                                                                                           61 

 

By June 2019 Success Mentors will create and implement attendance improvement plans for our ENL and special 
education students who were chronically absent the previous year resulting in 80% of the targeted students missing 
fewer days than the previous year.  

 

 

Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Community School Annual Goal(s): 
How will achieving your Community School Goal(s)--in Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family 
Engagement, and Health & Wellness--support your academic goals for students? 
PS 246 in collaboration with GSS will work towards our goal of improving student attendance by providing a menu of 
services including: identifying chronically absent/high risk students, family conferencing and case conferencing with 
collateral contacts. Attendance data will be reviewed regularly, reports will be run to identify at risk students and a 
individualized action plan will be implemented on a case to case basis for each student who is at risk. We plan to take 
a proactive approach towards attendance to help address the needs of our students and increase academic success. 
Working diligently to engage students and families to increase attendance will in turn will improve academic 
performance.  

 

 
Part 2 – Community School Partnerships Core Services Action Plan 

Part 2a. Identify the Community-based Organization (CBO) partnerships that you will develop in ELT, Attendance 
Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness, their target student population(s), and scope of the services 
provided. As well as supporting schools’ supportive environment and attendance work, CBOs should be helping to 
support your school’s instructional focus. 

CBO Partnership 

Good Shepard Services 

Target 
Population 

At risk, ELL, Sped. 
Ed. 

Scope of Service  SY18-19 SMART Goal 

By June 2019, PS 246 
and Good Shepard 
services will provide our 
ELL, Special Ed. and at-
risk students with 
attendance supports 
academic and 
enrichment programs 
aimed at increasing 
student performance in 
math and ELA. 

Focus on 
establishing 
success mentors 
to increase 
attendance of 
chronically 
absent students 
with a special 
focus on ENL and 
special education 
students. 
Provision of 
varied 
enrichment 
programs as an 
incentive for 
students to 
attend Saturday 
Academy 
Programs aimed 
at increasing 
reading levels 
and number 

  

 
 
2018-19 SCEP-FL                                                                                                                                                                                                           62 

 
 
Part 3 – Budget and Resource Alignment 

Part 3a. Indicate resources your Community Partnership will leverage to achieve your summative SMART goal(s) and 
implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 
GSS will use the services of our CBO's (Renaissance Youth Center, Vision Media and Education, the Department of 
Health, Montefiore Hospital) to provide support services to families of chronically absent students to assist them in 
getting the assistance they need in order to facilitate students attendance on a regular basis at school. 

 

 

Part 3b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 

 

 

Tax 
Levy 

Title I 
1003(a) 

 

 

Title I 
SWP 

Title 

III 

 

 

Title I TA 

X 

P/F Set-aside 

PTA 

Funded 

 

SIG 
Grant 

 

 

21st Century 

School 

Achievement 

Funding 

 

 

C4E 

Other 

Part 3c. Describe how the school will partner with the Lead CBO to do the following: 
1. 

Community Schools are expected to partner with a community-based partner organization (CBO) and 
together with members of the School Leadership Team, hire a Community School Director. The Director will 
lead implementation of the asset and needs assessment process, and other critically important coordinating 
activities. Indicate how you will leverage this aspect of the work. 
Community Schools are expected to personalize the needs of all students, through strategic programming and 
services, as determined by the asset and needs assessment, and must also offer Expanded Learning Time 
(ELT) and mental health programming. In completing this section, ensure that you think about how: (1) the 
right services are provided to the right students and families at the right time; and (2) how you will seamlessly 
coordinate services with instructional programming happening throughout and outside of the school day. 
Indicate how you will implement this work, and describe other programming you anticipate to be in place to 
strengthen this initiative. 
Community Schools are expected to emerge as Partnership Schools, which are places where parents and 
families feel welcome, actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of 
their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. Monthly meetings and Community 
School Forums engaging families and community stakeholders will be a critical part of this family engagement 
strategy. Describe how you will implement this aspect of the work. 
Community School Principals are expected to meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, 
select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual 
students. Data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter - and training will be available for schools to use. 
Indicate how you will implement this aspect of the work. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

1. The CSD (Community School Director) will be integrated into all aspects of the work at P.S. 246. The CSD will 
participate in any parent meetings, attendance meetings, CST meetings and safety meetings. The CSD will conduct a 
needs assessment with various people and departments throughout the school as well as hold a Community School 
Forum in the Spring. 

 

2.The CSD will have access to Data Sorter and will work closely with GSS' internal Program, Evaluation and Planning 
Department (PEP). This data base allows GSS to track and monitor students’ individual attendance as well as detect 
patterns etc. The data base allows for reports to be generated. This information will also helped direct students to ELT 

 
 
2018-19 SCEP-FL                                                                                                                                                                                                           63 

 

opportunities available within the building and will be used in school wide meetings to identify students who are in 
need of other social emotional supports. 

 

3. Parent Engagement is currently held once a week with a concentration on academics, the CSD will be present to 
ensure parents also have the opportunity to advocate for their children and discuss the school’s climate and culture. 
If need be, the CSD can implement a monthly meeting for parents where this will be the sole focus. These meetings 
will be a safe and welcoming place for parents to share their ideas and raise issues that affect the school culture and 
surrounding community. The School forum will be held in the spring. 

 

4. Weekly meetings will be held between Principal, CSD, AP's, key staff and other CBO's as necessary. The CSD and any 
pertinent staff will be trained in Data Sorter, and the data collected will be brought into the schoolwide attendance 
meeting. 

 

 
Part 4 – Community School Partnerships Oversight 

Part 4a. Key Staff and Partners 
1.  Name and describe the scope of involvement of all community partners working in the school (include partners 

supporting ELT, counseling, enrichment, etc.) 

2.  Name the members of your Community School Team and how meetings will be organized and structured to 

engage all stakeholders and be focused on results. 

3.  Explain data strategies including the use of the data sorter, and steps that the school will take to ensure that the 

appropriate interventions are provided to the right students 

1. GSS and the CSD work in collaboration with the administrative team, the School social worker, guidance staff and 
teachers to case conference and ensure students’ needs are being met.  

2. The members of our Community School Team are Andrea Johnson (Principal), Wendy Pena (CSD Director), Michelle 
Cuello (GSS Supervisor), Pam Smith (Attendance Coordinator), Mario Robles (Parent Coordinator). Meetings are held 
every Tuesday morning at 11:00 am to review attendance from the week before, review success mentor assignments 
and results, discuss attendance initiatives and supports for families of chronically absent student. 

3. The attendance results from the data sorter is used as follows: 

•The percentage and number of students who are severely chronically absent (missing 20 percent or more of school), 
indicating the number of students requiring intensive supports  

•The percentage of students who are at the cusp of becoming attendance issues 

•The percentage and number of students with satisfactory attendance (missing 5 percent or less of school.  

• Attendance patterns by sub-populations including for student on free and reduced price meals, English Language 
Learners and ethnic and racial groups 

• Identify where relevant resources available from the district or public agencies or community agencies could be 
targeted in order to improve attendance  

 
 
2018-19 SCEP-FL                                                                                                                                                                                                           64 

 

 

 

 
Part 4b. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to 
implement the Community School program. 
All programs that are under the umbrella of the community schools grant are conceived of as beginning at the end of 
our normal school day and on the weekend. As such there are no changes in our normal school schedule. Human 
resources required are in two main categories. For the organization of the Saturday Academy program we will hire 12 
teachers to work 5 hours targeting our special education, ENL and at risk student population. The day will be divided 
into two sessions: 9:00 - 11:30 for levels 1 and 2.4 students and 12:00 - 2:30 for levels 2.5 - 4 students. The second 
main category of human resources related to the personnel required for the running of the Saturday enrichment 
activities. These are done through our community school partner, GSS.  

 
Part 4c. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. 
The program start date is October 13, 2018 and the end date is May 11, 2019. There are 23 sessions for the program 
with every student getting 1 hour and half of enrichment and 2 hours and half of instruction. Ensuring that we meet 
the criteria of 90 hours for 215 students over the course of the 2018 - 2019 school year.  

 
Part 4d. Mental Health Work Plan 

Separate from this S/CEP, schools will complete a Mental Health Work Plan that will become an addendum to this 
document. 

 
 
 

 

 
 
2018-19 SCEP-FL                                                                                                                                                                                                           65 

 

Division of English Language Learners and Student Support 
Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 
52 Chambers Street, Room 209  
New York, New York 10007 
Phone:  212-374-6072 
http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY 
Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components: 

 

 

  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high 

academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas.  

o  The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need 
o  These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154.  
o  Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. 
o  Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.   

  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on 

the teachers’ performance in classrooms.”  

o  Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term 

workshops and conferences.  

  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet 

community needs.   

o  These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process.  

 
NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional 
development, and 20% to OTPS.   
  
For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and 
Performance Specialist.  Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30.   
 

Part A: School Information 
Name of School:            
This school is (check 
one): 
 

DBN:            

conceptually consolidated (skip part E below)                
NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below)     

 

Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information  
The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): 

Before school                After school             

Saturday academy        

Total # of ELLs to be served:            
Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply):  

K       
6       

1       
7       

2       
8       

3       
9       

4         
10       

5 
11       

12 

100 

 
 
2018-19 SCEP-FL                                                                                                                                                                                                           66 

 

Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information  
Total # of teachers in this program:            
# of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers:            
# of content area teachers:            

Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the 

rationale 

 
  subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  
  schedule and duration 
 
language of instruction 
  # and types of certified teachers 
 

types of materials  

Begin description here:            
    
PS 246's goal this year is to improve our student's reading and writing skills; to this end, our 
ELL Afterschool Academy will focus on promoting English Language Proficiency in Listening, 
Speaking, Reading and Writing.  The program will be held 
from  October 2018 -  March 2019.  Selected students approximately 100 who are at the 
emerging and transitioning levels from grades 1-5 will develop their listening, reading, writing 
and speaking skills through read alouds, shared and guided reading, and peer/group 
discussions.  Teachers will plan strategic thematic lessons to help students become better readers 
and writers as they explore and utilize the types of questions found on the NYSESLAT 
exam.  NYSESLAT preparation materials such as the FINISH LINE NY Ells from Continental 
Press and Imagine learning will be purchased to be used during the program to supplement our 
current resources. In a team teaching approach, an ENL or Bilingual certified teacher will work 
with a Certified Common Branch teacher during this program. They will use a variety of 
techniques to address student needs. They will use manipulatives, models, multiple 
representations and technology to engage students in phonemic awareness activities, build 
vocabulary, identifying and comprehending main ideas in reading and writing, identifying 
details, and developing reading fluency.  Students will be able to use voice in their writing, make 
inferences, use figurative language all through a variety of texts and genres shared, interactive, 
guided and independent reading and writing.  Teachers will use the NYS Common Core 
Standards and ENL Standards to plan and develop these targeted activities to address the 
language, reading and writing needs of each student. Every month we will focus on a particular 
theme such as explorers, multicultural celebrations, seasons and use biographies, folktales, 
poetry, music, to enhance  our unit of study.  As a culminating activity, parents of ELL students 
will be invited to an assembly program where their child will perform a reading or poem or song 
with their classmates in the program.  All correspondence with parents will be communicated in 
English, Spanish and other languages as available.  Translation and interpretation services will 
be available to all parents to ensure their full participation in this program. We envision the 
following schedule for our ELL After school Academy: 
Wednesdays:3:00-3:10- Social interaction with snacks- use guided questions with different 
partners3:10-3:25- Group A- Guided Reading    Group B-Center work      Group C-Center 
work3:25-3:50- Group B- Guided Reading     Group C- Center work     Group A- Center 
work3:50-4:20- Mini lesson in Reading (theme based) & Guided/independent practice4:20-4:50- 
Mini lesson in Reading using Empire State NYSESLAT & Guided/independent practice4:50-
5:00- Share TimeThursdays:2:45-3:00- Social interaction with snacks- use guided questions with 
different partners3:00-3:25- Group C- Guided Reading    Group A-Center work      Group B-
Center work                            3:25-3:50- Group A- Guided Reading     Group B- Center 

 
 
2018-19 SCEP-FL                                                                                                                                                                                                           67 

 

 

Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information  
work     Group C- Center work                          3:50-4:20- Mini lesson in Writing (theme based) 
& Guided/independent practice                                  4:20-4:50- Mini lesson in Writing using 
Empire State NYSESLAT & Guided/independent  practice                                     4:50-5:00- 
Share Time 
Reading groups will rotate throughout the weeks of the program so that each group works 
specifically with the teacher in a guided reading session.  Center work will emphasize listening 
skills, vocabulary development, accountable talk, fluency reading, sentence completion, phonics 
word work. Our  Bilingual Certified Common Branch teachers will work alongside the ENL 
teacher with  planning and co-teaching during reading groups.  Our ENL certified teacher will 
assist in order to further support language development.  
We will hire 10 teacher (ESL/Bilingual Certified), one  Assistant Principal will supervise the 
entire program from October 2018 to February 2019 and run and organize  the 
Professional  Development  as well as the Parent workshops scheduled from October 2018 to 
March 2019. She will ensure that all correspondence with Spanish speaking parents are 
translated and interpretation services will be available to all parents to ensure their full 
participation in this program.Title III After School Program: 
Total number of students being serviced:                  Approximately 125 Students 
•             Grades of students participating in the program: 1st  – 5th Grade (10 Classes) 
•             Total number of student in each class participating: 
 
1.           1st Grade:            25 Students 
2.          2nd Grade:         25 Students 
3.          3rd Grade:          25 Students 
4..          4th Grade:          25 Students 
5.           5th Grade:          25 Students 
•             Total number of teachers participating: 10 Teachers 
•             Certification:      
                                5 ENL Teachers (TESOL CERTIFIED) 
                                5 Bilingual Teachers (Common Branch with Bilingual Extension) 
•             Program Start and End Date for grades 1 - 5:    Start:  October 17, 2018      End:  March 
28, 2018 
                                               
•             Schedule:            Time for grades 1 - 5:  3:00 pm  –  5:00 pm             Days: Wednesday 
& Thursday                                                  
                30 Sessions for grades 1 - 5                        
 
•             Grades 1 - 5  -    2 sessions per week         4 hours per week @ 10 teachers  =  total of 
$30,078.00 for Teachers.  1 Assistant principal for a total of $2,967.60                           
   

Part C: Professional Development  
Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as 
other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs.   

rationale 
teachers to receive training  

 
 
  schedule and duration 
 
  name of provider 

topics to be covered 

 
 
2018-19 SCEP-FL                                                                                                                                                                                                           68 

 

 

Part C: Professional Development  
Begin description here:            
After an extensive itemized data analysis and walkthroughs of our bilingual programs  during the 
2017-2018 academic year, it was determined that there was a need for quality professional 
development focused on the integration of data and policy to improve the quality of instruction 
for our English Language Learners, specifically in Writing.  Planning time for teacher teams is 
provided horizontally and vertically with the purpose of increasing rigor of lessons and 
differentiation instruction to meet the needs of our English language learner population.  
Throughout the year, all teachers, including ESL and bilingual certified teachers are provided 
with ongoing professional development based on their individual needs and interests.  These 
professional development sessions have been scheduled for the allotted professional 
development time on Mondays, and during teacher teams meetings. An array of professional 
development opportunities will  also be provided by NYC Doe, our ELL and literacy specialist 
from our Borough Field Office, PS 246 administrator, instructional coaches and Bilingual 
coordinator 
 
The 10 teachers involved in the program will engage in 4 professional development sessions 
which will take place on the first Monday of the month as indicated during the Monday PD 
block, led by our Supervising Bilingual Assistant Principal and certified ENL Coordinator (at no 
additional cost).   The first professional development session will take place in November 2018 
to focus on the use of a pre-writing rubric to benchmark students strengths and needs and create 
a comprehensive form to monitor individual student progress, discuss goals and design schedule 
of activities to be used in the program.  At this time program goals will be discussed and a 
schedule of activities to be used in the program will be created. The second professional 
development session will take place in January 2019 and will highlight  student engagement and 
growth, develop a midline and end assessment that simulates the NYSESLAT components and 
design rubric  to inform instructional practice. During the following week, the third professional 
development session (to take place during a Monday PD block) will center on the interpretation 
of  the data gathered from the midline assessment to make any necessary changes to our 
program.   Our fourth and final professional development in March 2019 will focus on norming 
and scoring the end of year assessment that should inform us on how well our students have 
acquired skills in listening,speaking, reading and writing; this data will be shared with the day 
teacher of each student so that they can continue to support our ELL students after the program 
has ended. 
 
There is no additional cost for teachers or assistant principal associated with these PD's  
   

Part D: Parental Engagement Activities   
Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact 
higher achievement for ELLs.  NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as 
parent orientation during ELL identification process.   

rationale 

 
  schedule and duration 
 
  name of provider 
  how parents will be notified of these activities 

topics to be covered 

 
 
2018-19 SCEP-FL                                                                                                                                                                                                           69 

 

 

Part D: Parental Engagement Activities   
Begin description here:            
Our Bilingual and ENL teachers, ENL Coordinator, and bilingual supervisor involved in our 
after school program will host a parent orientation before the start of the program in order to 
inform the parents of the program’s components and expected student outcomes.  During this 
time, parents will become acclimated to the expectation of the NYS Common Core Standards 
and alignment with the NYSESLAT assessment.  The Supervising Bilingual Assistant Prinsipal, 
ENL Coordinator, Parent Coordinator, and Family Community Liaison will conduct a second 
workshop in December on how parents can further support their child’s English language 
development at home through hands-on activities that parents can replicate at home with their 
children.  In understanding the needs of the diversified families we service, an additional 
Parent Workshop will be offered by the Parent Coordinator and Bilingual Assistant Principal that 
will focus on how to prepare for different types of interviews; such as job interviewing, parent-
teacher conferences, face-to-face interviews, and hospital-intake.  The 3 sessions/workshops will 
take place on Tuesdays from 3:00 pm – 4:00 pm in  December 2018, February 2019 and March 
2019.  Finally, parents will be invited to a culminating activity, where they will share and hear 
their child perform a reading, or a personal authentic piece of writing, song or poem learned.   
 
Parents will be notified of these activities by flyers, letters, phone mail, and the PS 246 monthly 
calendar which will all be translated in Spanish and interpretation services will be available for 
parents for each workshop. 
 
Parent orientation will be held at no additional cost. 
    
              

Part E: Budget  
FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY.  Ensure that your 
Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. 
Allocation Amount: $           
           
Budget Category 

Budgeted Amount 

Professional salaries 
(schools must account for 
fringe benefits) 

           
           

  Per session 
  Per diem 

Purchased services 

  High quality staff 

and curriculum 
development 
contracts. 

Supplies and materials 

  Must be 

supplemental. 

  Additional 

curricula, 

           
           

           
           

Explanation of expenditures in this 
category as it relates to the 
program narrative for this title. 
           
           

           
           

           
           

 
 
2018-19 SCEP-FL                                                                                                                                                                                                           70 

 

 
 
 
 

Part E: Budget  
FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY.  Ensure that your 
Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. 
Allocation Amount: $           
           
Budget Category 

Budgeted Amount 

Explanation of expenditures in this 
category as it relates to the 
program narrative for this title. 

instructional 
materials. 

  Must be clearly 

listed. 

Educational Software 
(Object Code 199) 
Travel 

Other 

TOTAL 

           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           

 

           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           

 
 
2018-19 SCEP-FL                                                                                                                                                                                                           71 

 

DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT 

GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY 

SUBMISSION FORM 

2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR 

 

DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information 

necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English 

language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a 

part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the 

services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should 

be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily 

available on file in the school.  When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces.  For 

additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. 

Part I: School ELL Profile 

 

 

 
 

A. School Information 

District  10 
School Name   P.S. 246 Poe Center 

Borough  Bronx 

School Number   246 

 
B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant 

principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. 
 

Principal   Andrea A. Johnson 
Coach  Stacey Moyler 
ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher  
 Vanessa Livingston-Prince 
Teacher/Subject Area Darian Granville 
Teacher/Subject Area Ivelisse Ortega 
Related-Service Provider Wanda Roman 
Superintendent Maribel Torres Hulla 

 

Assistant Principal  Susan Rivera 
Coach Lito Verdeflor 
School Counselor  
Tara Cannistraci 
Parent  Vivian Ortiz 
Parent Coordinator Mario Robles 
Field Support Center Staff Member Jill Schimmel  
Other (Name and Title) Florentino Rosa, SCEPS 

C. Teacher Qualifications  
Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section.  Press TAB after each number entered to calculate 
sums and percentages.  
     
Number of certified 
ENL teachers currently teaching in the 
ENL program 

Number of teachers who hold both content 
area/common branch and TESOL certification 

2 

0 

1 

Number of teachers who hold both a 
bilingual extension and TESOL 
certification 

Number of special education teachers 
with bilingual extensions 

0 

1 

Number of certified 
bilingual teachers currently 
teaching in a bilingual program 

Number of certified ENL teachers 
not currently  teaching in the ENL 
program  

 

6 

0 

3 

0 

Number of certified 
bilingual teachers not currently 
teaching in a bilingual program  
Number of certified foreign 
language/world language teachers 
providing home language arts 
(HLA) to students in bilingual 
programs [applicable to grades 7–
12] 
Number of teachers currently 
teaching a self-contained ENL class 
who hold both a common branch 
license and TESOL certification 
[applicable to grades K–6] 

D. Student Demographics  
 
 
2018-19 SCEP-FL                                                                                                                                                                                                           72 

 
Total number of students in 
school (excluding pre-K) 

735 

Total number of ELLs 

283 

ELLs as share of total student population 
(%) 

38.50% 

 
 
 
Part II: ELL Demographics 
 
 
 
 
 
A. ELL Programs 

This school serves the following grades (includes 
ELLs and non-ELLs) 
Check all that apply 

 
 
This school offers (check all that apply): 

K

    1

    2

     3

     4

     5

 

6

   7

     8

    9

     10

     11

    12

 

Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) 

Yes

             No

Dual language program (DL) 

Freestanding ENL 

Yes

             No

Yes

             No

 

 

 

If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish 

If yes, indicate language(s):            

 

 
Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a 
separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. 
 

Bilingual Program Breakdown 

School 
Year 

Opened 
(e.g., 2013-14) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

         

       

1 

1 
 
 

2 

1 
 
 

3 

1 
 
 

4 

1 
 
 

K 

1 
 
 

Lang. 
Spanish 

Program 
TBE 
TBE 
TBE 
DL 
DL 
DL 
Total 
 
 
 
Part III: Assessment Analysis 
 
 

 
 
1 

 
 
1 

       

       

       

 
 
1 

 
 
1 

 
 
1 

5 

1 
 
 

6 

7 

8 

9 

10 

11 

12 

         

         

         

         

         

         

         

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

       

       

       

       

       

       

       

       

 
 
1 

 
 
0 

 
 
0 

 
 
0 

 
 
0 

 
 
0 

 
 
0 

 
 
0 

Tot # 
6 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
6 

After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 

1.  What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, 

teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? 
P.S. 246 utilizes the Teachers College Running Reading Record Assessment as part of its instructionally targeted assessment. 
The results of this assessment are used to further the planning and instruction for our ELLs focusing on language proficiency 
and differentiation.  This assessment method provides the staff with a more consistent assessment tool that aligns more 
appropriately with the progress measures used at our school.  Also, the Teachers College Reading and Writing Project (TCRWP) 
assessments give us the ability to analyze student work so to target the specific skills and needs of our ELLs in reading and 
writing. After analysis, teachers are able to confer and develop lesson plans to target the needs of individual students as well 
as note trends across the board with students and grade levels as a whole. Analysis of assessments show that ELL students 

 
 
2018-19 SCEP-FL                                                                                                                                                                                                           73 

 

struggle the most in the writing modality. ELLs consitently score lowest, on average, on the writing portion of the NYSESLAT as 
well as on other assessments. In efforts to better the writing skills of ELLs, all lesson plans designed by the ENL teacher feature 
writing assignments,  often times with a prompt to help scaffold the lessons. At professional development and teacher team 
meetings, an analysis of the students' writing ability is conducted and ELLs are compared to their non-ELL peers. Certain 
inverventions such as further use of graphic organizers, methods of organizing information for essays (i.e. boxes and bullets), 
and the use of visuals to aid in the writing process are discussed and then applied. The mainstream classroom teachers share 
both formative and summative assessments as well as lesson plans, so that the ENL teacher can then plan accordingly to make 
instruction more accessible to ELLs. Some of the strategies include   methods as highlighting and providing visuals for certain 
vocabulary, expanding on syntactic and structural issues in writing, and increasing phonemic awareness. 
 
In addition, moving forward ELLs at PS246 will be administered two periodic assesmments to inform the instructions for 
ELLs.   They will be assessed in the four modalities: reading, writing, listening, and speaking. This assessement is designed to 
measure students’ progress toward English proficiency for students whose first language is not English.  The results of the 
assessments will be entered into SchoolNet.com.  The data gathered will be utilized in teacher teams to adjust the instructions 
for the students.   
 

2.  What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 

At PS 246, the structures in place to support this effort is that all classroom teachers maintain a Running Record binder, and 
teachers are able to share documents to track running records results.  The objectives for using data is for teachers to  engage 
in quality professional learning at least weekly to ensure delivery of effective instruction for students, and to collect student 
data from several sources such as responses on standardized tests, writing tasks, teacher-student one-on-one conferences and 
other formative and summative assessments to meet weekly to analyze, interpret, and use the data to adjust instruction and 
plan lessons.  
 

3.  What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL 

Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? 
 The success of the programs for ELLs are evaluated according to a number of criteria. The Bilingual/ENL leadership team and 
teachers, especially the Bilingual Assistant Principal and the ENL Coordinator used the EDAT tool in the fall in order to evaluate 
the strengths and weaknesses of ELLs  to prepare them for the NYSESLAT and ELA exams and test structures. The NYSESLAT, 
ELA, and  MoSL (Measure of Student Learning) exams help the school get a better idea how successful programs for ELLs are 
and what their shortcomings may be. In the past, results have showed that programs for ELLs need to further emphasize 
practice with reading and writing. These successes and shortcomings are discussed at weekly teacher team meetings and 
professional developments with teachers as well as during AYP meetings.     
  
    
 

4.  What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered?  

The structure in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered is as follows: 
1. ENL teachers meet weekly during teacher team meetings to discusss students progress, and to address weeknesses address 
student needs and implement acadmeic interventions. In addition, grade level teams meet weekly to plan and discuss Tier 1 
and 2 instruction.  During these weekly meetings 
 
The results of the NYSESLAT and ELL Period Assessments allow the teacher teams to identify specific areas of need in the four 
langauge modalities (listening, speaking, reading and writing).  This data is used throughout the school year to inform our 
instruction and adjust the curriculum.  The NYSESLAT exam is also used to plan for upcoming school year and create strategic 
groupings according to proficiency levels. 
 
 

 
 
2018-19 SCEP-FL                                                                                                                                                                                                           74 

5.  How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-
5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.]  
P.S.246 follows the RtI framework in that there is a universal screening which influences instruction. That core instruction then 
becomes more specialized for those ELLs who are at a very low proficiency level and who need the extra academic 
intervention services. With all ELLs, progress is consistently and closely monitored.  The school's data for ELLs shows that our 
ELLs need the most work in their reading and writing. Therefore, the Core of Instruction (Tier 1) consistently focuses on 
activities such as read alouds, guided readings, independent reading as well as writing responses to reading, summarizing 
texts, writing essays, and other writing activities to help strengthen these two modalities for ELLs. These types of assignments 
benefit all of the ELLs, but especially the 85-90% or so that have greater BICS than CALP. Tier II Instruction, focuses mostly on 
newcomers who are at a low proficiency in all modalities, but usually have a significant degree of communicative competence 
when it comes to speaking. Much of what these students are exposed to in the mainstream classroom can be overwhelming. 
So to accommodate and address this issue, the data from all of their classes must be analyzed and these students benefit from 
lessons that have strong language objectives to help them to access the information. There is often very little data to show for 
these students since they have very low abilities with the language in all of the modalities, so often times beginning with the 
(Total Physical Response) TPR method, phonemic awareness lesson or flash cards may be the most beneficial.  
 
As per CR Part 154, we take a number of things into consideration when identifying students who need academic intervention. 
Examples of such considerations include: 
*  Number of years of instruction in a bilingual education in a bilingual education or English as a new language program 
*  English and home language literacy 
*  Content areas and socio-emotional support needs of students with inconsistent/interrupted formal education (SIFE) 
* English and home languge literacy needs of long-term ELLs 
*  Results on the annual English language proficiency assessment exam 
*  Bilingual education or English as a New Language teacher recommendation 
*  Content area teacher recommendation 
*  Parent or guardian request 
*  Sample of student work in English and, if possible, in the home language 
*  Bilingual education evaluation, if the student has or is suspected of having a disability       
 

6.  What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? 

([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS].  
At PS 246 the NYSESLAT and ELA scores are used to inform our ELL programming.  
 
At the beginning of the school year and throughout, the RLAT report is used to keep track of students who are eligible to take 
the NYSESLAT exam. 
 
The ELL Data Analysis Tool (EDAT) is used to review multiple sources of student performance datea and informs student 
programming, supports and instruction.  
 
 

7.  What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? 

At PS 246 the structures we have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustment to our programs are the 
following: 
*  The ENL teachers maintain documents that describe the NYSESLAT performance, including proximity to cut scores.  Scores 
are disaggregaed by modality. 
* The ENL teachers provide the school staff with professional development to share the NYSESLAT results.  

 

 

 
 

 
 
2018-19 SCEP-FL                                                                                                                                                                                                           75 

 
 
Part IV: ELL Programming 
 

Programming and Scheduling Information 

1.  How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented 
as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students 
regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in 
one class]).  

a.  Freestanding ENL program. 

At P.S.246 both the integrated and stand-alone classroom models are used in the ENL program. In the integrated (co-
teaching) ENL model, students are taught by both the certified ENL instructor as well as by the content teacher – in 
the mainstream classroom, simultaneously. In the stand-alone model, students are taught in heterogeneous groups 
either in the classroom designated for ENL instruction groups or the library. Most of the stand-alone classes are 
according to grade level. Ideally, and which is achieved in some cases, is to have a heterogeneous group of students 
all at the same grade level. In some cases the stand-alone groups are comprised of heterogeneous bands of students 
in two consecutive grades. Approximately 60% of the classes for ELL students are conducted via the integrated model. 
The other 40% are conducted via the stand-alone model. It is the school's goal to move more and more towards the 
Freestanding ENL classes being conducted via the integrated model with collaborative team teaching so that ELLs do 
not miss out on content area instruction. Instruction is aligned with the NYS standards and is geared towards 
extending and supporting classroom study in the content areas. The amount of instruction an ELL student receives per 
week is determined by the student's NYSITELL, Spanish LAB or NYSESLAT exams.   As described in CR Part 154.2, 
students who are desiganated entering or emerging receive 360 minutes of instruction per week.  Students who are 
designated transitioning or expanding receive 180 minutes of instruction per week.  Students who are designated 
commanding receive 90 minutes of instruction per week.   

b.  TBE program.  If applicable.   

The TBE program provides instruction in English and Spanish to develop English proficiency, by gradually reducing the 
amount of instruction in their native languages. Schools provide English Language Arts (ELA), Home Language Arts 
(HLA), and subject area classes in Spanish and English. As students develop English proficiency, time spent learning in 
English increases and Spanish instruction decreases. 

c.  DL program.  If applicable.    

N/A 

 

2.  How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each 

program model? 

a.  How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 

below)? 

          
Our ENL program follows the guidelines set for CR Part 154.2. In the integrated (co-teaching) ENL model, students are taught 
by both the certified ENL instructor as well as by the content teacher – in the mainstream classroom, simultaneously – to 
ensure students are receiving ELA instruction. In the stand-alone model, students are taught in heterogeneous groups in the 
classroom designated for ENL instruction.  This model allows the ENL teacher the ability to deliver specific ENL instruction – 
using HLA strategies when necessary.  Students at the entering and emerging levels receive 360 instructional minutes. through 
both integrated and standalone instruction.  Students at the transitioning and expanding levels receive 180 instructional 
minutes through either a combination of integrated and standalone, or only integrated.  Students at the commanding level 
receive 90 instructional minutes through integrated instruction only. 
 
In the TBE program ENL, ELA and HLA instructional minutes are incorporated into core content instruction as well as 
designated into periods throughout the week for SSL and ENL instruction.  To provide standalone minutes to entering and 
emerging students, the ENL teacher works with a small group in  the classroom or in another room.  

 
 
2018-19 SCEP-FL                                                                                                                                                                                                           76 

 

 

3.  Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and 

methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core 
Learning Standards.  
For the TBE program, there is a gradual release of instruction in the students' home language as proficiency in English 
increases.  The content areas are approached through the development and delivery of lessons for ELLs that have both 
language and content objectives. The content objective would be the theme or subject with which the ENL teacher works for 
that (i.e. Westward Expansion in Social Studies). The language objective would be a compliment to the content objective, in 
that it will help to make accessible to the students the language that they would need to interact with the content (i.e. 
students will write in the past tense when retelling a story). For example, the grammar point of writing in the past progressive 
might be a good compliment do discussing what was happening during a particular period of history. The Common Core 
Learning Standards are very beneficial in creating ENL curriculum in that they are heavily focused on ELA and specific language 
goals and can easily be translated into language objectives for lessons. Also, co-planning and collaboration between the ENL 
and mainstream classroom teachers provides the ENL teacher with further knowledge of the content that the mainstream 
classroom teachers are addressing. This helps the ENL teacher to further scaffold the material to make it more accessible to 
English language learners. Methods such as frontloading vocabulary for reading and using visuals to support vocabulary 
comprehension have proven very effective in helping to make the content more accessible for ELLs.            
 

4.  How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? 

For our TBE program, students receive instruction and assessment in core subjects regularly in both English and Spanish.  An 
assortment of methods are used to ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their native language. When an ELLs native 
language is Spanish, the ENL teacher will conduct the Spanish LAB (after conducting the NYSITELL) to assess the student's 
proficiency level. Since over 50% of the ELLs in P.S. 246 have Spanish as their L1, this method is particularly effective as it gives 
the ENL teacher some understanding of what literacy skills are in the L1. This is a good indicator of the literacy potential in the 
L2. Based on this assessment and the students’ NYSITELL, Spanish LAB and NYSESLAT results, the teacher determines when the 
students should utilize translations available for state level tests and resources such as translated tests or translators to read 
the questions to students in their native language. The teacher also have access to Engage NY Math materials in the students’ 
Native Language to further evaluate the students’ native language.    
 

5.  How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? 

SIFE   

a. 
b.  Newcomer  
c.  Developing   
d. 
e. 

Long Term 
Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status  

a. The plan for SIFE students is as follows: Currently, there are no SIFE student at P.S. The plan for SIFE students is as follows: -
Identify SIFE students upon their entrance into the school. -Pair students in class who speak their native language. -Utilize 
follow-along audio tapes with print support. -Provide at risk services from bilingual speech teacher. -Purchase picture 
dictionaries and high interest, picture support texts. -Parent support and meetings to facilitate the transition process. b. The 
plan for ELLs in U.S. schools for less than three years is as follows: -Total Physical Response (TPR), basic conversation, and 
vocabulary development are part of their instructional program. More advanced students receive ENL through the content 
areas. -Newcomers to this country receive the mandated 360 minutes or ESL instruction per week. -Taught in groups for 
maximum opportunities to work on listening, speaking, reading, and writing. -Given instruction in developing both BICS and 
CALP. -Interactive regalia, supported and interactive instruction. -All newcomers will receive additional instructional support 
after school as part of extended day programs. c. Differentiated instruction for developing ELLs is as follows:- Create graphic 
organizers for use in content classroom as well as ENL classroom- Provide visual glossaries and other visual supplements for 
text heavy readings- Group students with other students on similar development levels for direct instruction from a content or 
ENL teacherd. Differentiated instruction for long-term ELLs is as follows:- Provide high-interest; low-level books- Further 
development of Tier 2 and 3 words- Further grammar instruction to assist in writing developmente. Differentiated instruction 

 
 
2018-19 SCEP-FL                                                                                                                                                                                                           77 

 

for former ELLs is as follows:- Provide instruction and supports for up to two years after scoring ‘Commanding’ on NYSESLAT- 
As necessary, provide one-on-one support with writing- Provide plenty of models and examples of exemplary work           
 
 
  
 

6.  What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic 

content areas and accelerate English language development?  
Identified ELL-SWDs receive individualized academic support both within and outside of the classroom. Scaffolded instruction 
is provided to provide them with instruction tailored to the needs of each student. The specific needs of each student and best 
practices of instruction reflect the needs outlined on students’ Individualized Education Plan (IEP). Classroom teachers and the 
ENL teacher work together to provide the best instructional strategies and to help maintain instructional consistency inside 
and outside of the mainstream classroom. These practices provide access to content areas in addition to accelerating ELL-
SWDs language development. Such instructional strategies and grade-level materials include but is not limited to: adapted 
readings and lessons from curriculums and texts, increased use of visuals and video, small group instruction, repeated 
directions, modified directions. Additionally, bilingual dictionaries are provided to students to support their native language 
development. Our ENL and special education teachers work together to provide each student with the appropriate content 
and instruction through the use of these materials and strategies.      
  
 

7.  How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and 

attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? 
The school has all necessary services to meet the needs of all of the students in the school who have IEPs, including ELL 
students. The ENL teacher collaborates closely with special education teachers to give students extra support for the ELA test. 
In addition, the ENL program has meetings with the School Based Support Team (SBST) to closely monitor the ELL students 
who have Individualized Education Plans (IEPs). This collaboration allows us to focus on our students specific academic needs, 
to monitor their progress, and adjust instruction as needed. Teachers of ELL/SWD students use accommodations such as 
charts, preferential seating, break schedules, individual schedules, supportive checklists, on-task prompt cards, graphic 
organizers, and visuals to create instruction accessible to each student according to their needs. Teachers employ specific, 
familiar vocabulary and use technology to provide instruction that allows students to engage in learning through the academic 
content areas as well as to accelerate their English language development. P.S. 246 provides the least restrictive environment 
for ELL/SWD students through placement in ICT classrooms and classes that are collaboratively taught between the certified 
ESL instructor and the mainstream classroom teacher. ICT classes are taught by two teachers - one Common Branch-certified 
teacher and one Special Education-certified teacher. Both teachers have attended and continue to attend Professional 
Development (PD) days at which the best practices for ESL instruction are discussed and strategized. The ENL teacher push into 
these classrooms to provide ENL services in a small group setting right outside of the classroom. This instruction is coordinated 
with the other service providers in the school, including Physical and Occupational Therapy, Speech Therapy, and AIS and 
SETSS services.        
  
 

8.  Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups 

targeted).  List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which 
they are offered. 
In both the ENL classroom and students’ mainstream classroom, assessments are used to guide instruction and inform 
teachers of present levels of performance. Teachers College Running Records are used to indicate a students reading level and 
the particulars of the language (i.e. syntax, interpreting meaning) with which a student may be struggling. Also, Measures of 
Student Learning (MOSL) tests are administered toward the beginning of each year to assess students' skills in ELA and math. 
In regards to ELLs, many of the interventions occur in small groups, whether in a intergrated or stand alone. The ENL then 
makes the language more accessible in a number of ways. For example, in a math lesson in which ELLs are working with word 

 
 
2018-19 SCEP-FL                                                                                                                                                                                                           78 

 

problems, the ENL teacher will highlight key vocabulary words in efforts to lead the students to choosing the correct operation 
to solve a problem. In the case of an ELA lesson, the ESL teacher will often frontload certain vocabulary words and use employ 
visuals more so than in a mainstream classroom. Subgroups such as "Entering" and "Emerging" ELLs will sometimes be 
provided with a bilingual glossary for certain tasks. For ELLs with IEPs, the ENL teacher will meet with the special education 
coordinator in efforts to accommodate not only the linguistic needs of the students, but other needs as well. For example, if a 
student needs a certain amount of breaks over a period or if a student works with a paraprofessional, space and 
accommodations can be made. In the case of one student, a paraprofessional accompanies him to the classroom and I can 
have a lesson in which I utilize the paraprofessional and modify the lesson (i.e. highlighted vocabulary, having the directions 
read aloud) so to make it more accessible to the student.  
 
  
 

9.  Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year?    

The results from the ELL Periodic Assessment  indicate that in writing student's perform relatively less in the degree of 
response.  Therefore, the ENL instruction for the upcoming year will target analysis and elaboration in student's writing. 
 

10.  If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? 

There are no plans to discontinue the bilingual programs or any programs servicing ELL's.  
 

11.  How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs?  Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in 

your building. 
 ELLs are afforded equal access to multiple school-wide enrichment and after school programs, including Saturday Academy, 
Writing Club, P.S. 246 Choir,and our CBO Good Shepherd's After school program.  Additionally they participate in African 
Drumming and Choir via the  Brooklyn Conservatory of Music, Tap Dancing via Encouragement and Enrichment and 2nd 
graders are involved in the Swim for Life Program.  Our Title III funds administer our after school program called ELL 
Academy.  This program, which is staffed by certified ENL teachers, provides ENL students with additional support in English 
language development through instructional activities that are language-based and designed with research-based 
scaffolds.  The school is continuing in its efforts to improve the program by focusing on providing the ELLs with extra support in 
writing, the area of the NYSESLAT on which they perform lowest. The school invites ENL students to participate in enrichment 
and after school programming by distributing communication to families through flyers, which are translated into Spanish by 
the parent coordinator. Classroom teachers, ENL teachers, and administrators may recommend students to these programs 
during their communication with families, including formal family engagement programming such as Curriculum Night. 
Administrators send daily reminders to staff via e-mail about deadlines for program applications, which are then 
communicated to students and families.   
 

12.  What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language 

materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. 
ENL teachers design and create scaffolded instructional materials for ELLs in both content area classes and standalone 
instruction. Scaffolds may include: graphic organizers, guided notes, anchor charts, manipulatives, exemplars and anchor texts, 
glossaries of key discipline-specific terms and Tier 2 words that include translations, videos with subtitles, and additional 
comprehensible input such as Powerpoint presentations. ENL teachers use Raz Kids building literacy fluency and 
comprehension in English and as a support for TBE classrooms.  As well, Imagine Learning Literacy program where every child 
receives explicit, targeted instruction within an individualized learning path that continually adjusts to their needs.  There are 
over 4,300 engaging activities that teach critical language and literacy concepts such as reading and listening comprehension, 
basic vocabulary, academic language, grammar, phonological awareness, phonics, and fluency.  BrainPop ESL provides 
informational videos and enrichment activities that resemble gaming. The ESL extension utilizes ENL-specific strategies by 
presenting material with increased comprehensible input such as a slower pace of speaking and subtitles. Translation 
applications and web-based services such as Google Translate are frequently used by ENL teachers to scaffold instruction, 
especially when targeting vocabulary acquisition. Students are encouraged to use these tools as well in their production of 

 
 
2018-19 SCEP-FL                                                                                                                                                                                                           79 

 

language. In speaking activities, students occasionally use the web-based Vocaroo, which allows them to record their speaking 
and distribute the recording as an audio file or hyperlink, or to immediately listen to their speaking. ENL teachers will translate 
portions of instructional materials into students' native language based on English language proficiencies and corresponding 
levels of needed support. The ENL office and resource room includes a library with dictionaries in Spanish, French,and Arabic, 
as well as an extensive collection of bilingual books in English and Spanish and monolingual Spanish books.         
 
The following instructional material are used to support the ELLs in the  standalone  program: 
1. Decodable readers (newcomers, SIFE) 
2. Audiobooks, (newcomers, SIFE) 
3. RAZ Kids 
4.  Imagine Learning 
5. Scaffolded reading 
6. Graphic Organizers 
7. Exemplars 
 
The following materials are used to support our ELL students  across multiple content areas: 
1. Scaffolded reading (developing, long-term, former) 
2. Graphic organzers (newcommers, developing, long-term, former) 
3. Exemplars (all subgroups) 
4. Manipulatives (all subgroups) 
 

13.  How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? 

Home language support is delivered in the Freestanding ENL program through prompts in Spanish if needed by the ENL 
teacher. The teacher may also translate prompts or other components of instructional materials into students’ home 
languages. There is also a sizeable assortment of bilingual (English and Spanish) and Spanish monolingual books available in the 
ENL resource room and office. The approximately 8% of ENL students who speak French, Arabic, Albanian, Bengali, Fulani, 
Mandinka, Soninke, Thai, & Vietnamese are  permitted to use bilingual dictionaries for translation purposes when necessary, 
as well as web- or app-based translation services. When taking standardized math and science tests, ELLs have the option of 
receiving a test booklet in their native language as well as access to bilingual glossaries.  They can also have the questions and 
directions read to them in their native language. The school currently has to use The Big Word for translation and 
interpretation services for state exams. 
 

14.  Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels.  

The required services support, and resources correspond to ELLs' grade levels more than they do to ages. This is the case 
because certain students have been left back one or more grades or have returned to their country of origin for some years, 
which has interrupted their schooling in the United States. Service and resources correspond to grade level because the ESL 
teacher remains in close contact with mainstream classroom teachers and utilizes themes and texts from the content area to 
inform pull-out instruction. This provides a situation in which ELL students are engaging more deeply with the material with 
which they are working in their mainstream classes. The instruction of the material is re-conceptualized by the ENL teacher 
and is broken down into lessons which take into consideration not only content learning objectives, but language learning 
objectives as well. The type of language that the content employs and that the ELL students must use to respond to the 
content or content assessments is considered more deeply and made more accessible for the students. Also, in the 
integrated  model, the services and resources correspond to the ELLs' grade level even more directly as the content area is 
being co-tautht by the mainstream classroom teacher as well as the ENL teacher. The language is made more accessible in real 
time by the ESL teacher as instruction by the mainstream classroom teacher is taking place. Through both the stand alone and 
integrated instruction, students are interacting with the content they are learning about at their grade level, while developing 
the linguistic tools to engage with that content more deeply.  
 

15.  If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the 

ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met?   
N/A 

 
 
2018-19 SCEP-FL                                                                                                                                                                                                           80 

 

 

16.  Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for 

new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, 
parent coordinator).  
To assist newly enrolled ENL students before the beginning of the school year, they are invited to the school for a tour of and 
to meet with the ENL teachers as well as any of their other administrators, teachers, and staff that are on the premises, such as 
classroom teachers, specialists, special area teachers, school safety officers, and front office staff. ENL teachers and available 
administrators conduct the tours. Throughout the school year, newly enrolled ENL students and their families are offered a 
similar tour to assist in their transition to the school. Throughout the year, we have a host of activities to help ENL students 
and their families become familiar with the school. Such activities include orientations, parent teacher nights, dances, and 
other cultural events. Also, all ELL students are entitled to take part in the Title III-sponsored after school program, which aids 
in enriching their English language skills and is staffed by certified ENL teachers. 
 

17.  What language electives are offered to ELLs?  

N/A    
 

18.  For schools with dual language programs: 

a.  What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day 

(percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. 
In which language(s) is each core content area taught? 

b. 
c.  How is each language separated for instruction? 
d. 

Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same 
time (simultaneous)? 

N/A, We do not have a dual language program. 
 

 

Professional Development and Support for School Staff 

1.  Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic 

staff.)  What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs 
as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? 
ENL teachers attend various professional development opportunities (PDs) hosted by the District, specifically the Division of 
English Language Learners and Support Services. Trainings and workshops cover broad topics related to ENL administration 
and instruction, such as intake protocol, policy changes, or linguistic properties of mathematics or science discourse. The 
assistant principal also attends these PDs on occasion, and classroom teachers may be asked to attend. The school employs a 
consultant with an ENL teaching background who is available multiple days a week to meet with both ENL and classroom 
teachers to discuss instruction. There are regular school-wide professional development meetings, held every Monday, during 
which ENL teachers occasionally present to classroom teachers and staff about instructional strategies or resources for ENL 
students, including new learning from District PDs. On an upcoming school-wide professional development day, ENL teachers 
will host an "information session" for staff and classroom teachers followed by allotted time for co-planning every Tuesday. 
Administrators and ENL teachers are responsible for updating administrative staff about updates to ENL-related protocol 
following District trainings.          District staff and the Division of English Language Learners hosts multiple professional 
development days throughout the year during which aligning instruction with the Common Core Learning Standards is the 
primary objective. Activities within these PD opportunities may include: reviewing both seminal and recent literature related 
to ENL learning, applying theoretical frameworks to teaching hypotheticals that involve CCLS-based tasks to determine possible 
challenges or barriers to entry, exploring how Common Core standards engage students in language, and discussing specific 
strategies for scaffolding instruction and learning activities that are CCLS-aligned. Administrators suggest relevant trainings to 
teachers of ELLs, including ENL and bilingual teachers.           
 

 
 
2018-19 SCEP-FL                                                                                                                                                                                                           81 

 

 

2.  Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all 
teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include 
how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance).  Refer to ELL Policy and Reference 
Guide, Professional Development section. 
Administrators inform teachers and staff of relevant PD opportunities, including those facilitated by the Division of English 
Language Learners.  They further ensure that the stipulations of Part 154 are met by prioritizing trainings and workshops that 
are specifically for the integration of ENL learning frameworks and instructional strategies with discipline-specific content and 
practices. For example, an ENL teacher was directed by administrators to attend two trainings in the linguistic considerations 
of math and science discourse, both of which were offered by the Division of English Language Learners. These trainings 
aligned with the mandate for professional development that strengthens' educators' understanding of the integration of ENL 
instruction with content learning. Administrators also allot a portion of in-school professional development to ENL-specific 
themes. For example, for an upcoming professional development day, an ENL teacher will host an information session for all 
classroom teachers and staff, followed by weekly meetings about instructional strategies for ENL students. Engaging ENL 
teachers in school-wide PD this way supports efforts to meet the stipulation that 15% of hours for all teachers relate to the 
instruction of ELLs. All staff members maintain records by filing agendas from professional development hours, including 
school-wide PDs, as these include a portion of the ENL-specific training.  Agendas from District trainings are similarly filed by 
individual staff members. Administrators maintain attendance sheets for each PD session, and when staff attend trainings and 
workshops off-site they sign any available attendance sheets. For teachers who meet with the school's instructional 
consultant, including ENL teachers discussing issues related specifically to the teaching of ELLs, the consultant maintains 
records of dates and times that she meets with teachers.           
 
 

Parental Involvement 

1.  How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language 
development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? 
Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent 
orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences?  
Meetings for families of ELLs include but are not limited to: incoming student orientations,  school curriculum nights, PTA 
meetings, and IEP meetings. Additionally, the ELL Coordinator hosts parent meetings to provide information about 
programming and student progress. Throughout the year, ENL teachers will schedule individual meetings with families of ELLs 
to discuss goals, current performance, and next steps. All teachers use their Tuesday afternoon designated parent outreach 
time to meet or speak individually with family members about students' progress. For ENL students, this outreach might 
include discussion of language development and further needs. The staff includes a number of personnel who are fluent or 
proficient in Spanish and if needed these staff members may provide translation during interactions with families. The school 
also utilizes the Office of Translation and Interpretation to provide translations for documents for families as well as for 
translating purposes over the phone for in-person meetings.  In the past, the school has outsourced translation services to The 
Big Word.   When parents attend individual meetings, they sign a sign-in log that includes the date and their name.  A 
powerpoint presentation is presented around the topics discussed.  The ELL Coordinator keeps the sign-in log, information 
around what is discussed at the meetings, and maintain records of these individual meetings. If meetings include a survey or 
form related to ENL compliance, such as the Parent Survey & Program Selection Form for incoming ELLs, the ENL Coordinator 
keeps a copy of these completed forms in the ENL Compliance binder for the current school year and place a copy in the 
student’s permanent record.  An agenda of these meetings is also kept by the ELL Coordinator and and shared with the 
assistant principal and if possible shared with the ENL teachers and any other staff in attendance. The ENL Coordinator logs 
when entitlement letters were distributed to students, as well as any reminders to students about returning the letters. All 
correspondence, including letters that are to be signed and returned, letters that are not required to be returned, as well as 
copies of any flyers to families, in the ENL Compliance binder.  

 

2.  Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. 

The school holds monthly meetings for parents and families in the Bilingual/ENL program.  These meetings provide 
refreshments, are scheduled at a time that families report is convenient, and are conducted in both English and Spanish. These 

 
 
2018-19 SCEP-FL                                                                                                                                                                                                           82 

 

 

meetings typically inform parents about the current and upcoming curriculum, teacher observations of student progress, and 
ample opportunity for parents to ask questions or report their own observation of the child's language development, as well as 
any concerns they may have. The school's parent coordinator schedules multiple events with the specific objective to support 
families. For example, the coordinator will schedule a morning or afterschool informational fair in the school's cafeteria to 
inform families about current opportunities for students and local community resources. Outreach for this event included 
bilingual flyers and phone calls to students' homes from the coordinator, who is bilingual (English and Spanish). The parent 
coordinator also assists with translating notifications of school events, such as an upcoming Brooklyn Music Conservatory 
events, ELL Academy afterschool and Saturday Academy programs and Zumba class, into Spanish. There are also periodic 
school-wide meetings for families like Curriculum Night to reach out to parents and keep them informed of the school's 
activities.             
 

Additional Information 

Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for 
ELLs.  You may attach/submit charts.   This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted.   
Paste response here:    
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 
 
2018-19 SCEP-FL                                                                                                                                                                                                           83 

Part V: ELL Identification Attestation 

Principal Certification 

2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 
6. 

7. 

8. 

9. 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL 
Policy and Reference Guide, I, Andrea A. Johnson, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are 
adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 
 
1. 

The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for 
students entering with IEPs). 
Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined 
a. 

If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status 
relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level.  

The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue.   
a.  The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services 
are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality 
translation service.   

Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined.   
a. 

If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility 
to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. 

Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible.   
Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language.  
a.  Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. 
If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish 
LAB.  
Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources 
available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-
education-sife.  
If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting.  
a.  Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent 

video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask 
questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided 
throughout the meeting. 

10.  ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected.  

a. 

b. 

If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program 
in accordance with DOE transfer policies. 
If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent 
choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice.   

11.  Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process).  
12.  If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose 

ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 
 

 

 
 
2018-19 SCEP-FL                                                                                                                                                                                                           84 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

Part VI: LAP Assurances 

School Name:   P.S.246                                                                              School DBN: 10X246 
Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate.  Names listed in Part A, should align with this 
section.  

Name (PRINT) 

Andrea A. Johnson 

Title 

Principal 

Susan Rivera 

Assistant Principal 

Mario Robles 

Parent Coordinator 

Vanessa Livingston-Prince 

ENL/Bilingual Teacher 

Vivian Ortiz 

Parent 

Darian Granville 

Teacher/Subject Area 

Ivelisse Ortega 

Teacher/Subject Area 

Stacey Moyler 

Lito Verdeflor 

Coach 

Coach 

Tara CannistracI 

School Counselor 

Maribel Torres Hulla 

Jill Schimmel 

Florentino Rosa 

           

           

Superintendent 
 
Field Support Center Staff 
Member 
               
Other Senior Ell 
compliance Specialist 

Other            

Other            

 

Signature 

Date (mm/dd/yy) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

6/30/19 

6/30/19 

6/30/19 

6/30/19 

6/30/19 

6/30/19 

6/30/19 

6/30/19 

6/30/19 

6/30/19 

6/30/19 

          6/30/19 

          6/30/19 

           

           

 
 
2018-19 SCEP-FL                                                                                                                                                                                                           85 

2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS 

Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools 

 

School 
Name: 

 

The Poe Center, PS 246  

Superintendent:  MaribelHulla 

 

 
 

DBN: 

10X246  

 

 

 
The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. 
If there is more than one LAC, list all. 
 

First Name  

Last Name  

Title  

Has the LAC attended a 

2018-19 training 

The LAC was involved in 
the development of this 

conducted by the Field 

plan? Yes/No  

Language Access 

Coordinator? Yes/No  

Andrea  

Susan 

Vanessa 

Mario 

   

Johnson 

Rivera 

Principal 

Assistant Principal 

Livingston-Prince 

ELL Coordinator 

Robles 

Parent Coordinator 

no 

Yes 

Yes 

No 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

 
* The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs 
on translation,  
interpretation, compliance and budget.  
 

School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful 
opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's 
Regulation A-663).  
 
By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and 
interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). 
 
Part A:  Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 
 
1.  Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written 

and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from: 

  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS) 
  Automate The System (ATS) reports 
  Student Emergency Contact cards 
  Surveys conducted by your school. 

 

The following data and methodologies are used to assess the school's written translation and oral interpretation 
needs: 

 
1. The parents of newly admitted students to the NYCDOE complete the Home Language Identification Survey 
(HLIS). Part III of the HLIS lists the preferred language of the parent for both written and oral communication. 

 
 
2018-19 SCEP-FL                                                                                                                                                                                                           86 

 

 
2. All Parents complete the emergency contact cards and the school's Learning Environment Survey, they are 
supported in this through the interpretation and translation services of the Parent Coordinator and other 
bilingual members of the staff. 
 
 
3. The school maintains a record of the primary language of each student and this information is maintained in 
ATS and on the students' emergency card. The majority of the parents request information in Spanish which is 
easily covered by a staff member. However, for other languages requested, the school utilizes Language Line to 
communicate with parents in their language of choice. 
 
4. As part of the school's CEP planning with the School Leadership Team, the school addresses the language 
assistance needs, including: regular provision of translated documents through either existing resources or the 
Translation and Interpretation Unit, timely provision of interpretation services at group or individual meetings 
upon request, will engage the services of Language Line when such services are necessary for parents to 
communicate with teachers, guidance counselors, school nurse and/or other school staff regarding critical 
information about their child's education. Parents are informed of the availability of translation and 
interpretation services when visiting the school.  
 
 
 

 

 

 
 
2.  List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, 

which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language 
Report (RCPL) ATS report. 
 

Language  

Written Preferred  

Percent Written  

Oral Preferred  

Percent Oral  

Afrikaanas 

Albanian 

Arabic 

Bengali 

Estonian 

Fulani 

Lao 

English 

Spanish 

Thai 

Vietnamese 

   

 

0 

1 

13 

1 

1 

1 

1 

286 

445 

1 

4 

0 

0.13 

1.73 

0.13 

0.13 

0.13 

0.13 

37.98 

59.1 

0.13 

0.53 

1 

2 

11 

1 

0 

1 

1 

281 

451 

1 

4 

0.13 

0.27 

1.46 

0.13 

0 

0.13 

0.13 

37.32 

59.89 

0.13 

0.53 

 
 
2018-19 SCEP-FL                                                                                                                                                                                                           87 

 
3.  From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at 

least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, 
French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. 
 

n/a 

 

 
 
Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 
 
1.  List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be 

distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents.  
 

Document Name  

Month/Frequency Distributed to Families  

How do you 

plan to 

translate? 

Include 

procedures to 
ensure timely 
provision of 
translated 

documents to 

parents.  

All 
disseminated 
documents 
are translated 
by the Parent 
Coordinator 
and other 
bilingual 
members of 
the staff at 
least a week 
prior to being 
disseminated. 
All other large 
document 
language 
translations 
are done by 
the DOE or 
one of it's 
approved 
vendors.  

 

 

Parent Handbook 

September 

 

Parent-Teacher Conferences, 

September, November 

 
 
2018-19 SCEP-FL                                                                                                                                                                                                           88 

March & May 

 

September -June 

 

 

 

 

 

October-May 

 
 

 

Memos, 

Daily/Weekly Announcements, Calendars 

 

 

After school and Saturday School Program 
Information 

 

 

 

   

 

 

 

 

 

Over-the-
phone 
interpretation, 
parent 
volunteers, 
and in-person 
interpretation 
are all utilized. 
All documents 
requiring 
translation 
from the 
Translation 
and 
Interpretation 
Unit are sent 
out at least 
two-four 
weeks prior to 
dissemination 
ensuring the 
translation is 
completed in 
a timely 
manner. 

 

 

 

 

2.  List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as 

parent-teacher  
conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings.  
   

 
 
2018-19 SCEP-FL                                                                                                                                                                                                           89 

 

Meeting Name  

Month/Frequency of Meetings  

How does your school plan to 

Curriculum Night 

September 

November 

Parent-Teacher Conferences 

March 

Daily interactions with school staff, 
including teachers, guidance 
counselors, parent coordinator, and 
school administration. 

Parent Orientation 

Parent Workshops 

May 

As needed 

On-Going 

Bi-Weekly 

IEP & IST Parent Meetings 

On-Going 

Middle School Articulation Meetings 

November - March 

 

   

 

 

provide interpretation service(s)?  

We use over-the-phone 
interpretation service and bilingual 
school personnel as needed. 

We use over-the-phone 
interpretation service and bilingual 
school personnel as needed. 

We use over-the-phone 
interpretation service and bilingual 
school personnel as needed. 

We use bilingual school personnel 
and/or translation unit.  

We use bilingual school personnel 
and/or translation unit. 

We use over-the-phone 
interpretation service and bilingual 
school personnel as needed. 

We use over-the-phone 
interpretation service and bilingual 
school personnel as needed. 

 

3.  Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of 

a school emergency.  
 

In the event of an emergency all parents including limited English proficient families will be contacted via telephone 
using School Messenger in English and Spanish. Additionally teachers submit their list of parent languages to one of 
the office secretaries and other staff members who calls the interpretation service.  

 
 

 
 
Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure

 
Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and 
what resources are available to meet compliance.  
 

To ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor's Regulation A-663, the school provides 
information via professional development, signs are posted in each of the most prominent covered languages, 
indicating the availability of interpretation services. The Language Access Coordinator will turnkey training on 
language access to all staff members. A list of staff members who are able to assist with interpretation and translation 

 
 
2018-19 SCEP-FL                                                                                                                                                                                                           90 

 

 

is available to all staff, including the school's safety officers. The School's safety plan contains procedures for ensuring 
that parents in need of language access services are not prevented from reaching the school's administrative offices 
solely due to language barriers. The Staff is also informed of the Translation and Interpretation Unit, Language Line 
and the Department's website which provides information in each of the covered languages concerning the rights of 
parents to translation and interpretation services. 

 

 
 
Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services 
 
Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive 
information. Include any: 

  Translated signage 
  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents 
  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) 

 

Central provides signage information annually informing parents of their rights to information regardless of their 
language. We extend that information poster by adding languages not identified but specific to our school . We obtain 
translated versions of this document, in the covered languages, through 
http://schools.nyc.gov/RulesPolicies/ParentBillOfRights/default.htm. and additionally via a DOE vendor service. 
 
The school posts a sign in each of the most prominent parent areas of the building about covered languages, 
indicating the readily availability of interpretation services. A list of staff members who are able to assist with 
interpretation and translation is available to all staff, including the schools safety When more than 10% of the parents 
at the school speak a preferred language that is neither English nor a covered language, we will obtain from the 
Translation and Interpretation Unit a translation into such language of the signage and forms required pursuant to 
this section and shall post and provide such forms in accordance with this section.  
 

 
 
Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services 
Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the 
language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services?   
 

Our Parent Coordinator and PTA work closely with parents and have several parent workshops each month gathering 
feedback from families. Our parent coordinator maintains an attendance sheet indicating parents needing other 
language interpretation in order to engage an interpreter subsequent events. Parents are given the annual parent 
survey which includes a comment section and asks them to describe the availability and quality of translation services 
throughout the year. Phone surveys are provided for those families not under a DOE covered language via their 
preferred language translation. Also Feedback from parents on the quality and availability of services is gathered from 
parent surveys and parent reflections from parent workshops, as well as informal feedback from parents. Based on 
informal feedback, the school has provided additional support for parents to complete documents via the assistance 
of our parent coordinator, parent volunteers, Language Line and DOE services. 

 

 

 
 
2018-19 SCEP-FL                                                                                                                                                                                                           91 

