 17K012 School Name: DR. JACQUELINE PEEK-DAVIS SCHOOL Principal: SHAMIKA WATSON 2018-19 SCEP-FL 1  School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Section 4: SCEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Dr. Jacqueline Peek-Davis School 331700010012 Prek-5 430 Howard Avenue 718-953-4569 School Number (DBN): K012 718-953-4428 Phone Number: ShamikaWatson Fax: swatson16@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 17 Superintendent’s Office Address: Email Address: Shamika Watson Cherrol Bernard Charise Mack LaToyaGarcia Kim Franklin N/A N/A District Information Mr. Clarence Ellis Superintendent: 1224 Park Place cellis@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-221-4372 Phone Number: 718-953-4428 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 3  Brooklyn FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: MauriciereDegovia Executive Director: 415 89th street mdegovi@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 7189235171 Phone Number: 718-759-4960 Fax: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the SCEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Shamika Watson Cherrol Bernard Charise Mack Linda Brown Kim Franklin N/A N/A N/A Linda Brown LaToya Garcia *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable DC-37 Assistant Principal 2018-19 SCEP-FL 5  Name Kimberly Naidu Sha-NayLowery Kim Franklin Jennifer Santos Signature (Blue Ink) Position and Constituent Group Represented Member/UFT(Teacher) Parent Parent Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 SCEP-FL 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) is a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. The process of developing and implementing the SCEP is aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding SCEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and SCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 7  In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement 2018-19 SCEP-FL 8  NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the SCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the SCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for SCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 9   Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 5: Build consensus around activities, strategies and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 6: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 7: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 10  1. What is your school’s mission statement? Mission_Statement Section 4: SCEP Overview Dr. Jacqueline Peek-Davis Elementary School also known as P.S. 12 is the pride of Ocean-Hill, Brownsville. Our school motto says it all "Together we aspire, Together we achieve". We are a community of learners in which all children are encouraged to achieve high academic standards and social success. Our school celebrates diversity and individuality in our community. We believe it is essential to foster a safe and orderly environment, maintaining structure and providing each student with a nurturing environment. Our students are empowered to take responsibility for their own academic success. Students are active participants in building school community, through respect and honesty fostering positive attitudes and character. All members of the P.S.12 school community work together to create an environment where students and staff strive for excellence. As a community of learners, PS 12 is committed to promoting academic excellence for all of our students by: establishing a safe, orderly and nurturing learning environment. We will develop character and social awareness that fosters a positive school culture, ensuring that all students achieve academic excellence through high quality differentiated instruction thereby developing life long learners adaptable to the challenges of our evolving technological world. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Dr. Jacqueline Peek-Davis is an elementary school with 279 students from pre-kindergarten through grade 5. The school population comprises of 77.8% Black or African American, 18.8% Hispanic, 1.7% White and .9% Asian students. Our Title I population is 84%. The student body includes 7% English language learners and 22% special education students. Boys account for 50% of the students enrolled and girls account for 50%. The average attendance rate for the school year 2016-2017 was 89.4%. Special Initiatives Our school infuses common planning for all grades. We have an established Professional Learning Team consisting of grade leaders who meet weekly with the principal and assistant principal to discuss the instructional focuses and plan upcoming professional learning. In our school we use google drive as a shared and secure data base for instructional resources, curriculum, protocols and teacher team data. We utilize assessments to meet the needs of our learners and review a variety of data beginning in Prek. New York Junior Tennis & Learning After school (NYJTL) New York Junior Tennis & Learning is our sole after school. The program runs Monday-Friday 2:20pm-5:30pm and 13 days during the holiday or school vacation from 8am-6pm (September-August) This is a safe haven for our students and families. The NYJTL After school goal is to create opportunities for children to have fun while empowering their minds on their way to becoming life-long learners, active citizens, and happy successful positive contributors to society. NYJTL strive to create an after-school environment that is safe, comfortable, and intellectually stimulating, 2018-19 SCEP-FL 11  with books, art and writing supplies, science-experiment tools, and spaces that can be arranged for group or individual work. This supports development of social and emotional skills (SEL). As part of the program, students have daily physical fitness activities, read and write stories, work on homework assignments, learn to conduct hands on science experiments, participate in the arts through string instruments and chorus, as well as creative arts through visual crafts, and receive group tutoring if needed and community referrals for any additional support service. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Our school has a special needs population with a self-contained class on grades 1-5. Our special needs program is a combination of 12:1:1 classes, ICT classes, and SETSS. Behavior Intervention Plans and other supports are put in place for students with special needs. Some students are mainstreamed to general education settings for specific content, subject matter or activities with no limitations as directed by the IEP. An administrator oversees the special needs department along with a team consisting of the guidance counselor, social worker and psychologist as well as a family worker. Team meetings are held weekly to discuss students designated with special needs and students at risk who need alternative supports. Based on the state data for the 2017-2018 school year our special needs students in grades 3-5 increased in Level 1 and decreased in Level 2 on the ELA state exams. In addition, there was no change in Level 1's in mathematics based on the state data for the 2017-2018 school year and decrease in Level 2's. However, there was an increase in level 3 and 4 from 2017 to 2018. We attribute this decline to the number of new admits with special needs services throughout the year, the increase in percentage of special needs students served in the 2017-2018 school year, high parental request for student evaluations and a decline in register projection for the 2017-2018 school year. In addition, based on the state data for the 2017-2018 school year, our school is represented by a significant number of students who fall under the economically disadvantaged subgroup. Within this subgroup, In mathematics, of the 61 students that were tested in 2018, 13% were proficient. 30% scored a level 2, 7% scored a level 3 and 7% scored a level 4. In English language arts, of the 61 students that were tested, 18% were proficient. 34% scored a level 2, 16% scored a level 2 and 2% scored a level 4. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Reflecting on the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is designed based on student strengths and needs providing opportunity for student voice and choice. Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Teachers are aligning learning by revising units, creating lesson plans to provide multiple entry points and developing strategies to differentiate instruction and support the needs of all learners. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 12  Our next steps are to incorporate complex materials and resources into most lessons. We also need to work on higher order questioning to deepen critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: Our staff will integrate social emotional programs such as Sanford Harmony, Yoga and PBIS in the school day to support an ability to make responsible decisions and promote positive student interactions. The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Currently we have a PBIS (Positive Behavior Intervention Support) framework to support students in each classroom and schoolwide. Our next steps are to infuse Sanford Harmony (character education program) and PBIS to enhance the culture in our school. Continue to build the rapport between the social emotional team, parents, staff and the entire school community. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Currently teachers meet at least once per week to analyze student data, modify lessons and units in small teacher teams using Data wise rolling agendas and norms as best practice. Our next steps are to ensure all teams (both teacher teams and non-teacher teams) continue this system to provide an evident structure of excellence. Effective School Leadership: The Principal lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Currently the school leader use a variety of resources to support the student learning school wide. Our next steps are to utilize the Data wise system in order to develop a routine and structure of documentation while analyzing data. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 13  To explore grant writing and attaining additional funding to enhance school wide enrichment and student progress. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Currently we have partnerships with law enforcement and community organizations. We have a host of parent activities and family night. Our most recent parent event included 220 families yet we only have 248 students. Our next steps are to ensure parents are able to lead CCLS professional developments and assess their own student needs. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Currently we have a school motto that we live by "Together we aspire, together we achieve" developing trust and building community. We host several unity events and school wide team building opportunities. Our next steps are to ensure developing trust is part of everyday practice amongst the entire school community. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 14  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 17K012 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 282 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 29 30 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 20 13 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 95.0% % Attendance Rate 92.2% % Reduced Lunch 8.9% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.7% 23.8% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 3.9% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 0.1 0% 0% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 33.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 90% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No No Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups ED Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities N/A N/A N/A N/A NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 17 16 88.9% 2.8% 25.9% 71.6% 0.0% 0.7% 2 14% 11.1 30.1% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No Yes NO N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 15  Economically Disadvantaged N/A ALL STUDENTS N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 16  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to our most recent Quality Review in 2016- 2017, the school needs to "ensure that teacher pedagogy is informed by the instructional shifts, is aligned to the curricula and meets the needs of all learners so that all students produce meaningful work products." Strengths  According to Quality Review indicator 1.2, teacher practices consistently provide students with multiple entry points into the curriculum, allowing for learners to engage in conversation and produce meaningful work products.  According to Quality Review indicator 2.2, teachers are using assessment rubrics and checks for understanding to provide actionable feedback to students. The use of ongoing checks for understanding results in effective adjustments to instruction. On-the-spot adjustments to instruction to meet student needs is observed across classrooms. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 17   According to Quality Review indicator 4.2, teachers are engaged in vertical teams and common planning time. Teacher teams meet and use formative assessments to determine commonalities of student success and areas for growth across grade. Teachers discuss instructional next steps. Teachers have strengthened their instructional capacity through team collaboration. Needs  According to Quality Review Indicator 1.1, teachers must ensure that planning consistently reflects integration of modifications to address the different learning styles of all students.  According to Quality Review Indicator 1.2, teachers must ensure that entry points are strategic and that students are provided with the opportunity to demonstrate higher order thinking skills in work products. Also, teachers must ensure that students are able to take ownership of their learning without teacher prompting.  According to Quality Review Indicator 2.2, teachers' practice across classrooms should consistently reflect the varied use of ongoing checks for understanding and student self assessment so that students are aware of their next steps.  According to Quality Review indicator 4.2, the vast majority of teachers should be engaged in inquiry-based, structured professional collaborations that strengthen teacher instructional capacity and promote the implementation of the Common Core Learning Standards. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 at least 50% of all teachers will utilize F&P, on-demand writing pieces and conference note assessments to progress monitor student outcomes which will result in 50% of all students making academic outcomes. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 18  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). ● Use of a 4 week inquiry and planning cycle that will allow teachers to collaborate in order to: 1.) Revise current units of study, 2.) Analyze student work using various protocols, 3.) Analyze student data, 4.) Engage in professional learning/sharing of best practices. Grades K-5 ● Teacher's College, GoMath, Passport to Social Studies, and McGrawHill New York Science, technological support through SMART BOARDS and computers to further enhance the learning for students with special needs, English Language Learners, and other high-need student subgroups in our school. Grades 3-5 Teachers will engage in Problem Solving using Math Exemplars to build math critical thinking and reasoning. Mondays from 2:20-3:40pm Tuesdays from 3:00-3:35pm weekly Daily from Sept.-June Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Principal, Teacher Principal, RTI Team, RTI Provider, Teacher ● Teachers will work collaboratively to implement strategies for students in need of additional support. Small group instruction will be utilized by RTI providers and classroom teachers to ensure that students receive targeted instruction to accelerate their learning. Grades Sept- June K-5 Bi-weekly ● Opportunities for enrichment and intervention will be thoughtfully planned during teacher team meetings by using Datawise methods to improve instruction. Principal, RTI Team, RTi Provider, Teacher, PTA President, SLT Trained parents and community volunteers. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 19  Teachers will examine and assess students writing in teacher teams based on CCLS standards. In collaboration with National Training Network (NTN) teachers are provided with ongoing weekly on-site professional developments. Exemplars Math performance material provides teachers and administrators with a way of teaching and assessing, problem solving, and communication skills using rubrics. Teacher teams will assess student work using the Exemplars Math rubric. ● Through family engagement activities and parent meetings on a weekly basis parents and teachers will collaborate to work with students on areas of need as based by the NYS item skills analysis while using formative assessment to share data. Sept.-June All Families Sept-June Principal, Team, Parent Coordinator, RTI Provider, Teacher 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Our school will engage families in order to support the rigorous instruction and CCLS at home by hosting the following initiatives and opportunities: By September 2019 the use and implementation of Facebook, Twitter and our school website (www.ps12brooklyn.org) will be used to promote and support our school goals and learning. By November 2018 Principal Watson Assistant Principal Garcia and members of the SLT as well as the Parent Coordinator will host school tours, learning walks and classroom visits. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 20  By January 2018 each grade band will host a parent evening to support the current unit of study and parent engagement. By February 2018 our school will host at least 5 parent sessions on CCLS, Teachers College Writing, Mathematics and STEM. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. - Teacher observations and teacher feedback on lesson and unit revisions based on formative and summative assessments. - Summer trainings, September Conferences; Monday PD's, Professional Opportunities, Consultants in ELA and Math, November Election Day; November 2018- April 2019; one to one meetings; Use of Datawise in team meetings, after school, common prep; sub coverage and ATR coverage; Principal notes and feedback. - Implementation of guided reading; guided reading library and independent reading books. Common planning, Per Diem coverage for teacher training/ teacher and para professional development, summer professional planning, per session Teacher team meetings; common planning.Absence Teacher Reserve coverage; Sub Teachers; Use of Citywide Expectation funding. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding X C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019 at least 25% of all teachers will utilize F&P, on-demand writing pieces and conference note assessments to progress monitor student outcomes which will result in 25% of all students making academic outcomes. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 21  ADVANCE teacher observations, professional learning team feedback, use of the evaluation tool Advance, teacher artifacts and student work products will allow us to measure progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 22  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. X X X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Our most recent Quality Review indicated that we are proficient in school culture "Establish a culture for learning that communicates high expectations to staff, students and families and provide supports to achieve those expectations." Strengths  According to Quality Review indicator 3.4, school leaders communication high expectations for instruction to faculty and staff via staff handbook, weekly newsletters and memorandums and professional development sessions. Teachers are held accountable through walkthroughs, one on one conversations and observations feedback. School leaders communication with parents through progress reports, phone calls, flyers and workshops. In addition, parents receive communication regarding the school's expectations for their children through opportunities such as parent orientation, curriculum nights and meet and greets. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 23  Needs  According to Quality Review indicator 3.4, school leaders and staff should effectively communicate expectations connected to a path of college and career readiness and successfully partner with families to support student progress toward those expectations. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools –Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 at least 90% of all staff will integrate Sanford Harmony into the school day to support social emotional well-being to improve 50% of all student academic and social outcomes. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 24  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional   development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Implementation of Sanford Harmony character education program that uses practical methods for reducing relational conflicts and increases student confidence in relationship skills and academic excellence.  PBIS Matrix and assessment of school culture based on a compassion assessment. All students and staff Sept.-June (Daily for 15 minutes per day in all classes 4 x per week) Sept.-June (As needed) ● Creation of Behavioral Intervention Plans (BIP) and Functional Behavioral Assessments (FBA) for selected students in need of behavior management. Selected students with behavioral needs. ● Teachers will be trained in management strategies that focus on preventative measures to deescalate situations in classrooms. ● Positive Behavior Intervention Supports (PBIS) refresher training will take place for new teachers and teachers who need additional support in Domain 2: Classroom Environment in the Framework for Teaching. All students and staff Sept.-June (Monthly) ● Parents will be made aware of any incident involving their child in a supportive manner. The discipline code will be shared during Curriculum Night, Parent Teacher Tuesdays and student behavior will be captured in all progress reports sent home to parents. All Families Sept.-June (Monthly) Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Social Emotional Team, Crisis Team, Teachers Social Emotional Team, Crisis Team, Teachers, Classroom Teachers Psychologist, Social Worker, Guidance Counselor, Social Emotional Team, Crisis Team, Teachers, Classroom Teachers Principal, Social Emotional Team, Classroom Teachers , Parent Coordinator, PTA, After School director 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Our school will engage families in order to support their understanding of Supportive Environment at home by hosting the following initiatives and opportunities: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 25  -Parent evenings and workshops to allow parents to develop an understanding of the initiatives such as PBIS and Sanford Harmony that are taking place during the school day and learn strategies for implementing the skills at home. -Weekly opportunities for parents to meet with school faculty to discuss their children's academic and social emotional progress. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Using Title I monies, TL funds and Title I 1003 monies the school and family ties will be strengthened in order to welcome and encourage partnerships. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will be at least a 45% decrease in school incidents as measured by the school’s Annual OORS report. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The NYCDOE online occurrence reporting system (OORS) which is a database containing all incidents in all schools citywide. Parent engagement and participation in school events, parent attendance and parent commitment to school wide programs. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 26  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. SOP(s) Addressed X X 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. X 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to the 2017 Quality Review report the school was rated as proficient in quality indicator 1.1 "Ensure engaging rigorous coherent curricula in all subjects accessible for a variety of learners and aligned to common core learning standards and/or content standards. " Strengths  According to Quality Review indicator 1.1, the school faculty develop curriculum maps, lesson plans, and pacing calendars aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards and incorporated the instructional shifts. Lesson plans demonstrate that teachers make modifications to units through the use of instructional grouping, small group work, scaffolds, and manipulatives so that all learners have access to the rigorous tasks. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 27  Areas of Needs  According to Quality Review Indicator 1.1, teachers must ensure that all lesson plans provide access to content to learners with various learning styles. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 at least of 70% of all teachers will modify units of study in all content areas based on standard-aligned assessments to improve 50% of all student academic outcomes. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 28 Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). ● Teachers will use data wise methods to analyze and assess student needs through the use of protocols. In addition, the staff development team will work with groups of teachers to align their Core Curriculum lesson plans to this style of teaching to increase high levels of thinking and improve student discussions. ● With support from our literacy consultant, English as a New Language Teacher, special education teachers and lead grade leaders, the lesson plans will include differentiated learning options for students with disabilities and English Language Learners. ENL and Special Education Teachers All teachers Sept-June All teachers Sept - June Literacy Consultant Grade Leaders Staff Development Team Sept - June Principal, Literacy Consultant Principal, Literacy Consultant, Grade Leaders All Families Sept-June Parent Coordinator Grade Leaders ● Teams of teachers will provide targeted professional development to their colleagues to ensure that there is cohesiveness. ● All Teachers will participate in inter-visitations using the Instructional Rounds model to further enhance their learning. ● During our parent workshops all parents in attendance learn how Common Core Learning Standards are infused in our school community while observing and taking low inference notes. This will enable parents to also participate in small study groups and gain a clearer understanding of the instructional aspect of the school. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Our school will engage our families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and Strategies in the following ways: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 29  From November to May parents and SLT will receive a series of training on the implementation of Data wise via videos and protocols. From October to May parents will observe teachers as they engage in a planning session or teacher-team meeting. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The literacy consultant will support our teachers and students weekly. Teachers will be provided with professional development and in-class teaching support to elevate teaching practices. Selected Mondays will be utilized by teachers to collaboratively analyze data and revise current units of study and lesson plans. In addition, Mondays will be used to engage in teacher team meetings that involve sharing of lessons and discourse around best practices. Invest funds in new non-fiction independent reading books, guided reading, Book clubs, Storyworks magazines and a host of non fiction reading materials. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding X C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, at least of 35% of all teachers will modify units of study in all content areas based on standard-aligned assessments to improve 25% of all student academic outcomes. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 30  ADVANCE Observations, the Google Drive, Student artifacts, curriculum mapping and curriculum modifications will allow us to measure progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 31  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). X X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on the school leaders Principal Performance Review the school leader adjusts and modifies the school budget to benefit the needs of the school community. School leaders make strategic organizational decisions to support the school's instructional goals and meet student learning needs, as evidenced by meaningful student work products. Strengths The school leader collaborates with parents, SLT, staff and parents to create and use transparent systems and protocols that afford students and teachers the ability to fully benefit from a flexible and thoughtful program aligned to student achievement. Areas of Need To continuously use resources, human capital and financial resources to benefit the school community. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 32  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART– Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 school leaders, including teacher leaders and team leaders, will engage in instructional learning walks to progress monitor Danielson Domain 3 (instruction) utilizing a school-created rubric to result in improved pedagogical outcomes in 60% of all teachers. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 33  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) ● School leaders will develop a plan for professional development that will further develop teachers in delivering Common Core aligned lessons from our Core Curriculum (ie. Ready Gen and Go Math). All Teachers July-June Grade Leaders, Principal Weekly Our Professional Learning Plan will reflect mathematics support via internal (support from a math consultant) and varied citywide math professional learning opportunities. Our Professional Learning Plan will reflect ELA support via internal (support from a literacy consultant) and varied citywide ELA professional learning opportunities. ● School leaders will engage special education teachers, paraprofessionals, and selected out of classroom teachers in additional professional development in areas of need. ● Special Education and English Language Learners will receive targeted instruction using the strategies in areas of need. ● School leaders will conduct short, frequent cycles of classroom observations providing teachers with timely targeted actionable feedback using low inference data. ● 100% of parents will receive monthly progress reports and questions to ask their children at home to further develop student discussions. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Special Education and ELL Students Sept-June Monthly Grade Leaders, Principal All Teachers Sept-June Grade Leaders, Principal Weekly All Families Sept-June All Teachers Monthly 2018-19 SCEP-FL 34  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Our school will engage families and support Effective School Leadership and Strategies to promote parent leadership by: By October 2018 the PTA President and Parent Coordinator to host parent engagement opportunities. The Parent Coordinator will host two parent engagement sessions each month with at least 10 parents by September 2018. Our SLT will host at least two information sessions for parents by April 2019. By November 2018 we will implement the use of a newsletter to communicate effectively with parents as well as our Facebook or Twitter communication. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Professional Development Mondays, Parent Engagement Tuesdays, In-Class Coaching and Support, Per Session and Per Diem coverages. Expenditures in per diem for teachers and for sub paras using TL monies and IEP monies for students in need of a para. In order to create a Saturday school for 10 Saturdays beginning in January we will allocate TL monies. Some monies will be used for professional development and supporting the at risk learners. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 35  By February 2019 school leaders, including teacher leaders and team leaders, will engage in instructional learning walks to progress monitor Danielson Domain 3 (instruction) utilizing a school-created rubric to result in improved pedagogical outcomes in at least 30% of all teachers. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. School wide budget, expenditures, resources Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 36  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their X SOP(s) Addressed high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to our Quality Review the school is proficient in quality indicator 3.4 Strengths  According to Quality Review indicator 3.4, Parents shared that school leaders communicate with them via progress report, phone calls, flyers, and workshops. In addition, they receive communication regarding the schools’ expectations for their children through opportunities such as, parent orientation, curriculum nights, and meet and greet. Parents stated that the workshops they receive and the opportunity to meet with the teachers on Tuesdays have been very helpful. They noted that the workshops on test taking strategies have made them more aware of the Common Core Learning Standards and what students are required to learn. Furthermore, parents all agreed that as a result of the workshops they feel confident when helping their child with her homework. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 37  Needs  The school needs to increase the number and variety of parents at workshops that are offered. In addition, the school needs to vary the types of surveys that are administered to parents. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 at least 60% of parents will have opportunities to express their voice and receive information via school-created surveys and newsletters which will result in 20% of all parents attending workshops and activities based on family interests and needs monthly. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 38  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Parents will be invited to attend Common Core Workshops held during the week. These workshops will increase parents' knowledge of the Common Core standards and their alignment by grade. They will also provide parents with the strategies necessary to support student outcomes.  At least 3 Common Core workshops will be conducted at various times throughout the school year. Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) All Families Sept-June Principal, Teachers, Parent Coordinator Monthly Family Nights will be held several times throughout the year. Family nights will promote family and community ties and provide families with the opportunity to engage in academic activities with their child and school staff. All Families Sept-June Parent Coordinator, Staff, Principal Monthly Literacy/Math Family Nights   Celebrations of Academic Achievement Workshops will be held throughout the school year to introduce parents to Datawise. Parents will learn strategies for analyzing student data using Datawise while adhering to group-created norms. All Families Sept-June Principal, Parent Coordinator Monthly Every Tuesday, parents are invited to meet with their child's teacher to discuss academic progress. Teachers and school staff will regularly reach out to parents to encourage attendance on Tuesdays. In addition, parents will receive notifications and reminders of Tuesday meeting dates and parent-teacher conferences via letters sent home, phone calls and website notifications. All Families Sept-June Teachers, Parent Coordinator Weekly Parents will be presented with surveys at least three times per year to provide information to the school aligned with their interests. All Families Sept-June Principal, Parent Coordinator 2018-19 SCEP-FL 39  Parents will receive a newsletter providing them with information regarding the school and upcoming activities. All Families Sept-June Monthly Principal, Parent Coordinator, Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Our school works with New York Junior Tennis League as our afterschool and summer camp lead. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. School website School Twitter and Facebook pages CNXT Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019 at least 30% of parents will have opportunities to express their voice and receive information via school-created surveys and newsletters which will result in 10% of all parents attending workshops and activities based on family interests and needs monthly. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. We will use school wide documentation and sign in sheets; minutes and agendas. Parent surveys and workshops. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 40  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Students who score a Level 1 and Level 2 on state exams; Students who have demonstrated a need for academic intervention services based on formal and informal performance assessmentsin ELA. Students whose reading fluency and comprehension is below grade level according to Fountas and Pinnelllevels; iReady Diagnostic placement indicator, students not meeting state CCLS, students struggling with phonics and fluency. Students within small groups using Fundations, Compass Learning,Leveled Literacy Intervention (LLI) and those targeted in tiers determined by work samples and assessments. Students who score a Level 1 and Level 2 on state exams; Students who have Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) In class, Flexible Grouping(Small Group and Whole Group) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) 5 times per week After school (NYJTL) K-5times per week Push-in, small group Saturday School Pull-out,small group Grades 2-5,3.5 hours one-to-one tutoring Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Fundations, Great Leaps,, iReady, Use of informational text features Document based questions (DBQ) Great Leaps Math, iReady, In class, Flexible Grouping(Small 5times a week 2018-19 SCEP-FL 41  Science Social Studies demonstrated a need for academic intervention services based on formal and informal performance assessmentsin Math. ireadydiagnostic placement indicator will be used to determine the standards that students are not meeting, Great Leaps Math. Students who do not show proficiency in mastering targeted science concepts on grade level as determined by the Common Core Standards and New York State Standards. Students who do not show proficiency in mastering targeted social students concepts on grade level as determined by the Common Core Standards and New York State Standards. Use of theRTIsection of Go Math, Use of Exemplars Problem Solving procedures, Open-ended math problems Group and Whole Group) After school (NYJTL) K-5, 5 times per week Push-in, small group Saturday School Grades 2-5,3.5 hours Pull-out,small group one-to-one tutoring In class, Flexible Grouping(Small Group and Whole Group) 1-1 tutoring 2 times per week/50 minutes In class, Flexible Grouping(Small Group and Whole Group) 1-1 tutoring 2 times per week Using data from informal and formal assessments, performance tasks, skills targeted that requireremediation through textbooks, leveledreaders and online resources. Strategies include software assisted instruction, visual interpretation and hands-on learning. As determined by informal and formal assessments, performance tasks, skills targeted that require remediation through various textbooks, online resources and leveled readers. Strategies include visual thinking strategies, semantic mapping, vocabulary word maps, and use 2018-19 SCEP-FL 42 Counseling provided in small group or one-to-one setting. During school hours At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Students who are recommended by school personnel to receive services based on behavior influencing academic performanceand social emotional well-being/development. of primary resources and DBQ. Sanford Harmony used to strengthen peer relationships, social-emotional development, embrace diversity and resolve conflicts. Strategies include crisis management, goal setting, peer pressure and bullying conferencing, counseling services (individual and group) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 43  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) We have a total of 49 Students in Temporary Housing which is about 18.%. We provide students with book bags, books, resources and school supplies as well as uniforms and trips are covered for students in temporary housing. Families also receive tickets to Broadway plays and school wide trips. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 44  2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. STH will receive small group support academically and emotionally from AIS/ RTI staff and social emotional responders. Students in temporary housing receive opportunities to attend a variety of internal and external events. We also offer opportunities for our STH students to attend both family trips and educational trips. We ensure STH students receive uniforms and book bags filled with books and educational resources. The school covers the fees for all necessary materials needed by the families in temporary housing. Additionally, the school pays senior dues for all STH students. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 45 N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 46  Section 8: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. In order to maintain highly qualified teachers, teams engage in collaborative practice using the inquiry approach. Time is spent effectively assessing and evaluating student work and planning lessons that accelerate student learning. Teachers receive personalized professional development based on their needs. They attend in-house and external professional development and share best practices. Teachers lead teams in content areas in which they have strengths. Rigorous conversations are held in small groups and one to one amongst peers to facilitate collaboration and continuous dialogue. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS).  As a school community we encourage teacher leaders to work cohesively to be a part of the school hiring team to select new employees and provide them with high quality professional development which ensures that teachers become, and remain, highly effective in helping all students to achieve high performance standards. Highly qualified teachers are recruited through job fairs and interviewed by a hiring committee consisting of novice and veteran teachers.  In order to ensure that our teachers remain highly qualified, they attend in-house and external professional development and share best practices. The staff receives professional development on understanding the Common Core Learning Standards and the Danielson Framework for Teaching. Staff also receives professional development in the use of Positive Behavior Intervention Support and training by our social emotional team, teacher leaders and external developers. PBIS is a system that encourages positive behavior and expectation for students and the school community.  The use of technology based professional development will allow teachers and staff to reflect, network and provide on-going professional development through Engage NY and The Teaching Channel. Staff will receive 2018-19 SCEP-FL 47  professional development regarding behavior modification and classroom management in order to achieve high level student performance.  All P.S. 12 staff will receive professional development in order to maintain their highly qualified status.  Also staff with identified talent will be guided into roles that allow them to use those talents. Such examples are lead teachers who will be encouraged to seek /or train for administrative roles/ coaches.  All new teachers will be assigned a mentor for at least one year.  Small learning communities will be created to provide new teachers (and all in need of support) with the support needed to enhance our learning community. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). Each spring we reach out to local preschool programs and invite the families of children turning 5 (those ready to enter Kindergarten) to visit our school. Parents and prospective students are given a tour of our school and are invited to visit our kindergarten classes. Parents meet with the Parent Coordinator, teachers and administrators and receive a brief overview of the kindergarten curriculum and informed how they can help prepare their children for entering our school. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments 2018-19 SCEP-FL 48  Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers are consulted through surveys and small group conversations amongst their grade leaders who share the consensus with the leadership team. Based on the needs of the students and school needs we decide which assessments would best be suitable for the grade and/or school. As for the professional development the entire staff has an opportunity to attend Core Curriculum summer training for FREE in ELA and Math (Ready Gen and Go Math!) Any additional professional development may be attained externally or a team leader will turnkey the training allowing for our school to build capacity. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (SCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Title I Part A (Basic) Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 229,673.00 0 75,089.00 51,769.00 0 0 2,003,913.00 X X X X X X X Column B Section Reference(s) Section 2-7 N/A Section 2-7 Section 2-7 N/A N/A Section 2-7 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, 2018-19 SCEP-FL 49  State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/SCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent 2018-19 SCEP-FL 50  representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 51  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Dr. Jacqueline Peek-Davis School Public School 12 Parent and Family Engagement Policy 2018-2019 Parent Involvement Policy General Expectations PS12 agrees to implement the following statutory requirements: ● The school will put into operation programs, activities and procedures for the involvement of parents, consistent with the section 1118 of the Every Student Succeeds Act . ● Those programs, activities and procedures will be planned and implemented with meaningful consultation with parents of participating children. ● The school will ensure that the required school-level parental involvement policy meets the requirements of section 1118(b) of the Every Student Succeeds Act . ● The school will incorporate this parental involvement policy into into its school improvement plan. ● In executing the Title I, Part A parental involvement requirements , to the extent practicable, the school will provide multiple opportunities for the participation of parents with limited English proficiency, parents with disabilities, and parents of migratory children, including providing information and school reports required under section 1111 of the Every Student Succeeds Act . 2018-19 SCEP-FL 52  ● The school will involve the parents of children served in Title I, Part A programs in decisions regarding how the 1 percent of Title I, Part A funds reserved for parental involvement is spent. The school will be governed by the following statutory definition of parental involvement, and will execute programs, activities and procedures in accordance with this definition: ● Parental involvement means the participation of parents in regular, two- way, and meaningful communication involving student academic learning and other school activities, including ensuring: ● That parents play an integral role in assisting in their child’s learning. ● That parents are encouraged to be actively engaged in their child’s education at school ● That parents are full partners in their child’s education and are included, as appropriate, in decision-making and actively participate on advisory committees (PAC) to assist in the education of their child; as well as the execution of other activities, such as those described in section 1118 of the of the Every Student Succeeds Act . ● The school will inform parents and parental organizations of the purpose and existence of the Parental Information and Resource Center in the school. Descriptions of how P.S.12 will implement required Parental Involvement Policy (PIP) components: P.S. 12 will take the following actions to involve parents in the joint development of the school’s parental involvement plan (PIP) under section 1112 of the of the Every Student Succeeds Act . ● Host a Title I Parent Meeting (Evening and Morning) to accommodate all parents. ● Distribute the Title I school parental involvement policy and parent compact by November 17 th of each year. Adoption This school parental involvement policy has been developed jointly with, and agreed on with, parents of children participation in Title I, Part A programs, as evidenced by the agenda and sign in sheets from meeting. ● This policy was adopted by P.S.12 on November 15, 20137 and will be in effect for the period of 3 years. The school will distribute this policy to all parents of participating Title I, part A children on or before November 17 of each year. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students 2018-19 SCEP-FL 53  P.S.12 will coordinate and integrate Title I parental involvement strategies with parental involvement strategies under the following programs: ● CELEBRATION of Academic Achievement. ● P.S.12 will take the following actions to conduct, with the involvement of parents, an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parental involvement policy in improving school quality. The evaluation will include identifying barriers to greater participation by parents in parental involvement activities (with particular attention to parents who are economically disadvantaged, are physically challenged, have limited English proficiency, have limited literacy, or are of any racial or ethnic minority background). The school will use the findings of the evaluation about its parental involvement policy and ACTIVITIES TO design strategies for more effective parental involvement, and to revise, if necessary with the involvement of parents) its parental involvement policies. ● P.S.12 will build the school's ’and parent's capacity for strong parental involvement, in order to ensure effective involvement of parents and to support a partnership with the parents, and the community to improve student academic achievement, through the following activities specifically described below ● Providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement levels in literacy and use of technology through workshops held by school, ● Providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children. ● Fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parent s can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress. The parent coordinator will provide parents with training in Cookshop, NYC School Account, School CNXT and NYC ID. ● Providing assistance to parents in understanding Common Core Standards. ● Sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format and in languages that parents can understand. Use of the school website , facebook, twitter, and school messenger to communicate. ● Parents and family members are invited on a monthly basis to celebrate student writing the publishing parties. Parents participate in the Principal's Book Club. ● Solicit parent volunteers for school trips. P.S.12 will take the following actions to involve parents in the process of school review and improvement under section 1116 of of the Every Student Succeeds Act . Parental Involvement and School Quality 2018-19 SCEP-FL 54  ● PROVIDE OPPORTUNITIES FOR PARENTS TO CONFER WITH TEACHERS EVERY TUESDAY 2:20-3:30 ● Host Curriculum Day/Evening to give parents the opportunity to be involved in a classroom setting and share their child’s academic experience. ● Conduct workshops to assist parents in supporting their children for New York State Exams. ● Conduct parent meetings to inform parents of school initiatives and survey parent needs. The school will provide assistance to parents of children served by the school, as appropriate, in understanding topics such as the following, by the undertaking of the actions described in this paragraph. Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● The state’s academic content standards ● The state’s student academic achievement standards ● The state’s academic assessments including alternate assessments, the requirements of Part A, how to monitor their child’s progress, and how to work with educators. This will be achieved through one to one conferences, workshops, and classes. The necessary equipment or other materials that may be necessary will be provided to ensure success. ● The school will provide materials and training to help parents’ works with their children to improve their children’s academic achievement. ● Providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement levels in ● Providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education on their children. Meetings will be held on a monthly basis. ● Fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress. Providing assistance to parents in understanding Common Core Standards. Workshops will be held on a monthly basis. ● Sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format and in languages that parents can understand. ● Providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of our school community. Use of the school website, School messenger, email, texts and newsletters. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: School-Parent Compact (SPC) ● using academic learning time efficiently; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 55  ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student succeeds Act (ESSA) I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences 4 times per year during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to November 17 of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year. I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Dr. Jacqueline Peek-Davis School Public School 12 2018-2019 Parent Involvement Policy General Expectations PS12 agrees to implement the following statutory requirements: ● The school will put into operation programs, activities and procedures for the involvement of parents, consistent with the section 1118 of the Every Student Succeeds Act . 2018-19 SCEP-FL 56  ● Those programs, activities and procedures will be planned and implemented with meaningful consultation with parents of participating children. ● The school will ensure that the required school-level parental involvement policy meets the requirements of section 1118(b) of the Every Student Succeeds Act . ● The school will incorporate this parental involvement policy into into its school improvement plan. ● In executing the Title I, Part A parental involvement requirements , to the extent practicable, the school will provide multiple opportunities for the participation of parents with limited English proficiency, parents with disabilities, and parents of migratory children, including providing information and school reports required under section 1111 of the Every Student Succeeds Act . ● The school will involve the parents of children served in Title I, Part A programs in decisions regarding how the 1 percent of Title I, Part A funds reserved for parental involvement is spent. The school will be governed by the following statutory definition of parental involvement, and will execute programs, activities and procedures in accordance with this definition: ● Parental involvement means the participation of parents in regular, two- way, and meaningful communication involving student academic learning and other school activities, including ensuring: ● That parents play an integral role in assisting in their child’s learning. ● That parents are encouraged to be actively engaged in their child’s education at school ● That parents are full partners in their child’s education and are included, as appropriate, in decision-making and actively participate on advisory committees (PAC) to assist in the education of their child; as well as the execution of other activities, such as those described in section 1118 of the of the Every Student Succeeds Act . ● The school will inform parents and parental organizations of the purpose and existence of the Parental Information and Resource Center in the school. Descriptions of how P.S.12 will implement required Parental Involvement Policy (PIP) components: P.S. 12 will take the following actions to involve parents in the joint development of the school’s parental involvement plan (PIP) under section 1112 of the of the Every Student Succeeds Act . ● Host a Title I Parent Meeting (Evening and Morning) to accommodate all parents. ● Distribute the Title I school parental involvement policy and parent compact by November 17 th of each year. Adoption This school parental involvement policy has been developed jointly with, and agreed on with, parents of children participation in Title I, Part A programs, as evidenced by the agenda and sign in sheets from meeting. ● This policy was adopted by P.S.12 on November 15, 20137 and will be in effect for the period of 3 years. The school will distribute this policy to all parents of participating Title I, part A children on or before November 17 of each year. I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff 2018-19 SCEP-FL 57  Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer in various areas of the school e.g. at dismissal and in the cafeteria. ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures Parent/Guardian Responsibilities: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 58  ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; always try my best to learn 2018-19 SCEP-FL 59  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information Borough select one District 17 School Name Dr. Jacqueline Peek-Davis Elementary School Number 012 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Nyree Dixon Coach ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Natasha Danova Teacher/Subject Area Richard Whitehall Teacher/Subject Area Kimberly Naidu Related-Service Provider Damali Robinson Superintendent Assistant Principal LaToya Garcia Coach School Counselor Felicia Brown Parent Charise Mack Parent Coordinator Gladys Thom Field Support Center Staff Member Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] D. Student Demographics 2018-19 SCEP-FL 60  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 285 Total number of ELLs 25 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 8.77% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 3 0 4 0 2 0 5 0 6 0 7 0 8 0 9 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? We use WSS (Work Sampling System) as an authentic assessment for K-2. We also use the CCLS Performance Tasks, MOSL, and Fountas and Pinnell Benchmark Reading Assessment for early literacy skill assessments. Bi-Weekly Math and ELA assessments are used to evaluate student progress. In grades 3-5 we use past state exams, and our ELA ReadyGen program unit assessments to assess student progress. The data tells the strength and weaknesses, students' independent and instructional reading levels. The collected data helps teachers to plan their next instructional steps. It is due to these results teachers modify their lessons and teaching strategies accordingly. From this data, teachers are able to drive instructional 2018-19 SCEP-FL 61  focus, determine which reading strategies each child needs to work on, determine their independent and guided reading levels, and plan literacy lessons. Also, teachers are able to effectively differentiate instruction for each student. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Teacher teams use common planning periods and professional learning time to analyze and discuss student work and data. This helps teachers plan for differentiated instruction by creating small groups targeting student needs. The Data Wise team helps to gather and analyze school wide assessment data. Teachers use student friendly rubrics and checklist, so students can self-assess, and teachers provide actionable feedback. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We use NYC ELA and Math Performance Tasks and ELL Periodic Assessment to identify baseline, progress and areas of needs of our ELLs. I-Ready Diagnostic Assessments and MOSL are implemented in the beginning and end of the year in ELA and Mathematics. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? AIS providers gather information on students performing below grade level. AIS providers evaluate various data sources to identify student strengthens and needs. Student groups are created using set academic criteria and student needs. Services are provided in and out of the classroom by AIS providers 2-3 times a week. At the end of a six week cycle, students are reassessed and student groups are modified. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] In order to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention framework, the classroom teachers monitor the students at the Tier I level. They provide meaningful lessons, set challenging academic goals and build abilities through dialogue, questioning and sharing ideas. At Tier I level teachers use unit tests, performance tasks, classroom assignments and class participation to determine who needs further assistance. The teachers use the data from the assessments to see which students have not mastered certain skills or concepts and need to be re-taught. On the Tier II and III levels, the ENL teacher, SETTs teachers and AIS teachers provide more targeted instruction and additional academic support to help students. Data such as class work and participation in these smaller groups is evaluated to see if the child is progressing successfully with this extra assistance. Classroom teachers work with out- of- classroom personnel to improve the Tier II and Tier III services. The out-of-classroom teachers use different strategies trying to help students master skills and concepts. If the child still does not make any progress, the teacher meets with the School Based Support team. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. We use the results of the NYSESLAT, State ELA, Math and Science, I-Ready end- of- the year diagnostic test to evaluate and inform our ELL program. Each newcomer will complete the NYSITELL during the identification process.The main outcome assessments for ELLs are NYSESLAT and I-ready end- of the -year diagnostic test.The data patterns are most regularly repeated and reveal the same tendencies: NYSITELL is administered to 95% of complete beginners in ENL. Each newcomer will complete the NYSITELL during the identification process. The areas in the NYSESLAT that students show the greatest weakness in are the Reading and Writing sections. Scores in Listening and Speaking are relatively higher. Students score better on the exams in science and Math given in their native language.EDAT gives a lot of different data to inform the instruction for ELLs. The tool helps to analyse the data from NYSESLAT by levels, HL,different modalities; ELA and Maths growth percentile.It also helps to create at-risk level for each student considering different at-risk factors,e.g.attendance, progress in NYSESLAT ,etc. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 62  7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? All data for ELLs is analysed by all teachers working with ELLs during weekly Common planning sessions of grade teams and content areas teams; also, by members of the school Data Wise team, and during the weekly professional developments of the whole staff. All teachers share important materials on Google docs and are aware of all the main documents needed to make adjustments to their individual programs. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. a. Instruction in the ENL program is provided through Stand- Alone/Integrated services. The ENL instructional program is aligned with mandated ENL/ELA and content learning standards and the Common Core Standards. Students at the Entering and Emerging levels in the freestanding ENL program receive 360 minutes of instruction each week, and students at the Transitioning and Expanding levels receive 180 minutes of instruction each week in ENL and ELA. This explicit ESL instruction is delivered according to CR Part 154. The ENL groups are mixed up heterogeneously for targeted area instruction as informed by the NYSITELL and/or the NYSESLAT. There are three groups of ELL students that receive ENL services. Group 1 consists of K-1 students who are at the Entering, Emerging, ransitioning, and Expanding levels. Group 2 has students from grades 2-3 who are at the Emerging, Transitioning, and Expanding levels. Group 3 consists of students from grades 3- 4 at Transitioning and Expanding levels. There are no grade 5 students receiving ENL service at this time. The schedule of our ENL teacher is adjusted to the needs of the students so that all ELLs receive the appropriate amount of time needed to meet the state requirements. The ENL program stresses integration of all four ELA components: listening, speaking, reading, and writing. The ENL teacher co-teaches in the classrooms during various times of the day, thus ENL is taught through content areas. During the pull-out classes content-based books are used for ELA and Math instructions. The needs of all students are met through differentiated instruction. To help the ELL population meet the NYS Learning Standards, instructional strategies such as small group models, pair work, modeling, Phonemic Awareness, Total Physical Response, author and genre studies, use of multimedia materials, use of multicultural literature, graphic organizers, and class presentations will be utilized.The school provides ELLs with an access to Smart Boards,computers and tablets in the classrooms as well as an access to language-appropriate software that is aligned to standard-based curriculum. The ENL room has leveled books, author and genre studies materials, multicultural literature, Spanish library, audio and visual equipment. In addition, the ENL teacher uses different instructional materials to support students of all levels of proficiency: research-based reading programs Language Power, Leveled Literacy Intervention, Rourke Language Proficiency Intervention, IOpeners, Good Habits/ Great Readers, ENL Activities for Every Month of the School Year, Time for Kids Magazine, Write Time for Kids writing program, multiple manipulative materials, and variety of dictionaries. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? 2018-19 SCEP-FL 63  a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? At the beginning of the school year, the ENL teacher and the administration meet to ensure that ELLs are receiving their mandated number of instructional minutes in all our program models. All of our English Language Learners receive the New York State mandated ENL/ELA instruction time based on students’ proficiency levels. Entering and Emerging ELLs receive 360 minutes of ENL instruction a week. Transitioning and Expanding ELLs receive 180 minutes of ENL instruction a week. Students at Commanding level continue to receive 90 minutes per week of ENL support from the ENL teacher for two years within their classroom setting. Students are grouped according to their proficiency and grade levels. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. In ENL program model content area is incorporated into ENL instruction. Every reading and writing unit in each grade is content- area based. Thus, content area instruction and language learning are combined. Our school uses the GoMath! Math program. In this program students receive Math instruction that incorporates hands-on activities, use of manipulates, and technology. This type of program helps support ELLs. Teachers use strategies that scaffold instruction for English Language Learners. Some of the strategies we implement in our lessons are activating students' prior knowledge, make connections, use visual aides, organizers, and realia. Bringing realia or manipulates to the classroom helps teachers to provide comprehensible input. Prior to the lessons ENL teacher will front load information for optimal comprehension. Explicitly teaching key vocabulary from the text and focusing on concepts and connections is also a main component of ENL instruction. ENL teacher models correct thinking processes in all subject areas, so that learners become capable to work independently. Our program model implements differentiated and direct instruction providing research based, standard aligned and data driven ENL lessons that focus on content area vocabulary development, phonemic awareness, grammar and writing across the curriculum. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? N/A 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. Our SIFE students receive 360 min of the ENL services weekly. For SIFE students we stress explicit instruction in reading across the subject area with an emphasis on vocabulary reading. This is done in the ENL classroom as well as the content areas. This is done with daily instruction related to the lessons and reading comprehension, and paragraph and essay composition strategies via the writing process. Academic intervention is also in place with individualized remedial instruction in small groups to better prepare them for the NYSESLAT as well as the ELA exam. SIFE students receive academic intervention services in both reading and math if necessary. Also these students will be invited to participate in all after-school and extra curricular activities.b. P.S. 12 maintains English instruction for newcomers by providing all teachers with professional development. The ENL teacher with collaboration of the General/Special Education teachers modify the assignments for them and provide productive work that engages newcomers in language learning. Newcomers participate and show comprehension through pointing, nodding, drawing, using actions of simple responses. When necessary, children participate in AIS for additional small group instruction. We are sensitive to our newcomers’ emotional needs in adapting to a culture so we pair beginners with more advanced students who share a common native language. We use translators as needed, and in particular, where applicable, in testing situations.c. Our students who are in the Developing subgroup require additional help in reading and writing based on the NYSESLAT scores: they receive instruction that focuses on building high-order thinking skills during mandated ENL periods and in the classroom. d. The needs of the students receiving services for 4 to 6 years are carefully examined. The data is disaggregated to verify as whether the issue is based on a language deficit or an instructional deficit. If 2018-19 SCEP-FL 64  necessary our IEP teacher provides small group interventions. All of these students are strongly urged to attend our after-school and Saturday programs.e. Students who have exited the ENL program will receive mandated ENL service for two full school years. They will receive 90 minutes per week within their classroom setting. The ENL teacher in cooperation with General and /or Special education teacher is responsible for monitoring these ELLs. Monitoring consists of the following measures of students performance: report card grades, test scores, student performance, teacher observation, and progress in meeting the NYS Learning Standards in all areas. The ENL teacher will assist to adopt and modify materials and instructions to the exited students, thereby facilitating the transition. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? ELLs with special needs are provided with plenty of visuals and dramatized reading material. Total Physical Response, methodologies building academic vocabulary, simplifying content, and concept knowledge are ways to provide access to academic content and accelerate English language development. The technology that is used to help these students includes Smart Boards,CD players and computers. The ENL teacher meets with the School Based Support Team and the Assistant Principal and/or the Principal to make sure ELL-SWDs get the correct ENL services. In some cases, a Bilingual Assistant helps the student in class throughout the day. The ELL-SWDs use the same materials and do the same work as other students. However, the tasks and assignments are differentiated based on the student's abilities and on the IEP. Some students may need simplified instruction using only one or two words while others may need simpler language or have the task broken down into smaller components. Furthermore, multiple intelligence problem solving strategies are also used by teachers to promote academic success. These strategies include linguistic, logical-mathematical, bodily-kinesthetic, musical, interpersonal, and naturalistic. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? In P.S.12 the curriculum is modified to meet the needs of ELLs-SWDs. During mandated ENL classes the teacher focuses on the skills in reading and writing that will enable these children to meet the standards. Our ELLs-SWDs are pulled out mainstreamed with other ELLs who are at the same proficiency level. These children are provided with targeted instruction to meet their learning needs. These children receive small group instruction to help them build reading comprehension skills and are given opportunities to develop their English literacy skills. ELL students with special needs receive instruction based on their IEPs. Special consideration is given to their specific needs. The ENL teacher uses different strategies helping students to acquire academic language, use context to figure out unfamiliar words and expressions, one-on-one instructions, buddy-peer mentoring, manipulates, or a behavior plan when necessary. The ENL teacher uses challenging but understandable materials. The teacher encourages students to participate in group discussions, and students gain advantage by receiving feedback from the teacher and their peers through modeling grammatically correct statements. The ENL teacher conducts meetings with classroom teachers who have ENL students in their room. The ENL teacher also helps students with their classroom work and projects. There are currently 5 ELLs-SWDs in the program. These students are included in the groups with general education students for the duration of the ENL program. We are not planning to discontinue any programs for the upcoming school year. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. At our school we offer a variety of targeted intervention programs in order to meet the needs of ELLs in ELA and content areas. All of our reading and writing units on every grade are content-area based. ENL instruction is incorporated into Social Studies and Science, reading/writing units thus combining content area instruction and language learning. Our push-in model supports content area instruction. Our Science cluster teacher uses hands-on learning and ENL techniques to introduce new concepts to the ELLs. Our school uses the GoMath! Mathematics program. This program supports ELLs by incorporating hands-on 2018-19 SCEP-FL 65  activities, use of manipulative and Internet technology. Classroom teachers have been made aware that for ELLs two lessons are being learned at once: a set of new concepts as well as a set of new words to describe the concepts. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? In the 2017-2018 school year our school will have an Art class, a Dance class, Computer Lab, and a Science Lab available for all grades. The addition of these classes allows for all students, including our ELLs, to have access to the art of Dance and Art, Technology use, and Science instructions. Our after-school program was a success last year, so we will continue this program in the upcoming school year. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All ELLs are afforded equal access to all school programs. Our after-school and Saturday programs are available to all students of the appropriate grades. Both our Saturday and after-school programs will be using the Targeted Reading Intervention program. Targeted Reading Intervention specifically offers differentiation suggestions for English Language Learners as well as pre teaching activities to develop content-related vocabulary essential to comprehension. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. All classrooms in P.S. 12 are equipped with Smart Boards. Professional Development will be provided to assist all teachers in the use of this technology. Our school uses Smart Boards, I-pads, classroom computers, and individual laptops to supplement classroom instruction in various content areas. Technology integration is supported through ENL appropriate software in our computer lab. There is ongoing professional development to assist teachers who want to become more adept with technology use when working with ELLs. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? At P.S. 12 all required services support, and all resources correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. We match materials to each of our student groups. We do this by using materials at various difficulty levels so that all needs can be met. We have materials for students at the Entering, Emerging, Transitioning, and Expanding levels of English language proficiency at all ages and grade levels. We accomplish this by analyzing sources of formal and informal data. We provide instruction that meets students at their current level of functioning and helps build upon the skills they already possess. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. At P.S. 12 all required services support, and all resources correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. We match materials to each of our student groups. We do this by using materials at various difficulty levels so that all needs can be met. We have materials for students at the Entering, Emerging, Transitioning, and Expanding levels of English language proficiency at all ages and grade levels. We accomplish this by analyzing sources of formal and informal data. We provide instruction that meets students at their current level of functioning and helps build upon the skills they already possess. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? We share the building with a middle school but we don't share/or coordinate our work with ELLs. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Parents and students are given a tour of the building, they attend classrooms during Open School Week. They also have the opportunity to meet with the ENL teacher, support staff, administrators, and parent coordinator to express any concerns or 2018-19 SCEP-FL 66  needs before the child comes into the building. During the first week of the academic school year parents and newly identified ELLs also participate in our Curriculum Day or Night orientation, which is designed to have parents and students visit their future classrooms and meet with their classroom teachers to discuss class expectations, curriculum, and initiatives for the school year. New ELLs enrolling throughout the school year and their families are invited to participate in activities arranged by the parent coordinator such as family luncheons, outings, and workshops. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? We do not offer language electives. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? As per the new mandates: 15% of our staff PD are ELL related and 50% for the ENL teacher.We have one ENL teacher who attends all available professional development sessions from DOE that are applicable to elementary school students. Our classroom and out-of-classroom teachers demonstrate self-learning and self-motivated professional development by attending off-site workshops, seminars and conferences related to ELLs. Embedded in all of our professional development are strategies that would work for ELL students as well as others. When purchasing materials teachers are consulted so as to make sure that all students have the appropriate materials. ELL training is provided for all staff members during Professional Development days and Faculty Meetings and cover topics such as Who is an ELL?; NYS ELL Identification Process; NYSITELL and NYSESLAT; Proficiency Levels; Testing and ELLs; Promotion Policy for ELLs; Second Language Acquisition; ESL Strategies; SIFE. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. P.S. 12 meets the professional development requirements as per Part 154.2 by providing PD to teachers and administrators that specifically address the needs of ELLs. At least 15% of total PD hours are dedicated to language acquisition, best practices for co-teaching strategies, integrating language and content instruction for ELLs. The ENL teacher attends PD meetings provided by the Brooklyn South Field Support Center on a monthly basis. The ENL teacher turnkeys the learning from the Brooklyn South Field Support Center PDs to school personnel. 50% of the ENL teacher PD hours cover language acquisition in alignment with core content area instruction as well as best practices for co-teaching strategies, integrating language and content instruction for ELLs. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 67  Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? P.S. 12 ensures that parents and guardians are provided with a meaningful opportunity to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child's education. Parents of ELLs attend Parent/Teacher Conferences as well as ELL Parent Orientations where parents meet the teachers and discuss their child's progress. During fall and spring Parent/ Teacher conferences parents of ELLs are strongly encouraged to visit the ENL room. The ENL teacher also visits each classroom of the students she services to remind the parents and teachers to visit the ENL room. Parents have an opportunity to communicate their concerns with the ENL teacher and review their child's work folder to get a better understanding of their child's needs and achievements. The school Leadership, our Parent Coordinator, SLT and PTA members invite parents/guardians of ELLs to attend workshops that address the educational needs of ELLs, make translators available, disseminate materials and notifications in the preferred language of communication to the parents/guardians, and provide information about needed support services. Our school provides translation services for ELLs' parents. All important notices are sent in the preferred language of communication. Letters are translated by school personnel, when necessary we will use the NYCDOE Translation Service Unit to translate our letters and notices into various languages spoken at P.S.12. We will have a translator from the Translation Unit on site to assist parents when necessary. We keep an updated list of available personnel who can assist with translation and interpretation services. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. All parents including ELL parents take part in our parent involvement activities. When planning our parent involvement activities we survey and listen to our parents as how we can best serve their needs. We host a series of workshops conducted by the Parent Coordinator to support parents in understanding the curriculum. During these workshops parents are made aware of current data and are informed of student and parental expectations. Translators are available at all Parent/Teacher conferences, parent workshops and PTA meetings. Parents are constantly encouraged to become a member of our PTA in order to assist us in addressing their needs. Parents are invited to curriculum conferences to meet with their child’s teachers in order to learn academic expectations for the school year and how they could assist at home. Parents are proactive in creating school wide activities such as Common Core Learning and Barbecue, Family Movie Night, Family Game Night, Family Art Night, Family Night Skating, Cookshop, our annual dance festival, etc. In addition, parents are invited to Open School Week to observe instruction and get techniques that they can utilize at home. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 68 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Nyree Dixon, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 69  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Dr. Jacqueline Peek-Davis Elem School DBN: 17K012 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Nyree Dixon Title Principal LaToya Garcia Assistant Principal Gladys Thom Parent Coordinator Natasha Danova ENL/Bilingual Teacher Charise Mack Parent Richard Whitehall Teacher/Subject Area Kimberly Naidu Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Felicia Brown School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 11/08/17 11/08/17 11/08/17 11/08/17 11/08/17 11/08/17 11/08/17 11/08/17 2018-19 SCEP-FL 70  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 17K012 School Name: Dr. Jacqueline Peek-Davis Elementar Superintendent: Clarence Ellis The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Natasha Gladys Danova Thom ENL teacher Parent Coordinator Yes No Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Assessment of P.S.12 written and oral interpretation is done primarily through the Home Language Survey form that is completed upon registration. We also use a few ATS reports to help to determine the translation and interpretation needs of parents in our school. These reports include School Level Adult Preferred Language Report (RAPL), Citywide/District Parents’ Preferred Language Report (RCPL), School Level Emergency Contact Form (RECF), School Level Emergency Contact Student List (RCON), School Level Adult Detail Report (RADL), and Citywide/District/School Home Language Report (RHBG). Though not all of our students are eligible for ENL instruction, we keep a record of homes where English is not the primary language, so that translation and 2018-19 SCEP-FL 71  interpretation services are available to all parents who require them, and not just to parents of ELLs. Data is collected via ATS, students' Emergency Contact cards’ information, and from conversations with parents. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Arabic French Fulani English Spanish 12 1 3 290 16 3.73 0.31 0.93 90.06 4.97 9 1 2 293 17 2.8 0.31 0.62 90.99 5.28 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families P-T Conference Announcements September/ November/March/ May ELL entitlement/non-entitlement/ September continued entitlement letters Parent Curriculum Conference September/October How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. We use DOE Intranet template(s) for covered languages; we use school-based bilingual personnel and translation vendor for non-covered languages We use DOE Intranet templates We use DOE T&I Unit for translation into covered languages, school-based bilingual personnel and 2018-19 SCEP-FL 72  New York State testing dates March/April Letters from the school leadership throughout the year School Calendar monthly Trips’/ Events Notifications as needed translation vendor for non-covered languages We use school bilingual staff, DOE T&I Unit for translation into covered languages, and translation vendor for translation into non-covered languages We use bilingual staff, DOE T&I Unit for translation into covered languages, and translation vendor for translation into non-covered languages We use bilingual staff, DOE T&I Unit for translation into covered languages We use bilingual staff, DOE T&I Unit for translation into covered languages 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to Parent-Teacher Conferences September /November/March/ May October Open School Night Curriculum Night October Family Nights per school calendar Initial ELLs Parent Orientation September/October provide interpretation service(s)? We use DOE T&I Unit for translation into covered languages over-the-phone service; bilingual school personnel, and translation vendor for translation into non-covered languages We use bilingual school staff; for other languages we bring on-site interpreters from the vendor agency We use bilingual school staff; for other languages we bring on-site interpreters from the vendor agency We use bilingual school staff; for other languages we bring on-site interpreters from the vendor agency We use bilingual school staff; we use DOE T&I Unit for translation into covered languages over-the-phone service, bring on-site interpreters from the vendor agency 2018-19 SCEP-FL 73  IEP conferences as needed Parent Engagement Tuesday meetings weekly on Tuesdays Mandated meeting with a parent of ELL once a year We use DOE T&I Unit for translation into covered languages over-the-phone service, bring on-site interpreters from the vendor agency We use DOE T&I Unit for translation into covered languages over-the-phone service; bilingual school personnel We use DOE T&I Unit for translation into covered languages over-the- phone service, school-based bilingual personnel and translation vendor for non-covered languages 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In the event of a school emergency we will use our bilingual staff and Over-the phone DOE Interpretation Services. We have many staff members that are able to assist our parents with oral/written interpretation. The school administration ensures that the level of provided written and/or oral interpretation services represents a level of language that is objective and accurate. Should no one be available we ask a parent volunteer to assist us. We will also update our school safety plan, ensuring that in case of emergency parents in need of language access services are not prevented from reaching the school’s administrative offices due to language barriers. We will obtain a translation from the Translation and Interpretation Unit into the language of the signage and forms required for this section. We will post and provide such forms in accordance with this section. We will also use the school Emergency Blue Cards’ contacts if needed. Parent coordinator will use school messenger which provides telephone calls translation into Spanish and French. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. At the first faculty conference the Administration will review the procedures and emphasize the importance of translating important documents to be sent home. All staff will be made aware of the various languages represented at P.S. 12. Every staff member will receive a T&I brochure and Language ID Guide. Staff will be encouraged and reminded of their responsibility of open communication with limited- English-proficient parents (LEP parents). All parties will be made aware of the resources available here at the school as well as outside resources. Our school Language Access Coordinator will turnkey to the school personnel on how to use translation services and the over-the-phone interpretation service. P.S.12 school personnel will be trained on policies and procedures as well. School compliance will be monitored by the administration and Language Access Coordinator to ensure that all relevant 2018-19 SCEP-FL 74  school personnel are aware and follows the procedures. The Language Access Coordinator will utilize the Language Access Kit provided by the Translation and Interpretation Unit to help address language barriers within the school. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) All parents will be provided with information regarding their rights to have a translator if necessary as well as the procedures for attaining these services. P.S.12 will fulfill Section VII of the Chancellor's Regulations A-663 by determining within 30 days of a student's enrollment the primary language spoken by the parent of each student. If such language is not English, it is determined whether the parent requires language assistance in order to communicate effectively with the school. Each LEP parent will be provided with a copy of the Parents’ Bill of Rights, a copy of the Achieve NYC Guide, and a copy of the Parent Guide to Language Access. We will maintain current records of the primary language in ATS, as well as on students’ Emergency Cards. The school will continue to use all of translation options and selections. We will also post in a conspicuous location at or near the primary entrance sign in Spanish, Russian, Bengali, Chinese, Urdu and Arabic, indicating the availability of interpretation services. We will update our school safety plan, ensuring that parents in need of language access services are not prevented from reaching the school’s administrative offices due to language barriers. We will obtain a translation from the Translation and Interpretation Unit into the language of the signage and forms required for this section. We will post and provide such forms in accordance with this section. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? We will gather feedback from parents through conversations parents have with our teaching staff, our parent coordinator, and our administration. We will also use the information from the Learning Environment Survey. Our school will create and distribute a parent survey to gather feedback from parents on the quality and availability of services. Ongoing communication with limited-English-proficient parents during Parent Engagement Tuesdays will be used to gather input from parents and provide an opportunity for parents to voice suggestions. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 75 
