 13K054 School Name: P.S. 054 SAMUEL C. BARNES Principal: ANTHONY PIRRO 2018-19 SCEP-P 1  School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Section 4: SCEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Section 7: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 8: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 9: Title I Program Information Section 10: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 SCEP-P 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information PS 54 331300010054 PK-5 School Number (DBN): 13K054 195 Sanford StreetBrooklyn, New York 11205 (718) 852-8129 Fax: (718) 834-6752 Phone Number: Anthony Pirro APirro2@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Email Address: Anthony Pirro Shannon Speights ShateemaDildy Shannon Speights ShateemaDildy N/A N/A LatishaBrown,YMCA District Information Geographical District: 13 Barbara Freeman Superintendent: 355 Park Place Brooklyn, New York 11238 Superintendent’s Office Address: Bfreeman6@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: (718)636-3284 Phone Number: (718) 636-3266 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Brooklyn Field Service Center North FSC: Executive Director: Bernadette Fitzgerald 2018-19 SCEP-P 3  Executive Director’s Office Address: 131 Livingston Street BFitzge2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-935-3954 Phone Number: 718-935-4314 Fax: 2018-19 SCEP-P 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the SCEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Anthony Pirro Shannon Speights ShateemaDildy Catherine Cadle VivianaHay Guy Garrison TanishaHayes *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Parent 2018-19 SCEP-P 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) MirtaDesir Min Kim LawanaWooley Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 SCEP-P 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) is a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. The process of developing and implementing the SCEP is aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding SCEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and SCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 SCEP-P 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: 2018-19 SCEP-P 8  Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the SCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the SCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for SCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you 2018-19 SCEP-P 9  monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 5: Build consensus around activities, strategies and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 6: Step 6: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 7: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 SCEP-P 10  1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: SCEP Overview PS 54 - The Magnet School of Environmental Studies, Technology and Community Wellness is a unique school that serves a small population of approximately 234 high needs students through the integration of our STEM magnet theme via 21st century learning skills - collaboration, community partnerships, innovation, flexible thinking and real world problem solving. PS 54's School Mission Statement has been distilled into an essential intent that is both aspirational and concrete: Our essential intent, as a school community, is to have 90% of students at or above grade level standards in reading and math by June 2020. We use the term “reading” in both a specific (i.e. decoding, comprehending, fluency) and a global manner (reading the world around you, understanding others, context for learning, including math). 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Our school focus is monitoring students’ processes across content areas by making their thinking and learning visible through discussions and work products. Our students are involved in authentic discussions in all content areas. In science all students collaborate and present two project-based learning units per year that are aligned to our magnet theme of environmental science, technology and community wellness We have implemented a monthly "Coffee with the Principal" on the first Wednesday of every month, directly following arrival, t celebrate school successes and share upcoming events as well as to give voice to parent concerns and ideas. Our initiatives for our goal of creating a more positive Supportive Environment include the following partnerships and plans: Supportive Environment: Positive School Climate & Culture Initiatives Schoolwide implementation of Classroom Dojo, continued from 2017-2018 Schoolwide Incentives – weekly Classroom Dojo prizes and class celebrations,    Book of the Month, Reward Assemblies & other positive reinforcement  Social/Emotional health: o Respect for All o TCIS Training for all staff o Small Group social/emotional work o Mindfulness training through Green Generations program o Before & After school mentoring basketball group o Girls on the Run mentoring group  Cross grade co-teaching support model to increase teacher collaboration and effective peer communication    Partnerships with the following mental health services: Intervisitation System for teacher peer-to-peer feedback Learning Partners Model Teacher initiative Interfaith Hospital & Woodhull Hospital o o Child Mind Institute o Bed-Stuy Family Health Clinic (In House) o Green Generations o Thrive NYC Consultant Additional Partnerships during the school day include: 2018-19 SCEP-P 11   Playworks Team Up Program for organized play across the school year  Chess in Schools 1x/week for grades 3-5  Green Generations Social Emotional/ Nutritional support for 40 students in K/1, 2, 3, and 4/5 (4 groups of 10 students) 2x/week  The Leadership Program (TLP) Tolerance via Visual Arts Integration for students in grades K-2 (6 classes) 1x/week Additional After School partnerships include: STEM (Wed) – Teachers for an extended learning day for PK-5 students  Martial Arts (Tue/Thu) for 15-25 students  Move to Improve – Mentoring & Sports (Thu/Fri) for 15-25 students   TLP - Tolerance Through Theatre Arts (Tue/Thu) for 25-30 students  Marquis Studio (CASA Grant) – Arts  Chess in Schools (1x/week) for 15 students  Pre-K After School Program Schoolwide Access for families during Tuesday Parent Engagement Time including: Innovation Lab & STEM experiments in 413 and 408 with STEM teacher  Technology Lab on 5th floor with our Magnet Technology Specialist   Art Studio in 401 with Visual Arts teacher  HW support in the classroom with your child’s teachers Family reading time in the Library with school librarian   ESL/Special Ed Support with our School-based Support team  Gardening with our School Wellness Committee Launching the school year on the first Friday of the school year with our 3rd annual “Back to School Kick Off!” event. This included partnerships from different organizations ranging from the ones listed above to our after school partners including: Special Education Information – Yvonne Cordero  Recruitment – Nancy Dorvelus, Suziette Small   Recess Activities – Playworks CBO  Girls on the Run – Hind Ibrahim  Cool Culture – Shelby Cover  Urban Dove After School CBO - Shateka Johnson  YMCA OST Registration – Khadijah Frederick, CBO   Playworks- Site Coordinator TBD  Chess in Schools – CIS Instructor  Karate After School – Sensai Patrick  Move to Improve – Mentoring & Sports – Guy Garrison, Darelle McNeal School Foods – Andrew Goodman, School Food Services Rigorous Instruction: Our initiatives for our goal of creating rigorous instruction include the following partnerships and plans:  Aligning all of our work to focus on increasing our students' reading abilities  Cross grade co-teaching support model to increase teacher collaboration and effective peer communication  Professional Learning Cycles (PLCs) – Monday PLCs & Friday cross grade level meetings  Targeted Feedback using the Danielson Framework and research that shows how to give feedback to maximize impact on student learning with compliments and next steps for staff and students 2018-19 SCEP-P 12   Routines and structures for student independence in the classroom including turn and talk and peer comments  Expectations for small group instruction, station teaching & 1:1 student conferencing during ELA and math workshop time  Paraprofessional training and working with Reading Rescue program  NYU America Reads tutors to support student reading for children performing at level 2 in literacy  1-to-1 tutoring with Reading Partners (CBO)  Teacher and paraprofessional staff contributing to instructional committee agendas, next steps and follow through for school wide implementation of ideas Math Plan of Action:  NYC DOE Learning Partners Program (LPP) partnership focusing on developing strong pedagogy to support English Language Learners (ELLs)  Mathematics instructional focus on the use of board space, accountable talk and mathematical models  Updated math curriculum and resources to Engage NY math for consistent curriculum across K-5.  Partnership with Brooklyn North Field Support Center mathematical instructional leads to conduct yearlong math inquiry around lesson study along with 1-2 other elementary schools. Field Support Center math PD opportunities over the summer and during the school year   Departmentalization of mathematics and literacy across grades 4 & 5  Metamorphosis math Professional Development partnership with in–house coaching sessions, content specialty workshops for targeted teachers  Parent workshops with Metamorphosis staff developers around building fluency and math strategies ELA Plan of Action:  Continue our work with TCRWP through support from the Brooklyn North Field Support Center  Arts integration for ELA thru ESD/SVP grant and Grammy Music Education Coalition partnership  Integrating Technology & Curricula into project-based learning (PBL) via our STEM teacher, Librarian & classroom teachers Intervisitations SLT Learning Walks to help families better understand school wide and classroom expectations and to celebrate academic successes    Monday PLCs - Task oriented common planning sessions  Basic structure each month: o Social-Emotional Learning o Numeracy and Numeration (Support through BFSC) o Technology in Instruction o School Play Project  Tuesdays Committee Work time for instructional committees  Friday Cross-Grade planning Meeting Cycles o Updated on our Staff Magnet Calendar online & Professional Development 2018 -2019 o Use Looking at Student Work Protocols to drive planning as determined by grade level need for reading, writing, math and PBL 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. We offer a small student teacher ratio of approximately 17:1 in all classrooms. We have a Spanish dual language program in grades Pre-K-2. Each grade level from Pre-K - 5th grade has an integrated co-teaching (ICT) classroom, serving special needs students. In the past we have had partnership with K231, a district 75 program, that includes mainstreaming students into least restrictive environments in grades 4-5. In the 2018-2019 school year, we plan to broaden our relationship with PS 231 by adding a peer to peer mentoring program 2018-19 SCEP-P 13  Two subgroup populations that are of consideration are our English Language Learners (ELLs) and our Students with Disabilities (SWDs). Our ELL population consists of approximately 36 students across grade levels. Our SWD population consists of approximately 40 students (not including incoming Pre-K and K students) 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. According to the Framework for Great Schools Report 2017-2018, our areas of strength include Strong-Family Community Ties, with a score of 3.71. Our two key areas of focus for the 2018-2019 school year will continue to be strengthening instruction by building stronger teacher-teacher trust and developing social-emotional learning through teacher training and clear and consistent consequences/rewards. 2018-19 SCEP-P 14  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 13K054 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 208 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language YES Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 6 6 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 11 5 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 94.0% % Attendance Rate 91.3% % Reduced Lunch 14.9% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 3.4% 34.1% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 2.4% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 3.26 0% 4% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 20.9% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 68% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No No Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District Yes Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 43 43 89.2% 2.4% 18.8% 53.8% 6.3% 3.4% 4 0% 7.1 21.8% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No NO N/A N/A N/A NO YSH N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 SCEP-P 15  2018-19 SCEP-P 16  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed - - - X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The school's strengths relative to the framework include customizing plans that are tailored to meet the individualized instructional needs of our students. For example, we have worked with the Reading Partners program since September 2017. The program connects volunteers within the community to students at a 1:1 ratio, giving the child a direct intervention based on the needs assessment. When the benchmark assessment was compared to the final summary in the end of the year report, trends in the data suggest that the students within the program increased their vocabulary, phonemic awareness, sentence level and overall reading comprehension. Students participating in the Reading Partners program in the third grade increased from ten percent proficiency to thirteen percent; students in grade four increased nine percentage points from 11 % to 20%. The school also made progress with expanding the use of consistent language in student-friendly learning objectives. The staff received training to implement student learning objectives that connected to a formative assessment in order to gauge whether or not the objective was attained. As of 2018, 100% of teachers utilize the same structure, post the student-friendly learning objective for students to follow, and are currently working on developing formative assessments that measure if the objective has been attained within the period. We were also part of the Algebra 4 All initiative in 2017-2018 with a continuing partnership into 2018-2019. This initiative helped develop a systematic approach to class discussions, or "number talks", centered around mathematical concepts and critical thinking. This work coincided with our partnership with Metamorphosis, which provided professional development to teachers. Metamorphosis established engaging techniques to target math instruction to 2018-19 SCEP-P 17  students' level, including using white boards for quick checks on numeracy and base ten operations. This helped devise a system for teachers to develop small groups and hone in on the areas where students' skills were deficient. AIS Math time was also successfully implemented in 2017-2018. Students received 30 minutes of math games that aligned to our school's data that showed areas where students needed additional support. Teachers then grouped students homogeneously and assigned them a game to increase stamina, numeracy, and computational skills. After analyzing the 2017-2018 Measures of Student Learning (MOSL) assessments alongside the 2018 June instructional report, the school needs to develop long-term plans (LTPs) that incorporate common core skills driven by data-informed student learning objectives. The SLOs should strengthen transference of content knowledge by developing a long-term scope of the skills that need to be addressed throughout the school year. Lesson plans can then be derived from LTPs to center small group instruction on common student misconceptions, with intent to focus to bring in multiple access points for all types of learners. Our current inquiry work continues to focus on proactive planning for student learning outcomes prior to unit launches through the use of a universal long-term planning template, coupled with responsive (formative) lesson planning based on formative data collected on a weekly basis. This is based on evidence from observations using the Danielson Framework for components 1a, 1e, and 3d. The usage of long-term plans will provide a broader scope of the skills that we need to focus as a community while the formative assessment data collected weekly will provide teachers a measure on how to adjust daily plans in order to meet those long-term targets. We are continuing to use SLOs, metamorphosis training, Algebra 4 All training, the AIS Math game structure, as well as new initiative such as the Fundations word work program to streamline our approach to formative data assessment. According to the PPO (Principal Performance Observation) from Spring 2018 we also need to work with teachers and coaches to align curricula to multiple entry points. Our student work protocol conducted during Friday cross grade level meetings will continue to support planning through analyzing trends in student misconceptions related to literacy and math. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, students in grades K-5 will engage in rigorous common core aligned literacy instruction through the use of the Teachers College Reading and Writing Project (TCRWP) curriculum resulting in an increase from 51% to at least 56% of students in K-5 performing at or above grade level standards according to the June Measures of Student Learnin (MOSL) TC running record benchmarks. 2018-19 SCEP-P 18  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). All classroom teachers will analyze formative and summative reading assessments to plan targeted reading interventions for Students with Disabilities (SWDs), English Language Learners (ELLs) and students approaching standards. Teachers will provide targeted inquiry work for all students performing at levels 1 & 2 by focusing on the Danielson Framework components 1a and 1e to better align instruction to students specific and individual needs. Teachers Students Weekly Friday Cross-Grade Grade level meetings in 4-6 week cycles - Collaborative planning time - Mondays/ Tuesdays Teachers will utilize common core aligned reading assessments to assess their reading and the literacy work of their students. Data will be stored online in the TCRWP TC Assessment Pro database and analyzed using the tools provided (charts, graphs, next steps). This data will inform Danielson Components 1a & 1e in order to provide better aligned rigorous instruction (Domain 3) Teachers 5x per year: September/October, November/December, January/February (midpoint benchmark), March/April, May/June Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Teachers Administrators Data Specialist Brooklyn Field Support Staff ESL Teacher K-5 ICT Teachers IEP Teacher Teachers Administrators Data Specialist Brooklyn Field Support Staff Teachers Administration of the NYC MOSL Performance Based Assessment in Writing baseline leading to the collaborative evaluation and analysis of the evidence of student learning and gaps. Teachers will collaboratively use these formative assessments to plan targeted next steps during Friday cross grade level meetings. Parents will receive two interim progress reports which outline student proficiency levels in writing. Teachers will also use weekly parent engagement time and monthly opportunities to contact and meet with parents about student progress. Teachers Students September 2018 – June 2019 Parents October 26, 2018, February 8, 2019, May 17, 2019 Teachers Parent Coordinator Administrators 2018-19 SCEP-P 19  Teachers, students and families will use Math Mats to help understand CCLS content, skills and strategies through lessons and parent workshops. This will include lessons on how to follow the 6 steps for mathematical problem solving and explanations for parents on how to support their children with these steps. Students Parents Staff September 13, 2018 Curriculum Night, Parent workshops (TBD) Teachers ICT Math teacher Parent Coordinator Assistant Principal CITE PD staff 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. - Parents will be invited on a regular basis to attend literacy and parenting workshops as well as school events that strengthen the school-home connection. - The Parent Coordinator will conduct workshops for families explaining common core standards and showing examples of literacy and math work that is taking place across grade levels - Teachers will use their Tuesday parent engagement time to conduct focused workshops with families and students in regular cycles aligned to units of study in math, literacy and content areas. - The assistant principal and principal will conduct monthly Coffee with the Principal meetings with families in conjunction with CITE to give workshops with families. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Classroom teachers and teacher teams will use common planning/ Monday and Tuesday Collaborative Professional Learning time to support the implementation of this goal. Per session will be provided to give teachers time to analyze assessments and formulate next steps.  Parents are invited to attend monthly “Parents and Reading Partners” and “Parents and Math Partners” events Families are encouraged to participate in assemblies and conferences with that include raffles for attending   Parent Coordinator will be responsible for organizing incentives that encourage parent attendance at school events  Parent Coordinator will collaborate with the School Based Support Team, School Leadership Team (SLT), Parent Teacher Association (PTA) to develop a relationship with an organization that can provide assistance with family counseling and parenting classes Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Title I 1003(a) Title III X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding X X C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring 2018-19 SCEP-P 20  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal.  Teachers will review TC running record data every other month (October, December, February, April and June) using the TC Reading and Writing Project benchmark reading levels and marking period assessments.  At the beginning and the end of each K-5 writing unit 1 formative (Writing on Demand) and 1 summative writing assessment, a published piece, will be administered to students and assessed using the TC writing rubrics.  Weekly cross-grade meetings to look at student work will take place every Friday. Teachers will collaborate using our looking at student work protocol to evaluate student progress in reading, writing, math and STEM  Percentage of family attendants at school-wide events  Mid-year benchmark assessment data  Beginning of the Year (BOY) and End of the Year (EOY) New York City Math Performance Task Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. TC Writing on Demand assessments, TC Running Record Assessments informal running record assessments of formative student work samples Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 21  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. - - - X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child?  According to data from 2017-2018, the total number of incidents was 54 with the majority of incidents falling in the category of level 4.  We utilize the Responsive Classroom course that incorporates creative strategies to structure classroom routines as well as ways to communicate positively with students.  Teacher will participate in Therapeutic Crisis Intervention in Schools (TCIS) training in the summer of 2018  Our partner, Playworks, helped us structure the junior coach program, which empowers leaders from grades three through five to solve conflicts on the playground before they enter into the classroom.  Playworks assists with the development of systems during lunch and recess that also reduced the amount of conflict between students, resulting in a calmer social environment during lunch periods.  Urban Dove assists daily at recess to maintain the structure established over the past two years.  We share articles and resources that develop greater cultural awareness and understanding of co-generative dialogue amongst staff that benefits student to teacher relationships  The school designs a variety of learning experiences for parents such as Common Core Curriculum Nights and Parents as Math/Reading Partners consistently throughout the school year. During monthly Parents as Math/Reading Partners events, parents visit classrooms to observe and participate in reading and math lessons.  Parent volunteers engage with the school community by volunteering for various school events such as Hispanic Heritage Month, Parents as Reading/Math Partners, and classroom volunteers. 2018-19 SCEP-P 22    Students who were suspended were reintroduced back into the classroom environment through meetings established with all stakeholders to develop a resolution to behavior that obstructed learning (similar to restorative justice circles). "Bucket Dipper Sheets" are used when there is an incident to help students this about the conflict, their role in the conflict, how to resolve it, and how they will prevent the conflict from occurring in the future. Needs Assessments:  The school has several ongoing partnerships with community agencies that promote academic and social emotional development to support the success of our students such as The Child Mild Institute, The Leadership Project, Green Generations, and Playworks.  Teachers will receive TCIS (Therapeutic Crisis Intervention Support) training in the summer of 2018  The Junior Coach program established through our partnership with Playworks developed a streamlined  approach to resolving conflict at recess while empowering students in the role of junior coach to be leaders who talk through conflicts with other students. Increase communication between the school based support team and teachers as well as teachers and admin. to ensure consistency of consequences for level 4 infractions as well as students who fall in the top tier for behavioral RTI supports. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools –Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all PK-5 teaching staff that have been trained in TCIS will develop a common language between students and adults in order to implement de-escalation strategies in that facilitate collaboration, conflict resolution, and effective problem-solving skills, resulting in a 50% decrease in OORs reports at Level 3 & Level 4 as compared to 44 Level 3 & 4 occurrences in 2017-2018. 2018-19 SCEP-P 23  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).   Implementation of TCIS training for teachers Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) July 2018 Admin Teachers Classroom Teachers, PK-5, Cluster teachers, Parent Coordinator, Paraprofessionals, School aides Responsive Classroom and TCIS coaches will launch the school year and provide ongoing support in cycles. This includes the following pieces in place: Teachers, School Aides, Support Staff YMCA support staff  Morning Meeting  Energizers  Take-A-Break Chair - cool down spot in every class   Buddy Teachers   Reinforcing, Reminding, Redirecting Teacher language   Student choice in academics and social/emotional work Student independence Students use of "I messages" Interactive modeling September 5th, 2018 & monthly follow up visits Administrators Teachers Responsive Classroom Parent Coordinator YMCA support staff The parents of students will be updated on strategies and resources across the school through ClassDojo, Coffee With The Principal (monthly meetings), morning meetings and monthly PTA meetings. Parents 3rd Wednesday of every month Administrators, Parent Coordinator, P.T.A., Staff, Parents The school culture reinforces the use of positivie behavioral language through bulletins in the hallways and classrooms that emphasize individual worth and the celebration of student’s utilization of leadership. Students Parents Monthly bulletin board updates P.S. 54 staff will collaborate together to effectively build a culture of leadership and wellness in classrooms and throughout the school. The team will utilize collaborative Teachers, Paraprofessionals, aides, support staff Monthly staff meetings; Monday Administrators, Staff, Parent Coordinator School Wellness committee, School spirit committee Administrators, Staff 2018-19 SCEP-P 24  professional learning time scheduled to meet and review program goals and needs. The RFTA coach will work to align the Respect for All Curriculum and the Discipline Code online lesson plans to a weekly advisory period for students in grades 1-5 Teachers, paraprofessionals, students Professional Learning Communities Weekly Advisory meetings Fridays, October - January Mentoring Committee - classroom teachers, admin, cluster 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight.  Families will be invited to attend parenting workshops that will facilitate their understanding of how to relate and communicate with their child.  Parents will participate in communication, directly and indirectly, through the use of Classroom Dojo.  Hiring of a new parent coordinator that will assist with pre-existing structures of parent workshops and parent communication Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Responsive Classroom PD  Per session for Respect for All planning and training for staff  The Brooklyn Field Support Center will train all staff in TCIS Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Title I 1003(a) Title III X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal.  Track the number of reports for level 3 and 4 infractions in September 2018 and June 2019 compared to OORs reports from September 2018 -June 2019.  Amount/levels of non- incidents recorded in Restorative Discipline forms  Student wellness survey administered in January to look for the inclusion of Responsive Classroom strategies across all classrooms. Next steps will be determined based on outcome of survey and staff suggestions for improvement.  Non-evaluative Learning Walks with staff -K/2/4 visiting PK/1/3/5 and vice versa to monitor classroom climate and culture across the school 2018-19 SCEP-P 25   Classroom Dojo data showing at least 80% of tracked skills for students with positive outcomes reviewed on a weekly basis with classroom teachers. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress.  OORs reports looking at number of incidents and where/when they occur, as well as with which specific students Schoolwide positive-behavior tracking system (Classroom Dojo points)  Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 26  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. SOP(s) Addressed - - X 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. - 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year.  Weekly vertical and horizontal teacher teams collaboratively plan lessons and units, strengthening teaching practices, looking at student work products for evidence of learning and gaps, and make purposeful adjustments to increase student achievement through purposeful use of data.  Ongoing professional development in literacy supports teachers with customizing instruction to provide students with rigorous and engaging learning activities.  Use of common core aligned rubrics by teachers and students to assess and revise student work products in writing.  Use of grade level complex texts during whole group instruction to explicitly teach students how to negotiate language features, structure, layout, purpose and meaning and knowledge demands of information and fiction texts. These features of complex texts are utilized during close reading, shared reading and read aloud to engage all students in discussions and inferential thinking requiring text based evidence.  Access to a universal literacy coach through the K-2 Universal Literacy Initiative Needs Assessment: According to the 2018-2019 PPO, the school needs to:  Monitor and support teacher teams in the analysis of data and its implications on their teacher practice  Support teacher leaders in order to build capacity and strengthen their decision-making concerning student learning and progress 2018-19 SCEP-P 27   Redefine the focus of teacher teams to: o Focus on 8-12 minute mini-lessons o Small group instruction on a regular basis o Use of station teaching in early childhood o Focus on the writing process o o Increase volume of student learning increase the use of the use of elaboration in writing Our needs will concentrate primarily on the bullet points above and listed here:  Monitor and support teacher teams in the analysis of data and its implications on their teacher practice  Support teacher leaders in order to build capacity and strengthen their decision-making concerning student learning and progress Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, through collaborative teacher inquiry and professional learning opportunities, all K-5 classroom teachers will participate in weekly meetings using protocols to look at student work in order to develop effective instructional strategies to impact student progress resulting in an increase from 51% to at least 56% of students in K-5 performing at or above grade level standards school wide as measured by the June MOSL TC running record assessment. 2018-19 SCEP-P 28  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Teachers will participate in year-long cycles of professional learning focused on the TCRWP Units of Study for reading and writing within the building. Teachers and Paraprofessionals Sept. 2018-June 2019 Teachers will collaborate with administration to share on-going progress throughout the cycles of professional learning. Teachers and Paraprofessionals Sept. 2018-June 2019 North Brooklyn Field Support Center (FSC) District and Central Offices will continue to provide ongoing professional development opportunities for administration, faculty and staff. Teachers, Paraprofessionals, Principal, Assistant Principal Sept. 2018-June 2019 Teachers will participate in the Learning Partners Program with a host school and another partner school for intervisitations and instructional feedback Teachers September 2018 - June 2019 Teachers and contracted agencies will facilitate parent workshops on ways families can support their children and increase family engagement. Parents Fall 2018-Spring 2019 Principal and Assistant Principal; Universal Literacy coach, Field Support Center (FSC), staff, teachers Principal and Assistant Principal, teachers Field Support Center (FSC), District 13 Office of the Superintendent, Central Administrators, Teachers, LPP Host school, LPP Partner school CITE (Center for Integrated Teacher Education), Teachers, Principal, Assistant Principal 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Families will be invited to attend sessions with coaches visits from BFSC instructional coaches and parent workshops through outside providers as well as sessions with Algebra 4 All coaches in order to expose families to curricula and voice ideas during planning. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 2018-19 SCEP-P 29  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Funds distributed through Learning Partners Program  Tax Levy funds will be used to cover per diem for staff members attending outside professional development.   Prep schedule changes to align to administering and scoring performance tests  Monday/Tuesday professional learning time for collaborative learning cycles Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding X X C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal.  Teachers will use professional learning time to track students’ progress quarterly through benchmark assessment 5 times per year and plan based on progress data.  Weekly grade meetings will be held to review implementation of professional growth in planning, preparation and instruction.  AIS Tracking System Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress.  Advance data reports, specifically, an increase in teacher effectiveness in Domains 1 & 3 Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 30  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). - X - - SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths:  School Leadership creates and distributes monthly letters to parents focused on academic and personal behaviors that prepare students for college and career readiness.  The parent coordinator sends out monthly calendar of events to all parents.  Teachers contact families regulary through ClassDojo, both through direct messaging and classroom notices/updates  Teachers post pictures, feedback, and informational updates to ClassDojo and Remind  The Daily Notes reminds staff of the instructional expectations, professional learning opportunities and other important events for that day and week. School events and updates published regularly via school website.  Needs Assessment:  An increased focus on Danielson Framework components for Domain 1 - planning and preparation. 2018-19 SCEP-P 31   Administrators’ support of ongoing teacher development by conducting admin study group using the book Coherence: The Right Drivers for Actions in Schools focusing on planning and preparation work for teachers.  Continue to address student social emotional needs through parent education and engaging students in activities around self-regulation through Responsive Classrooms through planning and preparation.  The school leadership team's priority will focus on Domains 1 and 3- providing professional development and support to staff in creating rigorous lesson plans that target student needs. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART– Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 teachers will participate in 2 cycles of collaborative professional learning resulting in an increase in rigorous instruction as determined via the Danielson Framework through components 1a, 1e, and 3c, 3d with 75% of lessons observed being rated effective or highly effective. 2018-19 SCEP-P 32  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) School leaders will conduct frequent classroom visits to provide actionable feedback, coaching, and professional development aligned to the Danielson Framework for Teaching as well as ongoing Collaborative Professional Learning Activities. Teachers, Paraprofessionals Sept 2018-June 2019 Principal and Assistant Principal Teachers will participate in weekly cross-grade grade level meetings (K/1, 2/3 and 4/5) to focus on planning and next steps for students based on instructional outcomes. Teachers School leadership will meet 5x per year to review data and reflect on current school data trends and to identify next steps in the creation of an action plan. Leadership will engage in continuous professional learning in order to support pedagogical practice, parent engagement and student learning. Classroom Teachers, non-classroom teachers Principal and Assistant Principal, teacher leaders, Magnet Coach Parents will attend monthly workshops based on survey data Parents Every Friday October 2018-June 2019 October, December, February, April, June 2019 Monthly workshops, Monthly PLCs, Monthly parent engagement events September 2018 -June 2019 Principal and Assistant Principal, Classroom Teachers, School Support Services Principal, Assistant Principal, Teachers, Sp Ed Liaison, Data specialist Principal, Assistant Principal, Parent coordinator, Family worker, BFSC, District 13 Office of the Superintendent, Central CITE, Parent Coordinator, Principal, Assistant Principal, select teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. -Monthly SLT meetings – SLT team -Parent workshops as designed by parent input – cycles by semester (Sept – Jan, Feb – Jun) 2018-19 SCEP-P 33  -Monthly PTA meetings – PTA team, Parent coordinator -Monthly Coffee with the Principals – Principal, Parent coordinator, CITE staff developers -Weekly Family engagement Time on Tuesdays – teachers, Parent coordinators -Development of parent learning communities – cycles by semester (Sept – Jan, Feb – Jun) Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  School Leaders, Teachers, Data Specialist, and BFSC will collaborate during professional learning opportunities to promote student achievement including Tax Levy and Title I funding.  After school tutoring to provide targeted small group instruction.  AIS/SETSS/Guidance to support students’ academic and social emotional growth.  Per diem substitute teacher coverage to support teacher professional development on a weekly basis  Per session (ie. TL MOSL funds) to support teachers in analyzing student data in creating action plans  Cluster teacher schedules modified for push in to support classroom teachers in implementing action plans and conducing assessments  Parent engagement time on Tuesdays for parents to discuss curricula with teachers Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding X X C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal.  Teachers will implement feedback immediately after post- observations with evaluators in ongoing observations cycles of at least 4-6 observations from October 2018-June 2019.  All teachers will engage in at least 2 cycles of targeted professional learning October 2018 – May 2019.  Additional professional learning opportunities will be provided as necessary depending on the  Mid-point progress benchmarks will be ADVANCE observation dashboard reports, focusing on Domain 1 - 1a and 1e and Domain 3 - 3c. We are looking for 50% of lesson plans observed to be effective by February 2018. School leaders will collect observation data to plan next steps for teachers October 2018 – June 2019. The principal and assistant principal will conduct teacher observations in cycles, giving teacher feedback within 5 days of the lesson observation.  Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance reports Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 34  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. - - X - SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths:  According to the 2017-2018 NYC Framework for Great Schools, 97% of families say that they get opportunities to visit their child's classroom, such as observing instruction or participating in an activity with their child.  The school designs a variety of learning experiences for parents such as Common Core Curriculum Nights, Technology workshops, September and May Parent Meetings, as well as Parents as Math/Reading Partners consistently throughout the school year as well as an “open door policy” for parents in classrooms as well as access to administration. During monthly Parents as Math/Reading Partners events, parents visit classrooms to observe and participate in reading and math lessons.  Coordianted calendar of events with the PTA  Parent volunteers engage with the school community by volunteering during the lunch periods and for various  school events. Informing and engaging parents in mathematics instruction strengthened the community as a whole as parents become stronger educational supports to children.  Parent engagement time on Tuesday is reserved for parents to utilize all facilities in the including the library, technology lab, etc. Needs Assessment: 2018-19 SCEP-P 35   While the school has several ongoing partnerships with community agencies, there is a need to nurture these relationships by allocating more time to provide services to families. Additionally, the school needs to broaden our partnerships with other community agencies in order to promote academic and social-emotional development to support the success of our students.  There is a need to increase parental involvement across the school, as it is often the same parents that support  the school and their children on a regular basis as observed by school wide events from September through October 2018. There is a need to support students, staff and families in the developmental stages of behavioral expectations and discipline. The understanding of language, discipline and action steps across the school is currently fragmented for students, families and staff.  Our specific priority will be to increase positive parent involvement by involving families that have historically been less involved in school wide events and positive discipline procedures, such as monthly assemblies.  There is a need to strengthen the use of the parent handbook Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June of 2019, school staff, PTA and SLT members, will engage 75% of families in workshops in order to strengthen transference of curricula by conducting targeted outreach to connect parents to topics that meet their needs. This will be evidenced by parent sign in sheets for all family events as well as the data collected through the ClassDojo app. The impact will be a stronger understanding by families of the grade level expectations for their child. This will be evidenced by at least a 10% increase students performing at or above grade level standards in grades 3, 4 and 5 in the 2019 NYS ELA and math exams. 2018-19 SCEP-P 36  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Families will collaborate with teachers and the school community to help students create STEM projects to support common core aligned units of study. Parents, Students Sept 2018-June 2019 Staff will conduct parental learning opportunities that will expose parents to the school’s Magnet theme of Environmental Science, Technology and Community Wellness. Parent Coordinator will facilitate bi-weekly workshops, including Coffee with the Principal, geared towards providing parents with academic and social emotional resources to promote the success of their students. Parents Parents October 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 Administrators, Parent Coordinator, teachers Teachers, Administration, Parent Coordinator Principal Parent Coordinator Teachers will use parent engagement time to plan workshops for and reach out to parents in support of the school’s magnet theme Parents Every Tuesday, 2:40-3:20pm Families will be invited via Remind (texting App), ClassDojo, flyers and posters, and during arrival and dismissal by PS 54 staff and PTA members. Students and families September 2018-June 2019 Teachers School based support team Asst. Principal Teachers ENL, IEP, Art, Technology, Phys Ed Library cluster teachers Principal, Assistant Principal, Parent Coordinator, Teachers, Technology Specialist, Office Staff 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Child Mind Institute, Green Generations, Playworks, The Leadership Project, Thrive NYC Mental Health Consultant, newly hired parent coordinator 2018-19 SCEP-P 37  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Tax levy funding will be used to provide books and materials to support staff in Responsive Classroom and Zones professional development.  Per session for all teacher and staff to attend workshops Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding X X C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Students as facilitators of celebrations and parent meetings.  Use of teachers as facilitators of parent workshops.   Parent Coordinator, Staff, and Administrators will collaborate to plan rich learning experiences for parents.  Agendas, minutes and sign in sheets will be collected at each meeting or event attended by parents  Parent Coordinator meetings will be conducted on a weekly basis to assess parental involvement and revise plans to improve the school-home connection. By February 2019, 75% of PS 54 parents will attend at least two different parent and student engagement opportunities (i.e. workshops, PTA meetings, events, celebrations) provided by the PS 54 community as measured by parent sign in sheets for all family events. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Parent sign-in sheets Staff PD attendance sheets ClassDojo data Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 38  Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Program Description Directions: Expanded Learning Time activities are directly aligned to the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, Rigorous Instruction, Supportive Environment, and Strong Family and Community Ties. ELT provides enriching educational experiences that happen outside of the traditional school day and blend skill acquisition, relationship-building and fun to foster academic and social-emotional growth. Summer learning, afterschool programming, and extended-day ELT models, when well-implemented, play a critical role in supporting students in all grades and ensuring that they graduate from high school, college and career ready. SED requires that Priority schools offer a minimum of 200 additional student contact hours as Expanded Learning Time in addition to the current mandated length of 900 hours of instruction per year (25 hours per week) in grades K-6 and 990 hours of instruction per year (27.5 hours per week) in grades 7-12. Effective ELT models will blend school staff with community partners, and will provide a balanced curriculum that can include ELA, Math, STEM, arts, physical activity, and leadership development. Complete the sections on this page to demonstrate how the school will meet these requirements. Part 1 – ELT Program Goal(s) Describe the summative goal(s) of the ELT program for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. By June 2019, at least 75% of PS 54 Pre-K-5 students will participate in ELT opportunities as measured by attendance of students on a regular basis for before and after school extended learning time. Part 2 – ELT Program Type Is the ELT program voluntary or compulsory? X Voluntary Compulsory If the ELT program is voluntary, indicate how you will actively encourage the participation of all students, with the goal of serving at least 50% of students. We have begun enrollment of families in the following after school programs that are aligned to the work and curriculum at PS 54: - YMCA OST - Urban Dove - PS 54 After School STEM Academy - The Leadership Project for the Arts - Chess in Schools - A Back to School Kickoff event will be held on September 2018 from 2:00pm-5:00pm, before, during and after dismissal time with vendors and tables set up with families for information and sign up opportunities for extended learning. - Additional outreach by classroom teachers at dismissal time and during Tuesday parent engagement time. - Remind text messages will be sent out via the Remind App. Parents were signed up from previous school years as well as during Coffee with the Principal, September's PTA meeting and PS 54 Curriculum Family Night and Health Fair. - Flyers are sent home via backpack - Class Dojo posts with any updated announcements 2018-19 SCEP-P 39  - Posters and banners are displayed on the inside and outside of the school building to remind parents of events -Pre-K Afterschool Program -Move to Improve/Basketball -Karate -Casa Grant Teaching Artists -Empire Grant funded Saturday Academy Part 3 – ELT Program Description The ELT program will be offered to all students eligible for Academic Intervention Services (AIS), with the goal of serving a minimum of fifty percent of AIS-eligible students. Describe how the school will meet the following SED requirements for an ELT program in a Priority School:  Integrate academics, enrichment, and skill development through hands-on experiences that make learning relevant and engaging.  Offer a range of activities that capture student interest and strengthen student engagement in learning so as to promote higher attendance, reduce risk for retention or drop out, and increase the likelihood of graduation.  Actively address the unique learning needs and interests of all types of students, especially those who may benefit from approaches and experiences not offered in the traditional classroom setting.  Contain components designed to improve student academic, social, and emotional outcomes, including opportunities for enrichment programs such as in music and art.  Ensure instruction in any core academic subject offered in the program will be delivered under the supervision of a teacher who is NYS certified in that particular content area.  Engage in outreach activities made to families. Student after school programs will be a balance of academic support - reinforcing work from the current day/units of study and enrichment activities. Activities include mentoring, sports, chess, arts, and more. Instruction will be coordinated by a NYS certified teacher as per the agreement with the CBOs through th ED/SVP grant. Students will have a social-emotional component in their enrichment work teaching strategies and solutions for social/emotional outcomes. Outreach activities are done through Parent Coordinator led workshops, outreach from the PTA meeting during the Principal's Report, Classroom Dojo parent communication and Remind App text messaging Part 4 – ELT Program Implementation and Oversight Part 4a. Who will implement the ELT program? Who will oversee the program? 1. Indicate the key personnel that will be responsible for implementing and overseeing the ELT program, including school-based staff and any high-quality community partners that will be involved. If applicable, describe the scope of involvement of all community partners and how the joint ELT program is structured. 2. 3. Explain how you will evaluate the program to assess impact on student achievement. The after-school program is structured by the YMCA's site director, Khadija Frederick, so that students are in single grade groupings and are exposed to a cycle of enrichment activities. Each group has two group leaders with the students coordinating instructional and enrichment activities. 2018-19 SCEP-P 40  Assessment outcomes will be determined by the NYS ELA and math exams as well as the decrease in OORS incidents from students with recurring social/emotional issues. Part 4b. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. September 2018 -June 2019 This includes additional instructional time during breaks (December, February, April) as well as celebrations for inclusiveness (i.e. holidays, school-specific events) Part 5 – ELT Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the ELT program. CBO Site director 10% of YMCA budget Teaching and instructional materials 6 classrooms 1 science lab 2 gymnasiums 1 auditorium 1 Cafeteria Access to big outdoor yard and small outdoor yard Human Resources including: 3 STEM teachers, 1 Move to Improve Teacher, on-site supervisor (Assistant Principal and/or Principal), Chess in Schools instructor and DOE per session teacher Karate Instructor Theater Arts instructor CASA Grant for the Arts to provide art supplies and instructor Empire Grant Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support the ELT Program. 2018-19 SCEP-P 41  Note: If the program is funded by 21st Century Community Center Learning Funds, it must be offered in conjunction with a high quality, high capacity community partner. 21st Century Title I 1003(a) X Tax Levy X Title III Title I SWP PTA Funded Title I TA SIG Grant P/F Set-aside C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 6 – ELT Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. The midpoint benchmark will include January TCRWP independent reading levels as well as NYS benchmark assessments. Youthservices.net attendance reporting system also tracks students performance. Part 6b. Indicate the instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Attendance monitoring cross-checked with student achievement data from youthservices.net platform as well as assessments used for progress monitoring. Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 42  Section 7: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) All level one and two students below the median cut score of 305 Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) - Fundations - Guided reading - Shared reading - One-to-one conferencing - Before and after school - Small group strategy lessons - During school day - Close reading - Tutorials - Reading Recovery - Reading Rescue - America Reads Tutors - Reading Partners 1:1 Tutoring - NYCMath Performance Tasks - One-to-one conferencing - Before and after school - Tools from Exemplars, Inc. - Small group strategy lessons - During school day Mathematics All level one and two students below the median cut score of 306 Science All level one and two students -Shared Reading - Guided Reading - Informational Text Features -Close reading - Project Based Learning - Tutorials - One-to-one conferencing - Before and after school - Small group strategy lessons - During school day - Tutorials 2018-19 SCEP-P 43 Social Studies All level one and two students -Shared Reading - One-to-one conferencing - Before and after school - Small group strategy lessons - During school day At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) At-risk students (i.e. temporary housing), teacher referral, Administrative observations - Tutorials - Individual - Group - Guided Reading - Informational Text Features -Close reading - Project Based Learning - Observations and class visits - Behavior Modification Plans - Parent Engagement -Referrals to outside services - Before and after school - During school day -Parent Engagement Block 2018-19 SCEP-P 44  Section 8: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 20 student (non including Pre-K and K students) 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. School supplies, backpacks, food and clothing supported through Title I funds as well as at-risk counseling groups by SBST, family workshops, and support through newly hired parent coordinator. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 SCEP-P 45  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 SCEP-P 46  Section 9: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). - Professional Learning Cycles focusing on: Numeracy and Numeration, Play Project, technology integration, Social-emotional supports - Reading Rescue training for all paraprofessionals and other support staff - District AP and Principal meetings - Metamorphosis Training Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). 2018-19 SCEP-P 47  N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.).  The pre-kindergarten program facilitates the smooth transition of students from early childhood to kindergarten. Set up Pre-K & K Open House to meet with parents of transitioning Pre-K and K parents. Schedule Pre-K students and parents to visit kindergarten classrooms. Share articles about transitioning with parents.     Parent/Family workshops  Orientation for Pre-K families in the beginning of June 2019 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction.  Teachers across grades meet with administrators and choose assessments based on benchmark data gathering needs.  Professional development is provided on how to use the data from assessments to align instruction.  Testing coordinator along with admin confer in the Spring to align MOSL selections with baseline and formative assessments for the upcoming school year.  MOSL committee selections include TC running records and NYC Math performance tasks as local measures. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (SCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Federal 152,261 X  School Information Sheet pg- 11 2018-19 SCEP-P 48  Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Federal Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Federal Title II, Part A Federal Title III, Part A Federal Title III, Immigrant Federal Tax Levy (FSF) Local 16,979.00 67,511.00 36,290.00 12,366.00 0 1,395,290 X X X X X X  Budget and Resource Alignment- pgs: 16, 19, 22, 23  Professional  Development Instructional resources  Professional  Development Instructional resources  Budget and Resource Alignment- pg: 16  Saturday Academy and Dual language instruction  Professional Development -  School Information Sheet- pgs: 11 13, 16, 19, 22 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to 2018-19 SCEP-P 49  combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/SCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 SCEP-P 50  Section 10: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. 13K054, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. PS 54: The Magnet School for Environmental Science, Technology & Community Wellness will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students - providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; - providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; - fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; - providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 2018-19 SCEP-P 51  - sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; - providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; - The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: - actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; - engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; - ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; - support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; - maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; - conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; - provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 2018-19 SCEP-P 52  - host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); - schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; - translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; - conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement - holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; - hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; - encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; - supporting or hosting Family Day events; - establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; - encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; - providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; - developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; - providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. - developing community based partnerships that support parenting skills - strengthening community partnerships that provide resources to parents that support academic and social-emotional goals School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 SCEP-P 53  PS 54: The Magnet School for Environmental Science, Technology & Community Wellness School-Parent Compact (SPC) 13K054, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: - using academic learning time efficiently; - respecting cultural, racial and ethnic and learning-style differences; - implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; - offering high quality instruction in all content areas; - providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships - conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; - convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; - arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; - respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; 2018-19 SCEP-P 54  - providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; - involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; - providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; - ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff - ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; - notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; - arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; - planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents - creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; - assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); - sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; - supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; - ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; 2018-19 SCEP-P 55  - advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; -reporting any issues related to child safety in a timely manner II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; - ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; - check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; - read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); - set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; - promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; - encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child as it aligns to the school’s mission and vision of equitable practices; - volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; - participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; - communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; - respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; - become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; - participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; - take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; - share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child III. Student Responsibilities 2018-19 SCEP-P 56  Student Responsibilities: - attend school regularly and arrive on time; - complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; - follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; - show respect for myself, other people and property; - try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; - always try my best to learn. 2018-19 SCEP-P 57 Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components: 1. 2. 3. The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers. Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. 1. 2. 3. 4. High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” 1. Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences. Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. 1. These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 3 9 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 5 11 12 2018-19 SCEP-P 58  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the · · · · · · rationale subgroups and grade levels of students to be served schedule and duration language of instruction # and types of certified teachers types of materials Begin description here: Rationale - In the State tests for the 2016-2017 school year, our ELL students' scores in ELA and Math range between 1 and 2. Since their academic achievement lags behind, our Title III After-School Program is designed to accelerate language development and offer supplemental literacy and math instruction. Our main focus in the supplemental program is to give ELLs the support they may not be able to get during the school day, with the large number of non-ELLs around them in the classroom. We want our program to build students engagement and proficiency in English language literacy, home language literacy, and mathematics. We will build literacy and math proficiency through identifying subjects of student interest and researching the subject together. We will then participate in activities related to the subject together, document that activities, and then writing about the experience. Meanwhile, we will solve real world math problems, that relate to these activities or areas of interest. Some examples of possible activities that students might choose could be making slime, playing soccer, or dance choreography. In addition, we will also engage in readers' theater, to build literacy skills, which will culminate in a performance for parents. grade levels - Note: These numbers are estimated based on NYSESLAT scores from 2017. Numbers will be updated and proficiency levels will be added once we receive scores from the 2018 NYSESLAT test. Our program will serve the 28 ELL students enrolled in grades 1-5 and as many ELL kindergarten students as are identified in September. Three groups will be formed based on grade level. All three groups will be taught by ESL/ENL and dual language teachers. With this division, we will be able to provide instruction for all of our English Language Learners Group 1: Grades K , 1, and 2 students · · · The instructional focus will be Kindergarten and 1st grade math and literacy. Group 2: Grade 2 · The instructional focus will be 2nd and 3rd grade math and literacy Group 3: 4th and 5th grade students · · · The instructional focus will be 4th and 5th grade math and literacy Schedule and duration - 4 first grade students 3 second grade students however many kindergarten students are identified in September 9 second grade students 10 students total 7 fourth grade students 3 fifth grade students 2018-19 SCEP-P 59  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The Literacy and Math After-School Title III Program will start on November 8, 2016 and will end on May 2, 2017, for a total of 22 weeks. The program will run two days a week, Thursday and Friday, from 2:45 p.m. to 4:15 p.m. for a total of 180 minutes per week. Language of instruction - The language of instruction will be English when focusing on English language literacy, and Spanish, when focusing on Spanish language literacy. # and types of certified teachers - One certified ESL/ENL teacher, and 2 dual language teachers will deliver instruction. These teachers will be paid at the per session rate (fringe benefit) and the total amount they will be paid is calculated as follows: 3 (hours) X 3(# of teachers) X 50.13 (per session rate) X 22 (# of weeks) = 9925.91 Types of materials - Literacy Materials Bilingual dictionaries will be used as a resource for students to aid in their understanding of texts. This will cost $40. We will will also use books for independent reading, read-aloud books, and guided reading. These books will include bilingual books and books in the students home languages. Studies have shown that children develop literacy in a new language faster if they continue to develop their home language literacy. Monolingual English books, bilingual books, and books in students' L1 will be at students' reading level in each language. Some of these books will relate to subjects that pertain to students' home country and/or culture, because learning is facilitated when it builds on previous knowledge. We will also purchase books that relate to students' interests, especially about subjects that we can build in shared activities around, and that students can explore in their writing. Lastly we will purchase books that relate to students' school day content areas. The total cost for all books will be $770.26 We will supplement our program with games to support students' literacy in fun and engaging activities. The cost for these games will be $90. Math Materials We will purchase Math games for every age group. This will allow students to build their math skills through fun engaging activities. The cost will be $60. Teachers will use Go Math materials and Engage NY math materials to support student learning of math facts and concepts. These materials will be of no cost to the program. Art Materials We will purchase materials for group projects that relate to areas of student interest we will be exploring through reading, writing, group activities, and real world math problems. The cost of these materials will be $150 Technology Students will use ipads to to get information and download pictures and images (as a visual aid) to write about a topic. They will also use programs such as Google Presentations, Keynote, and imovie to present their writing, present about what they have read, and present their math strategies. Teachers will use Smart Boards to model literacy and mathematical strategies, enhance instruction, and present student work. ipads and Smartboards will be at no cost to the program 2018-19 SCEP-P 60  rationale teachers to receive training schedule and duration topics to be covered name of provider Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. · · · · · Begin description here: Rationale - The PD program is designed to support instruction in Literacy and Math. The aim is to have Title III teachers interpret assessment data to drive instruction and improve student achievement in the ELA NYS Test, Math NYS Test and the NYSESLAT. Training will address how to to support students' language development. We will also provide trainings that address how to support ELL students' socio-emotional learning. Teachers to receive training - All teachers working in Title III program will receive training - one ESL/ENL teacher, and two bilingual teachers. Schedule and Duration At no cost to Title III, teachers will attend workshops offered every Monday for 1hour 20 minutes. Additional trainings will be conducted that take place inside the school and others that are offered through DELLSS and fit the teachers' needs. All teachers will meet with a coach from TC on several occasions throughout the year. Coaches will guide teachers through how to best develop students' reading and writing skills, how to provide effective mini lessons, and small group lessons, how to conduct effective guided reading and read alouds, among other topics. Coaches will model effective teaching for teachers, will observe teachers providing instruction, and will provide feedback. All teachers will also attend several Calendar Days at Teachers' College which will address similar topics. Exact schedule for professional development provided, further topics to be covered, and names of providers are pending. rationale schedule and duration topics to be covered name of provider how parents will be notified of these activities Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. · · · · · Begin description here: Rationale The involvement of the parents and the family in the study and school activities of their children is very important for many reasons. Research has shown that family participation in education was twice as predictive of students’ academic success as family socioeconomic status. It has also shown that the more intensely parents are involved, the more beneficial the achievement effects 2018-19 SCEP-P 61  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities and the higher grades, test scores, and graduation rates the students achieve. Moreover, this results in better school attendance, increased motivation, better self-esteem, lower rates of suspension and fewer instances of violent behavior. Schedule and duration At no cost to Title III program, (except for the payment of a private translation provider) Parent Orientation Workshops are offered to all parents in September, and ELL parent orientation sessions are held the second week of September and throughout the school year to the parents of newly admitted ELLs. At these workshops and orientation sessions the school uniform policy, monthly calendars and all activities are explained to the parents with translation to Spanish, Arabic, Bengali and any other languages as required by school staff and/or private provider. There is a question and answer period available after the workshops. The following events take place throughout the school year: -Parents as Reading Partners 10/5/18, 12/7/18 -Parents as Math Partners 12/7/18, 1/4/19, 3/1/19 -Family Movie Night 11/9/18, 1/11/19 -Limit Setting Workshop 9/13/18 -Cyberbullying Workshop 9/14/18 -Dad Bring Your Child to School Day 9/18/18 -Hispanic Heritage Assembly 10/12/18 -Costume Party 10/27/18 -Halloween Parade 10/31/18 -Breakfast with Santa, Family Party 12/15/18 -Holiday Assembly 12/21/18 -Talent Show - 3/19/19 -School Play - 4/19/19 -Career Day - 5/10/19 -Field Day 6/7/19 -Father/Child Dance 6/15/19 -School Carnival 6/26/19 - Letters, fliers and newsletters with translation periodically sent throughout the school year In addition, teachers prepare a schedule for meeting parents every Tuesday 2:30 p.m. – 3:10 p.m. as they discuss with parents their programs and the ELL child's progress. Topics to be covered: During the orientation session that takes place prior launching Title III program in the last week of October parents and guardians of our ELLs will be made aware of the nature of Title III after school program, its goals, duration, schedule, teachers, and expected outcomes of the program. During the other parent and guardian meetings, a wide range of topics are discussed and covered. Topics range from instructional, to cultural, to socio-emotional and community building. Name of provider – These sessions are offered by the school staff that will include the three teachers working on the program, the principal, assistant principal and/or by professionals appointed by the school for sessions the school does not have the qualified staff to offer. How parents will be notified of these activities – The parent coordinator notifies the parents by mail, flyers, brochures, and phone calls. Translation of the written and spoken communications with parents will be available in all the languages spoken in our school i.e. English, Spanish, Bengali, Arabic, Haitian Creole, and 2018-19 SCEP-P 62 Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Chinese. Staff in the school will cover Spanish and Haitian Creole translation and a private translation provider will be hired for other languages. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) 1. 2. Per session Per diem 9935.74 Purchased services 1. High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. $1000 Supplies and materials 2. $1130.26 Must be supplemental. Additional curricula, instructional materials. Must be clearly listed. 3. 4. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 0 0 300 12366 Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. This will allow for 3 teachers, 2 bilingual certified teacher and 1 ENL certified teacher to work with students in three small groups for 3 hours a week for 22 weeks at the per-diem rate of 50.13. Dual Language support materials I Bilingual Dictionaries $40 Art supplies for student projects $140 Books in English and students' L1 for independent reading,read-alouds, and guided reading, books pertaining to students home country and/or culture, books pertaining to student interest, and books related to school day course content $770.26 Math Games - $90 Literacy Games - $90 NA NA Translation for Parent Events NA 2018-19 SCEP-P 63  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 13 School Name The Magnet School for Environmental Scie Borough Brooklyn School Number 054 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Anthony Pirro Coach type here ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Nicole St Clair Teacher/Subject Area Viviana Hay Teacher/Subject Area type here Related-Service Provider Yvonne Cordero Superintendent Assistant Principal Emma St. Romain Coach type here School Counselor Tasheema Norfleet Parent Song Min Kim Parent Coordinator Evangeline Umphery Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 3 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 234 2018-19 SCEP-P 64 Total number of ELLs 33 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 14.10%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 2 3 4 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 1 1 1 1 1 1 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 3 0 0 3 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? P.S. 054 uses the Teachers College Reading and Writing Project TCRWP assessment tool and ECLAS-2 in order to assess the early literacy skills of our ELLs as well as all the other students in our schools. ELL Students are administered running records, letter/ sound ID, word lists A-H, and spelling inventories. The TCRWP assessments assess both the comprehension skills and the fluency of the students. The Spanish literacy skills of the ELLs and the non-ELLs in the Dual Language program are assessed by EL-SOL and ESTRELLITA. Spanish language proficiency of Incoming students who speak Spanish at home is assessed using the Spanish LAB. TCRWP assessment is used several times throughout the school year; however, its first use during the months of September and October is meant to measure the early literacy skills of all our students in general and our ELLs in particular. Teachers administer the TCRWP reading benchmark at least five times a year, in September, November, January, March and June, and input the results into the TCRWP assessment tool. The students' classroom teachers and the ENL teacher administer 2018-19 SCEP-P 65  the MOSL in September and the first three running records, and another teacher in the school administers the MOSL in September. Teachers often administer additional running records in between these benchmarks as well. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Getting this important information form the data will help the school to design literacy instruction programs that meet the individual needs of each student. The first step in implementing a good literacy instruction program is to determine student baseline performance. Students enter the classroom with diverse backgrounds and skills in literacy. Some students may enter the classroom with special needs that require review of basic skills in reading, while other students may have mastered the content a teacher intends to cover. ELLs are among the groups of students that need special attention while carrying out a literacy program. Early diagnosis of their performance, their skills and areas of need, will help the teacher build on student's knowledge to target areas of need so that students can master them and so that the teacher makes sure that the ELLs are not left behind. Teachers use the information from these assessments, to inform student grouping, and to determine the focus of ENL instruction so that students can build on their previous knowledge and strengthen areas of need. In the Dual Language program teachers use assessment data to build on student's strengths and target areas of need in student's home language. This allows students build academic fluency in their home language. Teachers can also use information from home language assessments to understand which home language literacy skills students will be able to transfer to English in order to build their English Language literacy. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? P.S. 054 administers the NYCENET Math and ELA benchmark assessments. These assessments allow teachers to identify the strengths and areas of need that students bring to the table, and to evaluate student progress. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Dual Language teachers use information from benchmark assessments to inform grouping and focus of instruction within the Dual Language classrooms, and to address which supports and modifications English language learners will benefit from in ENL instruction. General education teachers and the ENL teacher collaborate in using information from assessments to inform grouping and focus of instruction for English Language Learners placed in general education classrooms. They also use assessments to inform which supports and modifications English language learners will benefit from. The ENL teacher also uses information from assessments to identify areas of focus for targeted stand alone ENL instruction for small groups of students with entering and emerging level proficiency. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] The teachers in the school use the data they collect from the NYS assessments for previous years, the assessments they do throughout the year and screening assessment they perform early in the school year. This data shows that ELLs at the entering, emerging and transitioning levels of proficiency fall within the groups of students who need to be referred to Tier II of intervention within the RtI framework. All the students in the class get Tier I instruction and the ones who are identified as at risk, work in small group and get Tier II instruction. The progress of the students is monitored throughout the year, and ELLs who show progress move back to Tier I instruction.. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. PS 054 administers the NYSESLAT to all ELL students. Additionally, we administer the ELA and Math New York State Assessments to all ELL students who have been in the country at least a year, along with all non-ELL students. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? 2018-19 SCEP-P 66  We evaluate the success of our ELL program by the results of the NYSESLAT. We take into consideration how many students have tested out of the program as well those who have moved from one level of language proficiency into a higher one. Using AMAO tool helps in identifying ELLs who met AMAO 1 and show progress, and those who did not show progress and stayed at the same level of language proficiency or performed at t lower level than they did the previous year. AMAO 2 identifies the ELLS who score the Commanding Level. We compare the target percentage of AMAOs 1 and 2 with the percentage at our school for these AMAO and decide whether our programs are successful in assisting our ELL to obtain English language proficiency. We also review the detailed school progress report to evaluate the Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) of our ELLs, and determine if they met the AYP as indicated on the progress report. We also look at the progress each of our ELLs is making in class by looking at their ELA/Math portfolios on a monthly basis and take notice of their progress and what skills that still still need to be mastered. At the beginning of the year the ENL teacher will distribute the students' NYSESLAT results to their classroom teachers so that they are aware of their students' results. The NYSESLAT specifically shows which modalities students excel in or struggle with. This informs both ENL scheduling and focus of instruction. It also helps teachers understand how to scaffold instruction. For example, if a student's lowest score is in reading and their highest score is in listening, teachers will give that student targeted instruction in reading in order to strengthen that modality, and scaffold that student's content area instruction with audio texts to access their strength in listening. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Instruction in the Freestanding ENL program is delivered in integrated ENL and content area classes taught by the certified ENL teacher, Nicole St. Clair, and the students' general education teacher. In addition, students at entering and emerging proficiency levels are administered stand-alone instruction in ENL, taught by Ms. St. Clair. ELL students at the entering, emerging, transitioning and expanding levels receive 180 minutes of integrated ENL / content area instruction a week. Commanding level students receive 90 minutes of integrated instruction for two years after passing the NYSITELL. Integrated ENL/ Content area classes are taught within a general education class. Students from one general education class may be pulled to another of the same grade level, in order that all students can receive sufficient integrated ENL instruction. Classes will consist of non-ELLs and ELLs at a varying proficiency levels. Within the class, students may be grouped in heterogeneous or homogeneous groups based on proficiency, depending on the activity. ELL students are sometimes grouped with other ELL students in order to target their particular needs. In other cases ELL students are grouped with non-ELLs either because their needs overlap or in order to scaffold the learning of the ELL students through communication with EP students. ELL students may also have skills or knowledge that Non-ELL students can learn from. In addition, we provide 180 hours a week of stand alone ENL instruction to ELL students at the entering and emerging proficiency levels. Stand-Alone ENL classes consist of small groups, usually consisting of 4 to 6 students. Entering and emerging students are taught together and classes may consist of students at more than one grade level, so that all students can receive sufficient ENL instruction. b. TBE program. If applicable. N.A. c. DL program. If applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 67  c. Instruction for ELLs in the DL program is delivered by bilingual teachers in grades k and 1 and in grade 2 a content area teacher and a bilingual teacher co-teach that class. The students of the same grade in the DL program are grouped as one heterogeneous class. Instruction for all students in the dual language program takes place based on 50/50 English/Spanish in which the first half of the day instruction takes place in English and the second half in Spanish in literacy and other content areas. The whole class travels together as a group, and ELLs and EPs work in heterogeneous groups within the same grade. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? ELLs at each proficiency level receive the mandated number of minutes according the CR Part 154. The ENL teachers, Nicole St. Clair, generates the RLAT report in ATS, which gives the levels of proficiency of each ELL according to their scores in the NYSESLAT they had this spring. In addition, newly registered ELLs’ scores on the NYSITELL, as revealed in the RLAT. Based on the ELLs’ levels of proficiency, a schedule is prepared for each ELL in which the number of mandated minutes of instruction is met. ELLs at the Entering and Emerging levels receive 180 minutes of stand-alone ENL instruction in additon to 180 minutes of integrated instruction, making for a total of 360 minutes of instruction. ELL students at the transitioning and expanding levels receive 180 minutes of integrated ENL / content area instruction. Commanding level ELLs receive 90 minutes of integrated ENL / content area instruction. The RLER report in ATS that lists all the ELLs in the school is also generated, and one column is added in which the levels of the proficiency of the ELLs is converted to the mandated minutes and marked next to the column of home language so that the each ELL receive the mandated minutes in addition to home language support based on proficiency level, home language, and program. All ELLs in the Freestanding ENL program receive stand-alone ENL/ELA instruction and are offered support in the home language. Students in the DL program receive 50% of the instruction in English and 50% in their home language. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. The classroom teacher provides instruction in the content areas using ENL methodologies and native language support in both program models. The teachers scaffold the lessons with modeling, visual and dramatized contextual support, Total Physical Response (TPR) and linguistic structure. In the DL language classroom, instruction is split 50/50, so if English is used in the morning, Spanish is used in the afternoon. This alternates each day in order to ensure that students receive instruction in both languages for each subject area. In the Freestanding ESL program, native language support is provided in the content areas. For literacy skills, the school follows the Teacher College Reading and Writing Project (TCRWP) and the teachers plan literacy units based on training they receive from TCRWP staff. For math the Envision math series for grades K-5 are used with for all grades which come with Spanish version that helps providing Spanish speaking ELLS in both programs with support in their home language. For science and social studies, the school uses materials purchased through the magnet program. In the Freestanding ENL program, sheltered English instruction is used by all homeroom and content area teachers as a way to make content comprehensible for the English language learners. This method is used with ELLs above the entering level in developing grade-level content-area knowledge, academic skills, and increased English proficiency. In sheltered English classes, teachers use clear, direct, simple English and a wide range of scaffolding strategies to communicate meaningful input in the content area to students. Learning activities that connect new content to students' prior knowledge, that require collaboration among students, and that spiral through curriculum material, offer ELLs the grade-level content instruction of their English-speaking peers, while adapting lesson delivery to suit their English proficiency level. For ELLs at the beginner/entering level, direct and explicit ENL instruction is offered by the ENL teacher to help them acquire the basic skills of English they need. •Content area teachers monitor the understanding of linguistically challenging material and use a variety of phrasings and synonyms to clarify meaning. 2018-19 SCEP-P 68  •Math teachers devote extra class time to untangling difficult word problems, and require students to make verbal explanations of the problems they work on. Translations of math content are available for Spanish speakers. •Social Studies teachers scaffold their instruction with visual aids such as maps, atlases, and illustrations to increase comprehension. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Spanish LAB-R is administered to all Spanish speaking students who are identified as ELLs by the NYSITELL within the first several days of their registration. All ELLs have testing accommodations for exams, including translated editions, bilingual word for word glossaries, oral translation for low incidence languages, extended time, and separate location. Translations and glossaries are not permitted for the ELA. Dual Language classroom teachers evaluate all of their students formally and informally in both Spanish and English across all content areas in the classroom. In second grade DL program, the Estrellita program is used along with the formative reading and writing assessment to assess the ELL in their native language formally and informally. For diagnostic assessment, teachers use the Batería III Woodcock-Muñoz which is an assessment of student progress, diagnosis of specific learning disabilities, determination of language proficiency level or language dominance, measurement of general intellectual ability. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. SIFE students are students with interrupted, little or no formal education who are at least 2 academic years behind their age group. We currently have no students who are SIFE. Our plan for future SIFE students is to provide academic intervention services as an extension of the regular school program by using both push in and pull out services. •Making an individualized student needs assessment •Creation of an AIS plan for the student focus on the literacy and math component •Grade appropriate instructional support materials •Differentiation of instruction in all areas •Staff will receive professional development in the ALLA assessment to identify SIFE students; and in strategies that benefit the SIFE within your classroom instruction. •Native Language Literacy instruction provided in the extended day intervention b. When a new student is registered in our school, we provide the following resources to facilitate the transition. •An informal student orientation •Buddy system identifying a similar student in his/her class that will assist during the day •An informal assessment is provided to identify possible Academic Intervention programs. •Home/ school communication. •Native Language Literacy instruction provided in the extended day intervention •Encourage student to participate in after school native language literacy program. •ELA Exempt ELLs take the periodic assessments so that they can become familiar with the format before they take the official assessment for the first time. These students spend time observing their English proficient peers as a scaffold for producing their own work. c. Developing ELLs are targeted with the following interventions: •Small group and differentiated instruction in the classroom. •Extended day instruction tailored to their needs. •Monitoring the progress of students in all content areas to differentiate instruction for literacy needs. •AIS support, in addition to ESL, during the day to enrich their language and academic skills. 2018-19 SCEP-P 69  d. Long terms ELLs are ELLs who have been unable to achieve English proficiency on the NYSESLAT after their 6th year of ELL services. We currently have no Long Term ELLs. Our future action plan for this group involves: •An after school program, targeting reading and writing. •Monitoring the progress of students in all content areas to differentiate instruction for literacy needs. •AIS support, in addition to ESL, during the day to enrich their language and academic skills. e. A 0.5 unit of study per week of integrated ENL in ELA or Content Areas or other approved services will be provicded to former ELLs (Commnading/Proficient level). They will also receive ELL accommodations along with ENL support for 2 years. The support can be in the ELA or any other content area. This will include: •Monitoring the progress of students in all content areas to differentiate instruction for literacy needs. •Use differnet ways of grouping the former ELL, to let him interact, participate and learn with/from other studnets. •Make sure that content is comprehensible. •Use scaffolding to provided secure method of practicing new concepts. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Our policy for ELL-SWD includes: •Small group and differentiated instruction in the classroom. •Ensure that teachers of students with an IEP are familiar with students’ particular needs and all services are provided accordingly to the IEP mandates. •Differentiation of instruction in all areas •Collaboration between the ENL teacher and IEP contact person. •Monitoring newcomer and SIFE student for possible special needs status. •The delivery of AIS services during and after school as needed. •In order to ensure that all students are getting the support they need, the ESL teacher collaborates with the classroom teacher, shares tips and strategies on educating ELLs and provides materials for ELLs, including NYSESLAT prep materials. An array of materials, both print and non-print, on a variety of levels are used. Leveled classroom libraries, genre based libraries, content based libraries (baskets for math, science and social studies), and computer based programs allow for differentiated instruction. Students performing below grade level use Compass Pathways, Light Sale, Reading A-Z, and Reading Rescue. The AWARD computer program is used for ELLs in the entering level in order to aid in their language acquisition and reading skills development. We use Fundations with emergent readers, and Words Their Way for word study. In addition, students have access to such websites as www.starfall.com, www.brainpop.com and www.britishcouncil.org/kids. Materials for Math are Everyday Math Consumables with Spanish language consumables provided for students with Spanish Language literacy and/or whose parents would be enabled to help their child through the use of Spanish materials. Additionally, all students, including ELLs, are required to use Renzulli Learning. ELLs, if literate in their native language, are provided with word-to-word glossaries for use in the content areas. Materials for STEM include Engineering is Elementary, FOSS (grades 3-5) and FOSS (grades K-2) and City Technology. Students are engaged in hands-on scientific exploration in classrooms and with a science cluster teacher. Students also have access to non-fiction science libraries. Engineering is Elementary provides differentiated materials, including versions of materials with text at lower readings levels and more visuals. These versions are provided to ELLs with disabilities. The City Technology curriculum calls for hands-on-learning activities. Students are shown videos through web sites such as Brainpop.com which allow ELLs with disabilities to access the information through visuals and audio. Multiple entry points are provided for the instruction of all scientific concepts. PS 54 uses Passport to Social Studies, the New York City Social Studies Curriculum. Other materials for Social Studies include trade books, primary source documents and word to word glossaries for students literate in their native languages. Students have access to non-fiction texts in their classroom libraries. Students with disabilities are provided with visuals and Social Studies texts at their reading level. The Freestanding ESL program does not use a particular text, using literacy instruction as an element within the framework of the Teachers College Reading and Writing Workshop Model. This includes the use of high interest / low level texts. 2018-19 SCEP-P 70  Technology resources available to ELLs are laptops, desktops and tablets which the ELLs can use to browse the internet as well as to use educational software and applications as instructed by their teachers. All ELLs as well as other students can use the projectors, smartboard and document cameras in presenting their projects. The school's ENL instructor creates content specific graphic organizers with student's strengths and needs (including disabilities) in mind. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? The ENL teacher, Nicole St. Clair, and the SETS teacher, Ms. Cordero, push into the classrooms to serve the needs and mandated services of ELL-SWDs, so that students do not miss out on content area instruction. The teachers modify the curriculum according to each student's Individualized Education Plan (IEP). Based on on-going assessments throughout the year, students are evaluated to determine next steps of IEP goals. Our school has a policy of trying the least restrictive setting for each student first, only switching to more restrictive if necessary, sometimes only for certain content area instruction, instead of the entire day. We also look for students with IEPs that can moved to less restrictive settings. Our school is a small one, and we have 2 classes in each grade, one a general education program and the other is ICT class. In the lower grades K, 1 and 2, the ELL-SWDs are placed in the monolingual ICT based on their IEPs. The DL class in these grades is not an ICT; if parents of an ELL with disability want to place their children in the DL program, mandated services are offered to the ELL in that program. In grades 3, 4 and 5, there are 2 classes in each grade, one of them is an ICT, and if the ELL has an IEP that mandates being placed in an ICT class, he is placed in that class, and if it is not mandated that the ELL-SWD is serviced in an ICT class, based on the ELL records, the school plans with the parents if they believe that the student will be benefited from bieng in that ICT class where 2 teachers are working with the students. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. For ELLs with limited Spanish literacy, several opportunities are available for Native Language instruction. ELLs who enter our school in kindergarten or above without emergent literacy skills in their native language receive HLA during extended day intervention services with a bilingual pedagogue. All Spanish speaking ELLs, especially those who have never attended a Spanish speaking school, are encouraged to attend an after school HLA program. Additionally, ELLs in grades 3-5 are encouraged to participate in after school programs geared to grade appropriate curriculum and standardized exams. ELLs not achieving the benchmarks in ELA or Math receive AIS during the school day as well as additional support during extended day sessions and in the before school and after-school tutorial. AIS includes access to differentiated texts through Compass Pathways and Light Sale. ELLs that are not reading at grade level take part in the Reading Rescue Program. They also receive additional word study work with Words Their Way, and emergent readers are instructed using Fundations. During the after-school tutorial which begins in November and ends by the of June, ELLs receive instruction in math 1 hour a week and ELA 1 hours a week. Internet is used for providing the supportive materials such as the Ten Marks website that offers remedial instruction and practice for ELLs with the support from a teacher. The students also use the Envision software that comes in English and Spanish and that allows students to have the textbook as well as the practice problems in both languages. For ELA, students use reading and writing software “The English Discoveries” that offers practice in the four language skills. “Brain Pop” is a internet website that is used to offer intervention in Math and ELA, as well as science and social studies. Intervention in science and social studies is offered during the school day in the home language (Spanish) by Ms. Cordero, the bilingual Sp Ed teacher. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We have started a variety of programs in the last two years. Our plan is to continue to develop our existing programs in the upcoming years since many of them are still new. Recent programs that we will continue to develop include Chess in Schools, Karate, Move to Improve/Basketball, TLP TOlerance Through the Arts (Theater and Visual), CASA Arts (Garage Band, Circus Arts, Dance on Broadway and Puppetry), 500 years of Expression and Growth, Uban Dove, Girls on the Run, ENL After School Enrichment, Green Generations, Playworks, Liberty Science Center, Teaching Turtle, Studio in a School, Materials for the Arts, and the Child Mind Institute. These programs provide ELL and non-ELL additional access to content, multiple modes of expression, and socio-emotional support. It is possible that additional programs may be added. 2018-19 SCEP-P 71  10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? We will not discontinue any programs or services. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All programs available to monolingual students in the school are also available to ELLs. All students take part in enrichment clusters of their choice. Enrichment clusters taken by ELLs include Sports Around the World, Drama, Latin Dance, Writer's Café and Poetry. ELLs are encouraged to participate in extracurricular activities. These include the YMCA, which is popular in the school, and which ELLs attend as well as after-school test prep for math, science and ELA. In order to support learning and foster community involvement, we use a portion of our funding to create supplementary programs for ELLs and their families. These include: •After School: Our After School program offers Chess in Schools, Karate, Move to Improve/Basketball, TLP TOlerance Through the Theater Arts, CASA Arts (Garage Band, Circus Arts, Dance on Broadway and Puppetry), 500 years of Expression and Growth, Uban Dove, and Girls on the Run. Invitations to and information for all school programs are translated into Spanish. In addition we have an after school program that provides extra help in math and literacy to the ELL students most in need of support in small groups. School Day Programs: Chess in Schools, TLP- Tolerance Thru Visual Arts, Green Generations, Materials for the Arts, Playworks, Liberty Science Center, Teaching Turtle, Studio in a School, Child Mind Institute. Spanish-speaking pedagogues call the parents of ELLs to encourage ELL participation in after school programs. •Parent Classes: Parent classes are offered throughout the year. The program for parents classes for 2017/2018 has not yet been finalized but will definitely include parenting classes among other subjects. Before School: Soccer. •Family Celebrations: Throughout the year, parents come to the school to take part in community celebrations, including The School Kickoff Fair, Publishing Parties, Parents as Reading Partners, Math Games Night, Career Day, STEM fair, the Basketball tournament, various student performances, such as Hispanic Heritage, Winter Holiday, Black History, and Chinese New Year, and the school Carnival. At these events, the school and community can come together to recognize student achievements in arts and academics. At school meetings and assemblies, Spanish translation is provided by a Spanish-speaking pedagogue. •Translation and Interpretation Services: These services are offered to increase the involvement of limited English proficiency parents. Additional funding is available to translate important policy documents, mainly in Spanish. At all meetings for parents, we have translators. All letters sent home are sent in both English and Spanish. Among the documents we have made available is the school’s Comprehensive Education Plan. Additionally, interpretation services are a daily help in communication between school staff and parents. All teachers have received directions in how to use the language line. • The Enrichment Program is a 1.5 hour weekly program that the school runs every Friday from 1:15 to 2:15, where all students including ELLs participate in different activities offered by the teachers to give the students the chance to practice and learn a skill that the students is interested in. Enrichment icnludes such activities as: needlepoint, jigsaw puzzles, world cultures, student counsel, art, dance, carton to garden, blogging, girls group, theater, STEM, and tech. The school makes sure that ELLs fully share and participate in all these activities as assistant principal, Ms. St. Romain, supervises these activities and makes sure all students including ELLs have full access to all the supplemental services offered in the building. To ensure the full participation of ELLs letters are sent home in English and the parents preferred languages informing them about any activity or trip offered in the school and require permission for participation in the activities 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. In order to ensure that all ELLs are held to the same high expectations established in the Common Core Standards, ELLs are given the same learning opportunities and the same quality instructional materials the mainstream students use. The instructional materials that are used are appropriate for teaching ENL and are sensitive to the language and culture of the students. Along with using the "Common Core ELA Standards" and "The Teaching of Language Arts to Limited English Proficient/English Language Learners: Learning Standards for ESL", the ENL teacher integrates and scaffolds skills and strategies in the Reading and Writing Workshops. An array of materials, both print and non-print, on a variety of levels are used. Leveled classroom libraries, genre based libraries, content based libraries (baskets for math, science and social studies), and computer 2018-19 SCEP-P 72  based programs such as Compass Learning and Light Sale allow for differentiated instruction. The ENL teacher maintains a levelled library at levels A through L for ELL students who read below the level provided in their classroom library. In addition, we ensure that ELL students have access to reading material in their home language, so that they can access content in their home language, and so that they can maintain their home language literacy. The school owns an extensive library of Spanish language books and we take trips to the Public Library so that ELL students can find additional books in their home language. ELL students in the upper grades learn how to search for and reserve books using the Public Library's online card catalogue so that they can find books in their home language that relate to their interests, and areas of study. The AWARD computer program is used for entering level students in order to aid in their language acquisition and reading skills development. We also use Wilson's Fundations with emergent readers. ELL students improve their spelling and reading on the word level with Words Their Way. All students are provided with an assortment of texts at their level in English, so they can choose the books that interest them. Students have access to such websites as www.starfall.com, www.brainpop.com and www.britishcouncil.org/kids. Materials for Math are Envision with Spanish language consumables provided for students with Spanish language literacy and/or whose parents would be enabled to help their child through the use of Spanish materials. Envision also provides visuals, and videos to scaffold ELL student's learning. ELLs are provided with manipulations and visuals to enhance their understanding of mathematical concepts. ELLs, if literate in their native language, are provided with word-to-word glossaries, and picture dictionaries for use in the content areas. They also use on-line translation such as Google translate. Students are engaged in hands-on scientific exploration in classrooms and with a STEM cluster teacher. Students also have access to non-fiction STEM libraries which provide books at various reading levels. All students, including ELLS use the FOSS curriculum, the City Technology curriculum and Engineering is Elementary. Engineering is Elementary provides differentiated texts, including texts at lower reading levels that use more visuals, which provide ELL students access to all STEM concepts. The City Technology curriculum teaches through hands-on activities, which helps make STEM concepts accessible to ELLs Students us the New York City Passport to Social Studies Curriculum which makes extensive use of visuals. Additional materials for Social Studies include trade books, primary source documents and word to word glossaries for students literate in their native languages. Students have access to non-fiction texts in their classroom. The Freestanding ENL program does not use a particular text, using literacy instruction as an element within the framework of the Teachers College Reading and Writing Workshop Model. This includes the use of high interest/low level texts. . The exception to this pattern is where materials are used to familiarize students with the state assessments, including: •Finish Line for New York ELLs BIlingual Common Core •New York State I-Ready both ELA and Mathematics 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? In the Freestanding ENL program, the students are provided native language support when the goal of the instruction is for the student to understand a concept or strategy. The ENL teacher can communicate proficiently Spanish and uses Spanish to support Spanish speaking students. Classroom teachers who speak the dtudents' home language are encouraged to provide home language support to their ELL students whenever appropriate and possible. In addition, home language support is provided through home language texts. Bilingual dictionaries, and bilingual picture dictionaries are provided. Technology such as Google translate, although imperfect, can be useful for translating words or phrases. As mandated in amended CR Part 154, 25% of instruction in the home language will be delivered to ELLs. For example, when it is important that the student understands the literacy skill to pay attention to how the character feels, the student is provided with a translation. However, when the goal is for the student to acquire the vocabulary of character feelings, instruction is provided in English and support with visual diagrams or dramatic contextualization. Additionally, the students will express themselves in the language that would best support the lesson goal. For example, when the target is reading or writing stamina, the student will read or write in the language in which they can be most independent. However, when the task is to talk about their favorite part of a read aloud, they will listen to their English proficient partners modeling dialogue and reuse 2018-19 SCEP-P 73  the language structures to express themselves in English, or may have accountable talk with a Spanish-speaking classmate. In the DL program, instruction is delivered in both English and Spanish (50% - 50%) by the bilingual teachers. Currently we do do not have a TBE program in P.S. 54. As discussed above. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Since integrated ENL / content area instruction take place in the ELLs’ classrooms, both support and resources correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. When ELLs are serviced in the ENL classroom, the teacher abides by the ELA Common Core Standards and refers to the New York State New Language Arts Progressions for the appropriate grade and proficiency level. The ENL teacher collaborates with the classroom teachers in order to support the students in their areas of highest need. We recognize that it is very appropriate to have grade appropriate content for any level reader of every age. We have High-Interest Low-Level libraries in every classroom. When planning for an activity, purchasing new resources, and offering a service, teachers review the IEP plans to make sure that each of these item correspond to the ELL’s ages and grade levels in general and ELL-SWD in particular. When ELL students read below the grade level of their class, they can access high interest / low level books of their choice at their level in the ENL teacher's classroom library. PS 54 has a relatively small percentage of English Language Learners spread over all grades. This means that in order to provide sufficient services to entering and emerging ENL students, each stand-alone ENL class must serve students from more than one grade. That being said, students are grouped with other students in the closest grades to theirs. The ENL teacher looks for overlap in the curriculum of the grades served with a single group when choosing content for the stand-alone classes, and differentiates stand-alone lessons for students of different grades. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Our school is collocated with P.S. K231 in district 75. The school building at 195 Sanford St. is large enough to provide ample space for both small schools. The two schools generally don't share staff or materials, since both have sufficient staff and materials to serve their own student bodies, which have very different needs. Our security officer, Ms. Parris and the personal employed by our food service company serve both schools. Each school has it's own ENL teacher and ELL resources. That being said the two ENL teachers are in contact and have a good relationship, so if one is in need of a specific resource they do not have, they can reach out to the other. In terms of physical space, the two schools occupy different floors, and use different stairwells. We share the cafeteria, outdoor space, gyms and a dance studio. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). When students are registered over the summer, a staff member takes the family on a tour of the building and has an informal orientation touching on topics such as school policies, school uniform and necessary supplies. The parent and student have the opportunity to ask questions and meet the teacher if he or she is present. For ELLs who enroll throughout the school year, the ENL teacher and the bilingual SETS give orientations to the parents of the ELLs and encourage them to attend the first day or at least a couple of periods with the student in the class. During the orientation they are made aware of the programs offered in the school, the after school activities, the extracurricular activities and other services the school provides to the students and their families. The parent coordinator provides the parents with all available brochures or handouts that inform the parents about the school life as well as any of the DOE available rules and regulations. In addition, if the student is new to New York State, upon entry a teacher will administer a home language interview. If the student is identified as an ELL, within the first 10 days of enrollment, the ENL teacher provides a parent orientation that specifically addresses the three main programs for ENL instruction offered in New York City and allows the parent an opportunity to choose which ENL program they prefer. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? We do not offer language electives. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. 2018-19 SCEP-P 74  In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? a. The Dual Language program follows a 50%/50% model. Spanish and English are used equally for instructional time. b. The Dual Language Kindergarten, First-Grade and Second-Grade are self-contained; therefore, the ELLs and non-ELLS are together for 100% of the instructional day, including all content areas. c. Language is separated for instruction by time, with one language being used in the morning and the other in the afternoon. This schedule alternates daily. d. Emergent literacy is taught in both the child’s home language and English at the same time. The majority in of the students in DL program are native speakers of English, so the teachers begins with English while supporting the Spanish speakers with Spanish so that all students ELLs and non-ELLs can benefit at the same time. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Teachers in P.S. 54 will attend workshops offered every Monday for 1hour 20 minutes which will run in 3 different cycles. The calendar for Monday PDs is still in progress at the time of writing. Teachers also participate in grade team professional development workshops on Fridays. These workshops are usually focused around TCRWP, Algebra for All, or Problem Based Learning, a focus of our magnet school. Finally, teachers enroll professional development opportunities of their choice through the Brooklyn North Field Support Center, TCRWP, Algebra for All, and Apple among others. The ENL teacher, Nicole St. Clair participates in the ENL Sole Provider Study Group, and the ELL Compliance Cooordinator Working Group, both run out of the Brooklyn North Field Support Center. These PDs support teachers in delivering common core aligned instruction by providing them with vocabulary and context strategies, assessment strategies, accessibility strategies and data analysis. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Teachers meet the CR Part 154.2 requirements for ELL-specific professional development by attending ELL-specific professional development workshops at the Brooklyn North Field Support Center and through TCRWP. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? During the first week of October, the school will prepare a schedule for meeting ELL parents individually in order to discuss the goals of the program the child is in, their child’s language development progress, their child’s English language proficiency 2018-19 SCEP-P 75  assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas. The meeting will include school staff necessary to sufficiently inform the parents or guardians about the child’s language development in all content areas in English and in the child’s home language in the case of students enrolled in a bilingual education program. Interpretation/Translation will be provided either in the language or mode of communication the parent or guardian best understands. The school has teaching staff who speak Spanish, Haitian Creole, and Arabic. These are the main languages of parents who speak languages other than English. In cases where a teacher who speaks the parents' language is not available, we will contact the DOE language line which offers interpretation in over 200 languages. The ENL teacher will keep records of the annual school meetings with ELL parents. The record will include information such as meeting date, time, parent’s name, names of teachers attending the meeting, topic discussed, method of interpretation, and list of materials provided to the parent. Any further phone calls with the parents will be documented in a timely manner, with date, time, teacher making the call, and topics discussed. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. The involvement of the parents and the family in the study and school activities of their children is very important for many reasons. Research has shown that family participation in education was twice as predictive of students’ academic success as family socioeconomic status. It has also shown that the more intensely parents are involved, the more beneficial the achievement effects and the higher grades, test scores, and graduation rates the students achieve. Moreover, this results in better school attendance, increased motivation, better self-esteem, lower rates of suspension and fewer instances of violent behavior. Parent Orientation Workshops are offered to all parents in September, and ELL parents' orientation sessions are held the second week of September and throughout the school year to the parents of newly admitted ELLs. At these workshops and orientation sessions the school uniform policy, monthly calendars and all activities are explained to the parents. There is a questions and answers period available after the workshops. Translation is always available for parents in commonly spoken languages among the parents of our ELLs. Parent Engagement: > Parents as Reading Partners > Parents as Math Partners > Parent Literacy library access in English and Spanish > Cultural events to engage parents such as the Hispanic Heritage celebration and the African American History month celebration > Other celebrations, such as the School Kick off Fair and the School Carnival > The STEM fair > The school soccer tournament > Participation on trips to museums and other field trips These sessions are offered by the school staff and/or by professionals appointed by the school for sessions the school does not have the qualified staff to offer. The parent coordinator is in charge of the planning, sending invitations, and making phone calls with the parents. The parents are notified by mail, flyrs, brochures, and phone calls, and the parent coordinator arranges translation for the events for the parents as he uses the ATS report Adult Preferred Language Report (RAPL) to decided the translation service required and the language in which the school does not an in house teacher to take care of. She makes sure that translation of the written and spoken communications with parents will be available in all the language spoken in our school i.e. English, Spanish, Bengali, Arabic, and Chinese. PS054 offers classes for parents throughout the school year. The schedule for the 2017/18 and 2018/19 academic years is not yet available although we do know it will include parenting workshops. During classes for parents interpretation is provided, usually by a bilingual parent or teacher. 2018-19 SCEP-P 76  Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 SCEP-P 77 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Anthony Pirro, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 SCEP-P 78  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: P.S. 54 The Magnet School for School DBN: 13K054 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Anthony Pirro Title Principal Emma St. Romain Assistant Principal Evangeline Umphery Parent Coordinator Nicole St. Clair ENL/Bilingual Teacher Song Min Kim Parent Viviana Hay Teacher/Subject Area N/A N/A N/A Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Tasheema Norfleet School Counselor Barbara Freeman Camilla Holmes Yvonne Cordero N/A N/A Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member ELL Svcs Administrator Other Related-Service Prov Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 6/30/17 6/30/17 6/30/17 6/30/17 6/30/17 6/30/17 N/A N/A N/A 6/30/17 6/30/2017 TBD 6/30/2017 N/A N/A 2018-19 SCEP-P 79  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 13K054 School Name: The Magnet School for Environmental Superintendent: Barbara Freeman The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Using biographical data, home language survey responses in Part III regarding parents' prefernece for oral and written school communication, information from applications to P.S. 54, and reviewing of ATS data (RHLA Report), we identified households wherein English may not be the primary spoken language. We also create the ATS Adult Preferred Language Report (RAPL) which lists the preferred languages adults indicate on school forms.This information was confirmed during informal interview with parents and guardians during the process of registration in addition to phone calls to the homes and as also recorded on the Blue Card. This information is updated regularly to include new the languages preferred by the parents of our new students. • The ENL teacher studies the (RHLA) ATS report to determine the languages spoken by the families of our students. 2018-19 SCEP-P 80  • Parent Surveys are given every year. Several questions were specifically addressed to parents concerning how the school communicates with them. • For new admits to the school, a trained pedagogue carries out an informal interview with the parent and student which gives a clear idea about the need of the parent for translation services. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language Preferred languages for oral and written communications are English (167), Spanish (67), Bengali (8), Arabic (2), Haitian Creole (1) and Chinese (1). 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families The list of documents the school distributes to families include: - Beginning of School Year letter to parents/guardians – beginning of school year - Monthly Letter to parents/guardians –beginning of each month - Parent-Teacher Conferneces – November and March 2018-19 SCEP-P 81  - Parents’ night – September and May - Curriculum night - October - Examination Notifications - March - Afterschool Program Notification – Permission slips – November - Trip Notification – Permission Slips – As necessary - Special Occasion Celebrations – As necessary - Letters to parents concering student behavior – As necessary - NYSITELL notifications, NYSITELL Scores for new non-English Speaking new enrolment – September, June and as necessary - ELL Program parent choice – as necessary - Letters of ENL service contiuation, eligibility, program placement, or service discontiuation – as necessary 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Formal face -to-face meetings include: - Parent-techaer conferences - November and March - Parnet Conferences - September and May - Tuesday engagement parent times (every Tuesday between 2:30 - 3:10 based on schedule prepared by each teacher) 2018-19 SCEP-P 82  - ELLs parnet orientation sessions, within the 2 nd week of September, and when a new ELL joins the school - As needed following a phone call from teachers/main office 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Parents whose primary language is a covered language and who require language assistance services will be provided with a copy of the Bill of Parent Rights and Responsibilities which includes their rights regarding translation and interpretation services. A sign in each of the covered languages, or most prominent covered languages, indicating the availability of interpretation services will be posted on the door of the main office. The school’s safety plan will contain procedures for ensuring that parents in need of language access services are not prevented from reaching the school’s administrative offices solely due to language barriers. Since the languages spoken by families of all our non-English speaking students are covered by translations from the TIU, those families will be notified about the availability of translation and interpretation services and how to access such services. All notification documents can be found at the Translation and Interpretation Unit’s intranet site: http://intranet.nycboe.net/SchoolSupport/translation_and_interpretation_unit. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? The school will gather feedback from parents on the quality of the availability of service through the use of parents’ survey which will be designed by the school. The survey will be offered in the languages spoken by the parents of our 2018-19 SCEP-P 83  students. In addition, during parents’ night and other meetings, parents will be encouraged to discuss and express their opinions regarding the quality of the services offered in the school which will be recorded and later discussed with the school staff in addition to the summary of results collected from the survey. The school will also schedule a meeting for a focus group of parents inclusive of all cultures and languages represented in your school to gather feedback and best practices on communicating with families so that the school can better offer the needed translation and interpretation based on parents preferences. 2018-19 SCEP-P 84 
