 19K325 School Name: THE FRESH CREEK SCHOOL Principal: LISA GOODSON 2018-19 SCEP-P 1  School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Section 4: SCEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Section 7: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 8: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 9: Title I Program Information Section 10: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 SCEP-P 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: The Fresh Creek School 331900010325 Pre-Kindergarten through 5th 875 Williams Avenue 718-272-1843 School Number (DBN): 19K325 718-272-2813 Phone Number: Lisa Goodson Fax: Lgoodson@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 19 Superintendent’s Office Address: Email Address: Lisa Goodson, I.A. Jessie Fields SadikiCoppin TBD N/A N/A District Information Dr. Thomas McBryde, Jr. Superintendent: 557 Pennsylvania Avenue TMcbryde@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-240-2741 Phone Number: 718-2402751 Fax: Brooklyn North FSC: Field Support Center (FSC) Executive Director: Bernadette Fitzgerald 2018-19 SCEP-P 3  Executive Director’s Office Address: 131 Livingston Street, Room 501 BFitzge2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: (718) 935-3954 Phone Number: 718 935-2382 Fax: 2018-19 SCEP-P 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the SCEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative Lisa Goodson Jessie Fields SadikiCoppin N/A Position is unfilled; voting will occur in Sept. 2017. N/A N/A N/A RashaadSimpson KeishaDouglas ChristinaDeMartino Teacher Teacher Teacher 2018-19 SCEP-P 5  TristonDaniels Brenda Jones BrigidaJazmin Sheila Moore N/A N/A N/A N/A Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Parent Parent Parent Parent Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 SCEP-P 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) is a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. The process of developing and implementing the SCEP is aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding SCEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and SCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 SCEP-P 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: 2018-19 SCEP-P 8  Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the SCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the SCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for SCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you 2018-19 SCEP-P 9  monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 5: Build consensus around activities, strategies and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 6: Step 6: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 7: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 SCEP-P 10  Section 4: SCEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? The Fresh Creek school community is committed to ensuring that every child in our school community has the opportunity to succeed. We believe that all children can learn. Our students engage in rich, meaningful learning experiences that are tailored to meet their individual and developmental needs. The goal of every member of the FCS family is to build our students’ confidence and help them to reach their potential. Every member of the FCS family works collaboratively to empower our students to become critical thinkers, caring citizens, and life-long learners with limitless possibilities. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. The Fresh Creek School (FCS, P.S. 325K) is a three-story, elementary school that was constructed in 1953. We are located in the East New York section of Brooklyn, NY and currently serve a diverse population of children in grades Pre-K through 5th grade. The Fresh Creek School is a relatively new school that is in the process of enhancing our academic programs to better serve our school community and improve student achievement. We are committed to cultivating innovative, well rounded citizens who are critical thinkers and inquisitive future leaders, who use literacy, technology skills, and the arts to excel in all facets of their life. FCS is comprised of 3% English Language Learners (ELLs), 24% Students with Disabilities (SWDs), 93% Free and Reduced Lunch, 75% African American, 25% Hispanic. We are a diverse staff that works collaboratively to assist all of our students and families. Our instructional focus ensures that all students are held accountable to be active participants in their learning. During the 2018-2019 school year, our instructional focus will continue to be to support students' abilities to read closely and provide evidence to support their ideas in academic discussion, which will transfer into writing across all academic domains. Our faculty is accountable to provide rigorous instruction to our students from multiple entry points, and with strategies to help our students remain engaged and persist in their studies. The FCS faculty uses formative and summative assessment data to inform instruction and monitor student progress. Our focus is on students' learning outcomes and ways in which to help our students consistently improve. Our students' families are critical partners in the education process and success of our students. Parent-Teacher-Student organizations play a vital role in representing key constituents and providing input in important district and school issues. Parents are listened to and consulted with as partners, as we pursue success with our students. Families work together with teachers, staff, and administrators to solve problems and implement strategies to promote progress. Our students' social, moral, and emotional development is as critical as their academic development. Our students are accountable to be good citizens. Physical fitness, social, moral, and emotional wellness are embedded in course curriculum. Character education programs promote self management and facilitate student/school connections. Students actively engage in service learning and community involvement opportunities. We believe in dignity for all students and encourage tolerance and respect for every member of our school community. 2018-19 SCEP-P 11  The Fresh Creek School has also formed relationships with several organizations that support our community's goals of creating well rounded students. City Year, Generation Ready, New York Junior Tennis League After-school, UFT Teacher Center, Generation Ready, Creative Solutions, Brainpop, G& R Inclusive Group, Purelements, Fantastic Tours, The Leadership Program, and Epiphany Blue are several organizations that have worked in collaboration with the administration and staff to the benefit our students. During the 2018-2019 school year, we will continue partner with Scholastic to support comprehensive literacy, to build instructional practices in classrooms, as well as, to strengthen families in supporting their child's literacy skills. FCS will explore opportunities to partner with additional organizations that focus on health, food and nutrition, and STEM programs. FCS strives to enhance our programs, strengthen our instructional staff, improve our teaching and learning outcomes, and introduce new opportunities that will help our scholars become well rounded 21st century ready citizens. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. FCS is comprised of 3% English Language Learners (ELLs), 24% Students with Disabilities (SWDs), 93% Free and Reduced Lunch, 75% African American, 25% Hispanic. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. To improve English language arts (ELA) proficiency during the 2017-2018 school year, FCS collaboratively worked with a reading specialist and a literacy coach to provide professional development (PD) on guided reading, shared reading, and small group instruction for targeted students. While the ELA proficiency rate for all students has consistently increased since the 2014-2015 school year, assessment data shows that the students are still performing well below the city average. During the 2017-2018 school year, FCS recognized the need to facilitate students’ literacy development. They began the process of ensuring that classroom libraries were well provisioned, well organized, and accessible to students. For example, all classroom libraries were equipped with an array of fiction and non-fiction books that are arranged by genre, clearly labeled, and within student reach. During the 2018-2019 SY Fresh Creek School will continue to ensure that FCS scholars have a rich array of literature accessible to them in every classroom. We will make sure that all classrooms are equipped with leveled libraries in both fiction and non fiction, as well as sets of guided reading books that will help support the teachers with the reading component. Along with that, we will implement technology supports through iReady, Brainpop, and MyON in order to promote literacy growth. To meet students’ needs, during the 2016-2017 school year, FCS applied for a Community Schools Grant to provide comprehensive academic and social-emotional developmental health supports for students, students’ family members, and community members. The grant supports the Partnership with Children and the Saturday Academy. 2018-19 SCEP-P 12  FCS is progressing to closing the achievement gap with students. The area in which the school has made the most growth is in the NYS ELA results across grades. According to the NYC Department of Education (NYCDOE) 2015-16 Quality Guide, we had 12% ( 6.5% to 16.8%) gain in English Language Arts (ELA) as compared to the previous school year. FCS scored lower on the NYS Math exam in comparison to ELA. According to the NYCDOE 2015-16 School Quality Guide, we went from 11.7 to 13.4. This represents a 1.7% increase in student progress based on the NYS Math test. A key area of focus for 2017-2018 is to restructure ELA and Math instruction. FCS will prioritize Rigorous instruction and Collaborative teachers to build stronger pedagogical practices in instruction. 2018-19 SCEP-P 13  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 19K325 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 211 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 30 27 12 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 14 11 12 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 94.0% % Attendance Rate 90.5% % Reduced Lunch 3.3% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 1.4% 26.1% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 1.9% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 1.25 0% 21% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 45.2% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 86% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Yes N/A 2 2 89.7% 3.3% 18.5% 69.7% 0.5% 1.9% 2 11% 5.6 42.1% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES N/A N/A N/A YSH YES N/A N/A N/A YSH N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 SCEP-P 14  2018-19 SCEP-P 15  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed X X X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. This school was visited in March 2017 by the State Education Department Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) because of its low performance. According to the feedback provided by the review team, the school’s current systems and practices are generally aligned with Stage Two on the DTSDE Rubric, with most Statements of Practice aligning with Stage Two. Data from the 2015-2016 school year indicated that 13% met State standards on the State math test. This is in comparison to 22% at the district level and 40% at the city level for mathematics. Findings from the 2015-2016 Quality Review indicate school ratings as: 1.1 Curriculum: Findings Proficient 1.2 Pedagogy: Findings Proficient 2018-19 SCEP-P 16  2.2 Assessment: Findings Developing Based on these findings, specific areas of focus for the school are as follows: 1) Collection of school data to evaluate student progress in mathematics learning. 2) Establishing benchmarks to evaluate the quality of curricular choices, teacher team work, teacher practices, and student mastery of standards in order to ensure students meet proficiency levels. 3) Improving pedagogy through implementation of a school-wide focus on consistency of teacher practice in mathematics instruction. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Goal 1- Rigorous Instruction: In alignment with District goals, by June 2019, all classroom teachers will be involved in Mathematical lesson study to infuse effective mathematical practices in instruction to deepen student understanding around mathematical concepts, as evidenced by a 10% increase in students scoring proficiency school wide on the state math exam. 2018-19 SCEP-P 17  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) The P.S. 325K school community recognizes that when planning instruction for mathematics, you must begin with the CCLS and determine what students are expected to understand and learn. Then you must backwards plan to ensure that the resources and learning activities align with the learning outcomes. It is ineffective to design a lesson then “try to match” the lesson to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS.) You must always begin with the standards. Teachers and Paraprofessionals Recurring monthly from Principal, Assistant Principal, Math Coach & Administration Sept. 2018 to June 2019 The P.S. 325K school community is transparent. In other words, information regarding student data is shared with the entire staff. Teachers and data specialists use student data from Go Math! assessments to create charts, graphs and tables that include multiple sources of data. The analysis of student outcomes is shared with the staff and implications for instruction are discussed and/or researched in Teacher Teams. Teachers understand that their effectiveness is measured by their student outcomes. The entire staff understands that the school’s effectiveness is measured by student growth—no matter the student’s entry point, he or she can make improvements if an effective educator provides the student with the necessary support and instruction. Professional Learning opportunities regarding multiple entry points are provided to all teachers. Using the End of Year Go Math! data, teachers analyze their students progress. Teachers then collaboratively review the Go Math! lessons and discuss what multiple entry points could be used to prepare RTI small group instruction. Throughout the year, teachers analyze student assessments, such as beginning, middle and end of year assessments, as well as chapter assessments during professional learning sessions and teacher teams. Teachers use common rubrics and scoring criteria, which has been “normed.” Teachers are then able to develop lesson plans based on the identified 2018-19 SCEP-P 18  needs of students. Staff will participate in cycles of PLC to help support their pedagogy. P.S. 325K has an established protocol when analyzing student work using the NYSED 2 point and 3 point math rubrics. When analyzing the Go Math! BOY, MOY, and EOY assessments, teachers group students using the an analysis of student work. Analysis of learning tasks and teacher questions will be routinely done during lesson study, teacher teams, and collaborative planning sessions. During professional learning opportunities, teachers identify what higher-order thinking “looks like” and “sounds like.” Teachers routinely analyze and rate their tasks and questions using Depth of Knowledge (DOK). Teachers in grades 3-5 use the released questions from the state to use as a model. The Staff Development Team will use CCLS, DOK, Math Progressions, Hess matrix and shifts as tools to promote higher-order thinking skills. Teams of teachers collaboratively create lesson plans that include DOK. Teacher collaboration includes, but is not limited to, teacher teams, inter-visitations, professional learning sessions, demonstration lessons and lesson study. Teachers emphasize that their student conversations are based on evidence from text. Questions that promote higher-order thinking skills are built into each lesson plan. The UFT Teacher Center Field Liason will work in the school with Master/Peer Collaborative and Model Teachers, and School Based site staff to design customized professional development, provide intensive ongoing job-embedded professional development, including one-to-one coaching, in classroom support and coaching, demonstration lessons, co-teaching, classroom learning labs, study groups, and work sessions to impact student achievement. They will also collect, analyze, and interpret data for making instructional decisions. They will use data and facilitate the creation of action plans for data driven professional development, learning laboratories and study groups. They will integrate instructional technology into teaching and and learning. 2018-19 SCEP-P 19  In order to provide AIS support for students during and after school, technology is needed so that every student can access programs. Acer Chromebook computers will help support students throughout the school year. Generation Ready will offer after school improvement services in math that are tiered and focused on developing new professional practices for both leaders and teachers. Generation Ready will provide 1:1, small group and whole group coaching sessions that focus on aligning curriculum to the mathematical practices in a way that meets the needs of all learners. This will help improve pedagogy and make curricular adjustments to support the needs of all learners. G&R Inclusive Group will provide ICT strategies that will help provide student success in the least restrictive environment. Support will be given around the development of rigorous academic tasks that are differentiated for the ICT setting and include training content area teachers not in ICT pairings on how to implement strategies to address the needs of level 1 students and students not meeting the standards. In 2-5 grades, all students will engage in using the S.O.L.V.E. method to solve daily "problem of the day" word problems. Students and classroom teachers will be analyze and discuss the problems and work together to determine the best strategies to solve different types of math problems. All Students S: Solve the problem O: Outline the options L: Limit and apply the solution V: Verify the solution E: Explain the results Principal, Assistant Principal, Classroom teachers, & Parents Biweekly review, occurring from Sept. 2018 to June 2019 Parent Workshop: Training Parents in math and literacy skills and strategies in a series of monthly workshops. Strategies taught to parents will be based on data compiled from performance tasks, state assessments, and local assessments. Parents Reoccurring monthly from Classroom teachers, AIS teachers, Coaches, and Specialists Sept. 2018 to June 2019 2018-19 SCEP-P 20  Centralized, electronic database that is accessible to all staff for the purpose of monitoring students' progress throughout the year. Students, Teachers, Parents and Administrators Updated biweekly, from Administrators and Data Specialist Grade level teacher teams will examine and analyze formative and summative assessment data to develop corrective instruction plans within daily mathematics instruction for all students. Grade level teacher teams 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Sept. 2018 to June 2019 Weekly review, from Sept. 2018 to June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, Lead Teachers How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Math personnel will conduct a series of parent workshops to strengthen parent content knowledge and familiarity with the math curriculum and standards, in addition to providing strategies and ways that parents can help their children at home. Math workshops for parents will be included in the school calendar and occur on a bi-monthly basis: October 2018, December 2018, February 2019, and April 2019. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Title 1 Priority/Focus SWP funds utilized for math incentives program  Tax Levy Fair student funding utilized for after school programming personnel (1 supervisor, 3 days a week; 3 after-school teachers  Title 1 Priority/Focus SWP to staff an F-status teacher in math  SIG Grant monies allocated to staff after school programming personnel (1 supervisor, 3 days a week; 3 after-school teachers (pending funding) Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded X X P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, students will show a 30% increase in the development of math skills in the areas of operations and algebraic thinking, number and operations in base ten, and number and operations in fractions, as measured by data collected from students math notebooks and summative assessment data. 2018-19 SCEP-P 21  As a result of students’ 30% increase in the development of math skills, 5% of students in grades 3-5 will move up one level towards meeting proficiency in State math assessment. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Local measures of assessment include weekly assessment of student math notebooks, progress using S.O.L.V.E. method; summative (unit) assessments, NYSED Holistic math rubric, and beginning, middle, end of year GO MATH benchmark assessments and iReady. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 22  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. x x x SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Based on the CLASS, the Classroom Assessment Scoring System, survey 33% of teachers scored in the medium and low level on four elements of classroom culture: behavior management, productivity, instructional learning format, and student engagement. Our greatest strength in the school has been that several systems are in place that started through PBIS continue to function and promote positive behaviors. This work is ongoing. We continually monitor for improvement to our systems. We will also implement the Mood Meter structure in order to address and help support the social-emotional needs of our students. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools –Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified 2018-19 SCEP-P 23  priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Goal #2: Supportive Environment By June 2019 100% of classroom teachers will implement school wide Positive Behavioral Interventions and Supports (PBIS) in conjunction with the Mood Meter Structure. As a result, quarterly survey data on questions related to “Do you feel supported by your teacher when you are upset?", "Do you feel safe sharing your feelings?" will be increased by 10%. 2018-19 SCEP-P 24  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Team for School Initiative (TSI) subcommittees : Kindness Initiative committee monthly . School community Sept. 2018 to June 2019 Committee Chairperson Purelements, An Evolution in Dance will provide an art in education program. Purelements will provide students with experiences in multiple forms of art to enhance literacy, link the arts with academics, and encourage students to use creative and critical thinking skills in their academic endeavors. They will show students to use the arts as a vehicle to support personal development, exposure to careers in the arts, support aspiring artists with developing and refining their talents, and to educate program participants and audiences on social issues affecting their communities. Fantastic Tours will support our students by providing students and staff with guided preparation for college through experiential learning that immerses them in local college environments as well as tours of local historical sites. They will also provide students with a Broadway event as well as a visit to Washington D.C. in order to explore the Fords Theatre, The Smithsonian Museum, MLK memorial, Arlington Cemetery, and engage in a Washington D.C. tour. They will support and expose students by providing them with the highly valuable cultural experience, build motivation, and promote a positive school culture. The Leadership Program will provide student mentoring, conflict resolution, and support grade 5 students with the transition to middle school through a comprehensive program. The Leadership Program will help increase student attendance, an enhanced academic focus and improved communication skills specific to each student will be sought. 2018-19 SCEP-P 25  Epiphany Blue will provide professional development services in social emotional supports to equip educators with skills, knowledge, and confidence they need to safely and effectively anticipate behavior challenges in the school in order to prevent crisis and help students succeed. They will also support 5th grade students who will be transitioning into middle school. Epiphany Blue will provide tools, resources, skills, and knowledge to teachers and administrators to help improve student social and emotional skills and encourage students to exhibit positive social behaviors. Kindness Initiative activities and calendar to message goals and track progress of the school in implementing culture building Act of Kindness (AoK) systems : ● Log of behaviors / teacher referrals ● Positive behavior incentives (e.g movie day) ● Student of the Month recognition ● Character traits and artifacts ● Community circle ● Book of the Month Scholar Dollar (Used to purchase prizes every Friday)   Town Hall Meetings School Culture members Sept. 2018 to June 2019 Principal and School Culture committee School community Sept. 2018 to June 2019 School Culture committee members Systems Initiative: Lesson plans and PD training to school wide practice and compliance, emotionally responsive speech, de-escalation strategies. Teachers & Parents Sept. 2018 to June 2019 Consultants, Administrators, School Psychologist, Social Worker Classes will create strategies and track certain behaviors in alignment to the mood meter structure. Every classroom will have a designated area where students can track how they are feeling, an area where they can calm down if they feel they need to refocus their energy before the continue their instruction or assignment. These centers will have books, notebooks, and any other materials deemed necessary to help the student with their feelings. Professional Development provided by City Year Social Worker for staff on Restorative Justice, and for Parents on Social/Emotional development of children All staff & families Sept. 2018-June 2019 Director of Partnership with Children, Administration, 2018-19 SCEP-P 26  3b – Parent and Family Engagement Behavior Coordination Team How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Designated personnel (e.g. AP, Dean, Parent Coordinator, Social Worker, School Psychologist) will provide a series of parent workshops, newsletters, and surveys to strengthen the home-school connection and foster a shared vision of expected behaviors in the school community. Staff will develop with parents an established list of acceptable school-wide behavioral norms that will be upheld throughout the school community. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Title 1 SWP funds allocated for positive behavior incentives and school recognition programs  Title 1 Vision for school improvement funds used for per session TSI meetings  Tax levy funds used for staff members on the committee  SIG Grant monies allocated for staff, in conjunction with Partnership for Children, to work with parents and teachers (pending funding) Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded X P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. School culture will improve as evidenced by an increase in number of positive responses from quarterly survey data on questions related to “Do you feel supported by your teacher when you are upset?" "Do you feel safe sharing your feelings?" "Which classmate(s) do you trust when you are feeling upset?" which result in a 5% increase in survey data. IN JANUARY 2019, A STUDENT SURVEY WAS DISTRIBUTED ASKING STUDENTS THE QUESTIONS NAMED ABOVE. ____% OF STUDENTS SAID THAT THEY FEEL SUPPORTED BY THEIR TEACHER WHEN THEY GET UPSET ____% OF STUDENTS SAID THAT THEY FEEL SAFE SHARING THEIR FEELINGS. ____% OF STUDENTS SAID THAT THEY HAVE A CLASSMATE THAT THEY TRUST WHEN THEY GET UPSET STUDENTS HAVE BEEN ENGAGED IN VARIOUS LUNCH CLUBS TO HELP CREATE A POSITIVE SCHOOL CULTURE WHERE THEY CAN SPEAK TO SOMEONE THEY TRUST ABOUT HOW THEY ARE FEELING. SOME OF THE CLUBS THAT STUDENTS 2018-19 SCEP-P 27  PARTICIPATE IN ARE COOKING, YOGA, AND DANCE. PLAY THERAPY ALSO TAKES PLACE DURING THE LUNCH SESSION TO PROMOTE POSITIVE BEHAVIORS AND SOCIAL INTERACTION. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Internal Survey Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 28  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. SOP(s) Addressed x x 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. x 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The primary strength in collaboration of the FCS team is consistency in utilizing planning time, common planning periods, and sharing data during professional development meetings. In order to grow as a collaborative team, deeper analysis of student work and teacher's use of instructional strategies must take place during teacher team meetings. During the 2017-2018 school year, a gap between analyzing student work and its impact on targeted instruction surfaced during formal and informal observations. Based on the recommendation from the May 2017, SED IIT report, the Fresh Creek School was cited as needing to develop an instructional leadership team that meets regularly to address topics of teaching and learning across grades and content areas. Administrators, staff developers, and colleagues will meet regularly to engage in analysis of student and produce actionable feedback to teachers. Therefore, in 2018-2019, teachers will continue collaboration through intervisitations, common planning, and lesson studies. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified 2018-19 SCEP-P 29  priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Goal # 3: Collaborative Teachers By June 2019, 100% of teachers will engage in professional learning communities in which they will research, share, revise, and adapt instructional practices as measured by teachers moving one level on a Domain 3d element. 2018-19 SCEP-P 30  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teacher team meetings: Analysis of student work to guide instruction. Teacher teams will consist of grade bands for horizontal and vertical alignment. PreK/Kindergarten/First, Second/Third, Fourth/Fifth and SPED. School wide templates for action plans, data analysis, agenda/meeting minutes and student work analysis will be utilized during meetings. Teachers will also create a calendar of intervisitation and PD supports. Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Teachers Sept. 2018 to June 2019 Administrators and staff developers Teachers self-assess and reflect upon their professional progress using the Danielson Framework for Teachers. Teachers will routinely reflect on lesson outcomes based on data, such as baseline assessments, exit tickets, word problems, etc.<br> Teachers Principal and Assistant principal will collect data from student notebooks to monitor student progress. Monthly collection, analysis, and review of assessment data for each student will be used to provide additional feedback to teachers and parents. Data is input and monitored by the administration and data specialist.<br> School Instructional Staff Sept. 2018 to June 2019 Administrators, staff developers, and teachers Sept. 2018 to June 2019 Administrators and staff developers Rubicon Atlas was used to create and monitor units in ELA, Math, Science, and Social Studies with close attention to the tasks' assessment used in planning.<br> Creation of an additional prep period each week for teachers and administrators to work collaboratively and engage in Data Driven Instruction conversations. Teachers Sept. 2018 to June 2018 Administrators and staff developers Teachers Sept. 2018 to June 2018 Administrators Parent Involvement/engagement: Teachers will conduct grade level parent learning meetings and Terrific Tuesday that focus on assisting parents in helping their child(ren) in ELA and Math. Parents Sept. 2018 to June 2018 School Community Sept. 2018 to June 2018 BrainPop creates a cross curricular digital content that engages students and supports teachers, from animated movies, creation and reflection tools, learning games, and interactive quizzes to customizable and playful assessments, lesson plans, professional development opportunities, and beyond. The individual accounts allow teachers to assign work, provide feedback, and keep track of learning. Their resources include Brainpop Jr. (K-3) and Brainpop Espanol. They will provide a schoolwide license which will allow access at the school, home, and mobile devices. Their goal is to make learning visible through tools that challenge students to reflect, make connections, and engage in deeper curiosity driven learning. Administrators, staff developers, and teachers Administrators, staff developers, and teachers 2018-19 SCEP-P 31  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. By June 2019, teachers will communicate with parents through various means (e.g. monthly newsletters, Class Dojo, monthly calendars) to update parents of actions in school. Hard copies of the monthly, grade-level newsletters will be distributed by the 2nd school day in each month to all parents. The school website will be updated with monthly newsletters by the last day of the previous month. Communication to parents through Class Dojo will begin in September 2018 and occur throughout the school year, at least once a month, ending in June 2019. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Title 1 and Tax Levy FSF for AIS/STEM staff to provide coverage for weekly data conversation meetings ● Sequester/2010 census title 1 SWP funding utilized for Rubicon Atlas software ● SWP funds will provide funds for supplies needed and text to occupy the work of the teacher teams Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 50% of teachers will engage in professional learning communities to share, revise, and adapt instructional techniques as measured by teachers moving one level on domain 3d. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Danielson Framework For Teaching Rubric, Atlas protocol Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 32  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). x x x SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. To improve English language arts (ELA) proficiency, the school leader hired a reading specialist and a literacy coach to provide professional development in guided reading and small group instruction for targeted students. While the ELA proficiency rate for all students increased from 6% in 2014-15 to 17% in 2015-16, the school is working to build upon this success in the current school year through targeted resources. During the 2016-2017 school year, the school leader recognized the need to facilitate students’ literacy development. They ensured that classroom libraries were well provisioned, well organized, and accessible to students. For example, all classroom libraries were equipped with an array of fiction and non-fiction books that are arranged by genre, clearly labeled, and within student reach. During the 2017-2018 school year, only 30% of students were at a level 3/4 proficiency level in ELA and Math/ In order to support the growth of our students, shared reading and guided reading structures were highlighted in order to expose students to close reading strategies as well as annotation strategies to help students improve in reading comprehension. 2018-19 SCEP-P 33  To expand on this growth, a shared reading component will be added to the comprehensive literacy program. When using shared reading, teachers will:  Use text that is visible and accessible to all students  Do the majority of reading/modeling of text that is at/or above students’ instructional level  Provide opportunities for students to join in on the reading (echo or choral) or reread independently after they have heard it  Provide opportunities to allow students to learn and apply strategies with the text  Use the gradual release of responsibility model Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART– Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Goal # 4: Effective Leadership By June 2019, FCS classroom teachers will engage in a lesson study which focuses on the comprehensive literacy structure (Targeted Guided Reading/Centers) to improve students literacy skills, as measured by a 10% increase in proficiency levels (Level 3 and 4) for all students in grades 3-5 on the State ELA exam. 2018-19 SCEP-P 34  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) For the 2018-19 SY, 19K325 will utilize Fundations for grades K through 2 to address our area of focus, which is to increase the number of students leaving second grade on or approaching grade level in literacy. All students Sept. 2018 through June 2019 Administrators, Staff developers, Data specialists, Grade leaders, AIS teachers All teachers Weekly from Sept. 2018 through June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, Staff Developers, and Teacher Teams Fundations is a systematic, multilevel instruction. This approach to a balanced literacy program is packed with activities to reinforce interactive word-building and pattern-decoding. This month-by-month approach to a balanced literacy program is packed with activities to reinforce interactive word-building and pattern-decoding. Analysis of learning tasks and teacher questions will be routinely done during lesson study, teacher teams and collaborative planning sessions. During professional learning opportunities, teachers identify what higher-order thinking “looks like” and “sounds like.” Teachers routinely analyze and rate their tasks and questions using Depth of Knowledge (DOK). Teachers in grades 3-5 use the released questions from the state to use as a model. The Staff Development Team will use CCLS, DOK, Writing Progressions, Hess matrix and shifts as tools to promote higher-order thinking skills. Teams of teachers collaboratively create lesson plans that include DOK. Teacher collaboration includes, but is not limited to, teacher teams, inter-visitations, professional learning sessions, demonstration lessons and lesson study. Teachers emphasize that their student conversations are based on evidence from text. Questions that promote higher-order thinking skills during shared reading sessions are built into each lesson plan. The UFT Teacher Center Field Liason will work in the school with Master/Peer Collaborative and Model Teachers, and School Based site staff to design customized professional development, provide intensive ongoing job-embedded professional development, 2018-19 SCEP-P 35  including one-to-one coaching, in classroom support and coaching, demonstration lessons, co-teaching, classroom learning labs, study groups, and work sessions to impact student achievement. They will also collect, analyze, and interpret data for making instructional decisions. They will use data and facilitate the creation of action plans for data driven professional development, learning laboratories and study groups. They will integrate instructional technology into teaching and and learning. Create observation tracker on Google Forms to track feedback from supervisors to teachers. Teachers Teacher team meetings on Terrific Tuesdays to support grade level conversations with administrators and coaches with particular attention to sub-groups Teachers Sept. 2018 through June 2019 Sept. 2018 through June 2019 Administrators and Staff Developers Administrators and Staff Developers Class coverage provided to classroom teachers for weekly team conversations with administration. Teachers and educational assistants Sept. 2018 through June 2019 Administrators and Staff Developers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. By June 2019, designated personnel (e.g. parent coordinator, principal, AP) will communicate with parents through various means (e.g. monthly newsletters, monthly calendars, email) to update parents of actions in school and encourage involvement in school activities. Beginning with the launching of the school's new website in September 2017, parents will be able to keep abreast of school activities and events. Parents will also receive paper copies of the monthly, grade-level newsletters and school calendar by the 2nd day of each new month. Paper copies will be "backpacked" beginning September 2018 and conclude in June 2019. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Title 1 SWP funds used for AIS/Science cluster position ● Tax Levy funds for staff cluster position to support inter-visitation and coaching feedback cycles Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring 2018-19 SCEP-P 36  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, 50% of students in grades K-1 will advance a minimum of two reading levels, as measured by the Fountas and Pinnell assessment. By January 2019, 50% of students in grades 2-5 will advance a minimum of one reading level, as measured by the Fountas and Pinnell assessment. It is expected that students' growth in reading levels will result in a 5% increase in student proficiency levels, as measured by students' performance on released items from the State English exam. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Fountas and Pinnell benchmark assessment (Literacy) Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 37  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. x x x x SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our strengths include providing a safe and nurturing environment for students at the Fresh Creek School. All stakeholders agree that this is an area of strength for the school. As well as teachers and administrators having high expectations for our scholars. The work of improving the school and family ties lies in communication and providing more opportunities for parental involvement.  10% of our parents have never volunteered time to support the school  14% of our parents have expressed a desire to improve outreach to parents Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Goal #5: Strong Family Community Ties 2018-19 SCEP-P 38  By June 2019, there will be a 10% increase in end of year survey data regarding parents strongly agreeing that they feel confident in helping their kids at home as a result of partnering in Family Fridays, targeting literacy and math initiatives instituted throughout the year. Progress will be monitored through a beginning, middle, and end of year survey. 2018-19 SCEP-P 39  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Professional development for school connect system provided for administration, teachers and parent coordinator to administer parent school communication app. Enhanced outreach to parents through several media.School MessengerSchool connect app/translation provided for all communications ie teacher letter, notices Color coded backpackingsocial media: School Website and Twitter School Website Class Dojo 2 Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Teachers,Parent coordinators, Administrators and Parents September 2018 -June 2019 Principal, A.P.,Parent Coordinator, PTA, SLT School wide Calendar During SLT meetings revisions to calendar with targeted volunteer opportunities PTA meetings Am/PM/Saturday Parents Sept. 2018- June 2019 Principal, A.P., Parent Coordinator, PTA We will continue to build strong relationships with parents and their children. Parents will have confidence in completing homework assignments with their children because we are committed to provide workshops that align with the unit of topic that are addressed in the classrooms. Parents will have exposure before the unit commences. Staff members will conduct the workshops in order to provide the information and allow for Q&A sessions. Students with special needs and ENLS families outreach through the newly developed parent resource center. Literature provided to support families of subgroup. Monthly workshops for home school connection as well as content specific, ELA,MATH,Science SS Community Circle provides parents and the entire school community with real time data in areas of focus (attendance, behavior, reading logs) Classes are celebrated for reading progress, improved attendance, etc. via hallway bulletin boards that display data charts.Making this a public celebration improves parent attendance and gives them another opportunity to positively participate in the school community.Family Fridays will be scheduled on the last Friday of every month. During Family SPED/ELL Families September 2018-June 2019 Principal, A.P.,Parent Coordinator, PTA, SPED liaison Parents September 2018-June 2019 Parent Coordinator & Administration 2018-19 SCEP-P 40  Fridays parents/ guardians are invited to their children's learning environment to actively participate with their children as they engage in CCLS lessons. Parent Involvement Tuesdays will include monthly workshops in each content area (Math, ELA, Science & Social Studies) Parents 3b – Parent and Family Engagement September 2018-June 2019 Parent Coordinator & Administration If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. The Fresh Creek School has formed relationships with several organizations that support our community's goals of creating well rounded students. Generation Ready, City Year, New York Junior Tennis League After School, Creative Solutions, Purer Elements Solution in Dance, The Leadership Program, and Epiphany Blue (Social-Emotional Support) are several organizations that have worked in collaboration with the administration and staff to the benefit our students. During the 2018-2019 school year, we will explore opportunities to partner with additional organizations that focus on health, food and nutrition, and STEM programs. We will begin to partner with City Year to provide social emotional needs to the students in our school community, as well as provide parent engagement opportunities to families that address the needs of the students and families in our community. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Title 1 SWP funds used for School Messenger  Title 1 Parent Involvement funds for hosting events Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, we expect to see a 6% increase in parent involvement, as measured by sign in sheets and Parent Coordinator logs. Progress will be monitored throughout the year and compared to percent involvement during the previous school year. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Parent Sign In sheets & PC logs 2018-19 SCEP-P 41  Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 42  Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Program Description Directions: Expanded Learning Time activities are directly aligned to the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, Rigorous Instruction, Supportive Environment, and Strong Family and Community Ties. ELT provides enriching educational experiences that happen outside of the traditional school day and blend skill acquisition, relationship-building and fun to foster academic and social-emotional growth. Summer learning, afterschool programming, and extended-day ELT models, when well-implemented, play a critical role in supporting students in all grades and ensuring that they graduate from high school, college and career ready. SED requires that Priority schools offer a minimum of 200 additional student contact hours as Expanded Learning Time in addition to the current mandated length of 900 hours of instruction per year (25 hours per week) in grades K-6 and 990 hours of instruction per year (27.5 hours per week) in grades 7-12. Effective ELT models will blend school staff with community partners, and will provide a balanced curriculum that can include ELA, Math, STEM, arts, physical activity, and leadership development. Complete the sections on this page to demonstrate how the school will meet these requirements. Part 1 – ELT Program Goal(s) Describe the summative goal(s) of the ELT program for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. As of June 2019, our priority students (those scoring at or below Level 2 in ELA or Math) will have a 75% attendance rate during the Expanded learning time program. Part 2 – ELT Program Type Is the ELT program voluntary or compulsory? Voluntary X Compulsory If the ELT program is voluntary, indicate how you will actively encourage the participation of all students, with the goal of serving at least 50% of students. N/A Part 3 – ELT Program Description The ELT program will be offered to all students eligible for Academic Intervention Services (AIS), with the goal of serving a minimum of fifty percent of AIS-eligible students. Describe how the school will meet the following SED requirements for an ELT program in a Priority School:  Integrate academics, enrichment, and skill development through hands-on experiences that make learning relevant and engaging.  Offer a range of activities that capture student interest and strengthen student engagement in learning so as to promote higher attendance, reduce risk for retention or drop out, and increase the likelihood of graduation.  Actively address the unique learning needs and interests of all types of students, especially those who may benefit from approaches and experiences not offered in the traditional classroom setting.  Contain components designed to improve student academic, social, and emotional outcomes, including opportunities for enrichment programs such as in music and art.  Ensure instruction in any core academic subject offered in the program will be delivered under the supervision of a teacher who is NYS certified in that particular content area.  Engage in outreach activities made to families. The school day will increase from 2:40 p.m. to 3:40 p.m. Monday-Thursday for all students 2-5 (mandatory). Students from K-5 will participate in Enrichment Programs that will be serviced by City Year and New York Junior Tennis League After School Programs. Students will meet in small groups focusing on reading and mathematics as with levels determined through assessment results from F&P, MOSL and Interim math assessments Wednesday-Friday. Monday & Tuesday will offer enrichment clubs during the after school segment. A Social Worker from our CBO will also 2018-19 SCEP-P 43  provide social-emotional support during ELT. Core academic instruction will be delivered by teachers who hold appropriate NYS certification. Part 4 – ELT Program Implementation and Oversight Part 4a. Who will implement the ELT program? Who will oversee the program? 1. Indicate the key personnel that will be responsible for implementing and overseeing the ELT program, including school-based staff and any high-quality community partners that will be involved. If applicable, describe the scope of involvement of all community partners and how the joint ELT program is structured. 2. 3. Explain how you will evaluate the program to assess impact on student achievement. The administration of the Fresh Creek School will implement the instructional program for the extended day. Seven teachers from grade 1st through fifth will be utilized as the instructors during the academic program Wednesday through Friday.The school leaders will be responsible for the school wide enrichment program as well. On Monday and Tuesday our various partners will provide a rich cultural program that includes: CBO New York Junior tennis League will provide extracurricular sports activities such as tennis and basketball CBO partner Arts connection will provide Drum, Drama, music instruction Students and parents will receive a beginning of the year, mid-year and end of year survey to evaluate the program components. Student will be assessed using Thinkcerca data for growth in ELA and Math Part 4b. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. Pending funding, the extended school day will occur between September 21, 2018 through May 11, 2019. Part 5 – ELT Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the ELT program. Regularly licensed teachers and school staff. Educational material including Thinkcerca software, MyOn , Mathletics, leveled literacy, and Wilson Fundations resources will be utilized to implement the program. Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support the ELT Program. Note: If the program is funded by 21st Century Community Center Learning Funds, it must be offered in conjunction with a high quality, high capacity community partner. 21st Century Title I 1003(a) X Tax Levy X Title III Title I SWP PTA Funded Title I TA X P/F Set-aside SIG Grant School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 6 – ELT Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 75% of the Priority students identified will be attending the extended time program as monitored by daily attendance sheets. Part 6b. Indicate the instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2018-19 SCEP-P 44  In order to standardize assessment and monitor student progress on the specific standards in which students did not meet proficiency, released items from the State exams will be used to monitor students' progress during ELT throughout the duration of the program. Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 45  Section 7: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Leveled literacy Small group Afterschool Fundations Writing workshop During the school day Small group Afterschool During the school day During the school day During the school day During the school day Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Students were assessed using F & P benchmark, as well as performance task and interim assessment Students assessed using state assessment, interim assessment and math inventory Performance task, Unit tests Unit test Wilson Skills by skills Repeated reading Small group Repeated reading Small group At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Office referral forms Lunch time counseling services provided by Socialworker Small group 2018-19 SCEP-P 46  Section 8: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) There are 19 students identified as student in temporary housing. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Upon becoming aware that a student at P.S. 325K is residing in temporary housing, the Guidance Counselor or Social Worker will reach out to the student and the student's family to provide support and referrals for community services as needed. The Guidance Counselor or Social Worker will meet with the student on an as needed basis to provide the student continued support in school. The Guidance Counselor, social worker, and teachers will create an academic intervention plan if needed. The teacher will closely monitor any academic or emotional changes in student in order to report such changes to the Guidance Counselor or Social Worker. The Guidance Counselor or Social Worker will refer any student in need to a Community Based Organization (CBO) for additional support and/or guidance. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). n/a 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 SCEP-P 47  n/a 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. n/a 2018-19 SCEP-P 48  Section 9: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). All teachers meet in grade level groups at least two times a week with a member of the Professional Learning Team during common prep periods, Monday professional development periods, and Tuesday parent involvement sessions. During these sessions teachers meet to analyze student work, reflect on teaching practices, engage in Lesson Study, collaboratively create curriculum and plan lessons and units of study. Teacher are provided with a series of learning opportunities based on the topics of their choice. We also provide selected teachers with opportunities to attend professional development provided by the New York City Department of Education and Brooklyn North. All of our teachers are provided with common preparation periods. During which, the team engages teachers in professional learning opportunities, including but not limited to collaborative inquiry, lesson study, intra/inter-visitations, demonstration lessons and videotaping of lessons for professional learning purposes. We provide teachers and paraprofessionals with opportunities to select topics for professional learning from a menu of choices which best meet their professional needs. All teachers from grades Pre-K through 5 and specialty teachers are required to engage in lesson study to further their pedagogical skills and student achievement. During lesson study, teachers meet in grade level teams to analyze student and teacher data. With the support of the professional learning team, these teams of teachers research best practices to meet the needs of their students. This gives us the 2018-19 SCEP-P 49  opportunity to meet vertically and horizontally to analyze student work, identify gaps in understanding, determine implications for instruction thus yielding improved student achievement. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). P.S. 325K’s transition plan to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program consists of providing our students and families with a welcoming environment, including them in joint decisions, ensuring they receive ongoing communication during the summer and throughout the year and extending the learning between home and school. This serves to keep our parents informed and creates a learning partnership that will enhance our students learning experience. To further assist our children, we build families’ capacity and develop solid partnerships with them in supporting children’s learning and development. We believe that the earlier in a child's educational process family involvement begins, the more powerful the potential effects on the student’s learning. At P.S. 325K, we align the curriculum to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) by embedding the NYC Units of study into our curriculum. This ensures all students are prepared for the rigorous instruction in kindergarten. Parent workshops are offered in June to allow for a smooth transition into kindergarten. An introduction to kindergarten teachers and a tour of the kindergarten classes is provided to prepare parents and students for a smooth transition. Parent workshops targeting specific topics will be conducted throughout the school year. Pre- Kindergarten teachers prepare students by immersing their students in books and engage in rich discussions regarding kindergarten and what they can expect. The Moving-Up Ceremony provides our students with a sense of accomplishment, readiness, and excitement about their new year in kindergarten. The Social Worker attends professional development sessions related to the importance of transitions into kindergarten and turn keys information to staff developer and pre-k teachers. Pre-K teachers provide informational materials to parents that will engage students in summer activities that promote literacy and math skills for kindergarten. Teachers are required to provide parents and kindergarten teachers with the Work Sampling System Summary Report to show the students developmental progress throughout the year. The social worker has an integral role acting as the liaison between parents and agencies to aid and support parents in obtaining services for children with Individualize Education Plans. 2018-19 SCEP-P 50  This includes supporting families in the referral process and continued services through Committee of Pre-School Special Education (CPSE.) We also assist preschool children to transition to the elementary school program by ensuring the curriculum and collaboration is transparent. Vertical and horizontal staff meetings pertaining to curriculum and instruction will continue. Staff members and parents participate in parent involvement activities and professional development workshops. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. The administration meets with a committee of teachers (MOSL) to discuss assessment options. The school provides professional development regarding how to use results and data to improve instruction. Teachers meet during teacher team meetings to discuss student work, plan for assessment, and use the results to address students’ needs in the classroom. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (SCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) x N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Column B Section Reference(s) 5A-5E N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Title I Part A (Basic) Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal 186,640 0 0 0 0 0 2018-19 SCEP-P 51  Tax Levy (FSF) Local 1,840,502 x 5A- 5D 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/SCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs. 2018-19 SCEP-P 52   Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 SCEP-P 53  Section 10: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. P.S. 325K, The Fresh Creek School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students The Fresh Creek School will support parents and families of Title I students by:  providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology;  providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and  decision making in support of the education of their children; fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress;  providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments;  sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand;  providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community. Parental Involvement and School Quality 2018-19 SCEP-P 54  The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will:  actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact;  engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills;  ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and  strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills;  maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home;   provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report;  host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, and ESSA. schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help.    The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement  holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference;  hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; 2018-19 SCEP-P 55   encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; supporting or hosting Family Day events;   establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents;  encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers;  providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress;  developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress;  providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) P.S. 325K, The Fresh Creek School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards;  using academic learning time efficiently;    offering high quality instruction in all content areas;  providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships     conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education;  providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact;   providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information;  ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year. 2018-19 SCEP-P 56 I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff  Provide parents reasonable access to staff by:  ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents;  notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff  member; arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities;  planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents    creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents;   ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as  described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; Parent/Guardian Responsibilities: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities  monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent;  ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games;     promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits;  encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child;   participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education;  communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested;   become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact;  participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child.   2018-19 SCEP-P 57  Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● set goals for myself in ELA and Math ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 SCEP-P 58  Addendum: Community School Partnerships Directions: The Community School (CS) strategy is directly aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. Community Schools bring schools and community partners together and integrate academics, health, youth development, and family engagement to provide students with the tools and opportunities they need to succeed. The Core Services in Community Schools are Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness. Part 1 – Community School Partnerships Goal(s) How is the CS strategy integrated into academic instruction at your school, and what impact has it had on student academic outcomes? Success Mentoring program pairs students with high risk academic and attendance behaviors with staff (including educators) to support those scholars with their social, emotional and educational needs. This program directly impacts those students ability to, pass classes, and progress academically. It also allows educators to engage students and build relationships outside the regular interactions of the classroom. Indicate the summative goal(s) of the Community School for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. Reach a school wide attendance rate of 95% by June 2019 (86% by February 2018) Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Community School Annual Goal(s): How will achieving your Community School Goal(s)--in Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness--support your academic goals for students? Successful achievement of our goal will bring students of high need into our building and provide staff and educators the opportunity to engage those scholars within the school environment. Without increasing the attendance of our most high risk students, it is more difficult to engage them and help them progress academically and socially. In addition, students who are chronically late or absent often have other obstacles or needs outside of the school environment. By providing a broad and comprehensive plan that includes home visits, phone/email outreach, incentives, and success mentorship we are able to address the social and emotional barriers that often impede academic, social and emotional progress. Part 2 – Community School Partnerships Core Services Action Plan Part 2a. Identify the Community-based Organization (CBO) partnerships that you will develop in ELT, Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness, their target student population(s), and scope of the services provided. As well as supporting schools’ supportive environment and attendance work, CBOs should be helping to support your school’s instructional focus. CBO Partnership Attendance Supports Target Population All students under 85% YTD, or otherwise designated as high risk Scope of Service SY18-19 SMART Goal Home Visits: Attendance rate will be 95% by June 2018 CSD (5 home visits) Outreach Worker (Ms. Harrington- 5 home visits) and Clinical caseload with CSD (2 home visits) Weekly 2018-19 SCEP-P 59  Attendance Supports Attendance Supports Part 3 – Budget and Resource Alignment Chronically absent/late students 20 highest risk students determined by 2017 attendance Monthly mailings/Daily Calls by SWs/PWC Success Mentors to meet weekly with assigned students Attendance rate will be 90% by June 2018 Attendance rate will be 90% by June 2018 Part 3a. Indicate resources your Community Partnership will leverage to achieve your summative SMART goal(s) and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Community-based Organization Budget - SIG Funds Part 3b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) Title I SWP Title III Title I TA P/F Set-aside PTA Funded X SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 3c. Describe how the school will partner with the Lead CBO to do the following: 1. Community Schools are expected to partner with a community-based partner organization (CBO) and together with members of the School Leadership Team, hire a Community School Director. The Director will lead implementation of the asset and needs assessment process, and other critically important coordinating activities. Indicate how you will leverage this aspect of the work. Community Schools are expected to personalize the needs of all students, through strategic programming and services, as determined by the asset and needs assessment, and must also offer Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and mental health programming. In completing this section, ensure that you think about how: (1) the right services are provided to the right students and families at the right time; and (2) how you will seamlessly coordinate services with instructional programming happening throughout and outside of the school day. Indicate how you will implement this work, and describe other programming you anticipate to be in place to strengthen this initiative. Community Schools are expected to emerge as Partnership Schools, which are places where parents and families feel welcome, actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. Monthly meetings and Community School Forums engaging families and community stakeholders will be a critical part of this family engagement strategy. Describe how you will implement this aspect of the work. Community School Principals are expected to meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. Data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter - and training will be available for schools to use. Indicate how you will implement this aspect of the work. 2. 3. 4. 1. Fresh Creek School envisions the community school director (CSD) assisting with coordination of: Expanded Learning Time, Parent/Family collaboration , School Celebration Events, finding resources from the community to assist in supporting our students and families. In addition, Community School Director will 2018-19 SCEP-P 60  establish and maintain attendance interventions and outreach. Attendance work will be informed by staff reports, referrals from weekly attendance team meetings, along with ATS and Data sorter. 2. PwC provides social emotional support, including working with students and families to remove obstacles to school attendance, mental health and academic progress. Students will be identified through referral from staff as well as assessment by PwC. Students will then be placed in the appropriate service which includes; individual, group, case management, supportive, and crisis intervention. These services and outcomes are tracked by PwC using a data system (called Apricot) which allows for effective documentation and analysis of services. ELT is integrated directly into the school day and has become a seamless part of students’ academic curriculum. 3. PwC supports families through workshops and one-on-one meetings. PwC assesses the needs of the families that they serve and provide families with referrals to a variety of agencies outside the school community if necessary. PwC provides workshops for parents on a variety of topics, including how to support students, self care, computer literacy and personal development workshops. PwC social workers also maintain consistent communication with parents of enrolled students and assist with mental health updates, referrals and support. Parents are also encouraged to bring their own skills and expertise to the school community. This includes through participation in SLT, PTA, Community School Team, school events, and workshops. Parents are provided a comfortable and functional space in our parent suite, with access to their own phone and computer. 4. Weekly meetings are held between Principal, AP, key staff and CBOs. These meetings are informed by ATS, Data Sorter, Apricot (mental health services through PwC), and other forms of information/data. The meetings include weekly meetings for the attendance team, PPT, and building council team. In addition, Principal keeps an open door policy and provides impromptu meetings whenever needed/possible. Part 4 – Community School Partnerships Oversight Part 4a. Key Staff and Partners 1. Name and describe the scope of involvement of all community partners working in the school (include partners supporting ELT, counseling, enrichment, etc.) 2. Name the members of your Community School Team and how meetings will be organized and structured to engage all stakeholders and be focused on results. 3. Explain data strategies including the use of the data sorter, and steps that the school will take to ensure that the appropriate interventions are provided to the right students 1. PwC is the main CBO and provides one full time Social Work Director and Community School Director. PWC provides students with one-on-one counseling, group counseling, serves on the attendance, SLT, PTA, and SEBD Teams. In addition, PwC supports the coordination of services in ELT. The CSD has three main focuses, which are; Attendance, Family and Student Engagement, and Community Coordination/Partnerships. 2. Community school team members include: CSD, Principal/AP, SLT Chair, PTA President, , and parent volunteers. Meetings will take place monthly and will include an agenda that is structured to include introductions/check-ins, review or debrief of previous events/meetings, discussion of new topics/upcoming events, open agenda time and scheduling of the next meeting if not already on the calendar. 3. CSD will utilize ATS and New Visions in order to analyze and assess attendance interventions and strategies. This includes determining home visits, incentives, outreach and referrals. In addition, this information will be shared with the Community School Team and mental health providers in order to inform future events and mental health services. By collaborating with all parties involved students are better paired with the services they need, including one on one counseling, group counseling, case management, supportive counseling, crisis intervention, outside referral, success mentorship, attendance outreach/home visit, and incentives. Part 4b. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the Community School program.  Partnership with Children to support social and emotional health of students and to provide families with needed supports. 2018-19 SCEP-P 61   Social Emotional Behavior Development Team/Attendance Team to provide process to refer, support and monitor students and families in need of social and emotional supports. Family Night  Grade Teams to monitor and implement supports for students to ensure academic success.   Celebration of Learning  Community Forum and other events to engage our students and families. Part 4c. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates.  October 2018 - Surveys completed by students and families regarding services, needs, engagement  opportunities, etc. In addition, establish success mentor program, begin attendance outreach based on previous year data. Sept - Jan - Begin engagement activities including/events, including workshops, attendance interventions/incentives, parent/student events, etc. February 2019 - Attendance improved to target goal  February 2019 – Academic Achievement Awards   March 2019 - Forum initial meeting and planning   June 2019 - Community School Forum June 2019 - Achieve Community school attendance goal and improvement in parent/student engagement Part 4d. Mental Health Work Plan Separate from this S/CEP, schools will complete a Mental Health Work Plan that will become an addendum to this document. 2018-19 SCEP-P 62  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 19 School Name The Fresh Creek School Borough Brooklyn School Number 325 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Lisa Goodson Coach ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Jose Rosa Teacher/Subject Area Jose Rosa/ENL Teacher/Subject Area type here Related-Service Provider type here Superintendent Dr. Thomas McBryde Jr. Assistant Principal douglas Avila Coach type here School Counselor Yolanda Vivas Parent Nicole Harrington Parent Coordinator Ricardo Fortuney Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 211 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Total number of ELLs 0 0 9 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 4.27% 2018-19 SCEP-P 63  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 3 K 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? The school uses The Teachers College Reading and Writing Program (TCRWP) to assess the students literacy skills and monthly writing benchmarks. The data shows that the Entering ELLs have low to no print concept. They are unable to recognize words from word concept lists. This helps drive instruction to focus on letter recognition, letter sound, sight word practice and visual cues for new vocabulary. The ELLs on the other proficiency levels show improvement on their reading and are closing the gap towards reading on grade level. The majority of ELL are in the emerging and transitional levels. Three students are in the entering level. All students will be receiving AIS support during the day and after school. Teacher's will use the data from Fountas and Pinnell, NYSESLAT, ELA and Math scores from the 17-18 school year to guide instructional planning for these students. Students will be grouped based on language proficiency. Teachers will use story cards, non-fiction magazines and other resources available from Ready Gen, Permethean World, weteachnyc.org , Spanish Go Math, English Go Math resources from EngageNY.org. 2018-19 SCEP-P 64  2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? The ENL teacher will support students as per their recommended times on a weekly basis and will work to support students and teachers. The NYSETELL exam will be given to our new arrived ENL students within the first 10 days. Data from Fountas and Pinnell, TCRWP, NYSETELL, NYSESLAT reading, speaking and writing, ELA and Math State scores will be reviewed in early September and shared with all teachers. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The ELL Periodic Assessment, Performance Series, will be used to assess students and to monitor the progress of students during the 2017-2018 school year. These exams will be used as benchmark assessments as well and will be used to monitor progress and areas of need for the ELL students. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? The structures that will be in place during the 2018-2019 school year will be for teachers to gather during weekly professional periods to review all of the data. Data will be reviewed in September and at the end of every benchmark to address interventions once the data has been gathered. Assistant Principals will monitor and support teachers during the weekly professional learning meetings. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Teachers and the school leadership analyze the results of the ELL Periodic Assessment to drive their planning and instruction for ELL, ensuring that all ELL students are actively engaged and guide instruction within the Response to intervention (RtI) framework. The school leaders put structures in place for the 2017-2018 school year to guide instruction using the ELL periodic assessment. The ELL periodic assessments are analyzed to identify strengths, next steps and implication for instruction and groups students for RTI. School leaders will also review evidence for each English language learner who scores below specified levels of performance on the annual English language proficiency assessment. Additional support services will be provided to exact student and consider their number of years of instruction in a bilingual program or as a new language program; English and home language literacy; content area and socio-emotional support needs of the student with inconsistent/interrupted formal education(SIFE); English and home language literacy needs of long-term ELLs; Results on the annual English language proficiency assessment exam(NYSESLAT); English as a second language teacher recommendation; Parent or guardian request, review of student work in the home language and in English; Bilingual education evaluation, if the student has or is suspected of having a disability; and content area teacher recommendation. The critical elements of the 3-Tier RTI model will be implemented at the Fresh Creek Public School. Tier I: Core Curriculum and Instruction (Whole class grouping); Tier II: Supplemental Instruction(Small group instruction(3-5 students); Tier 3: Increased levels of supplemental instruction(Individualized or small group instruction ( 1-2 students). 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. School leaders will continue to use various indicators such as results from the NYSELAT, ELA and Math State results, Fountas and Pinnell, MOSL, performance series, ELL, ELA and Math Benchmarks as well as teacher observations to accurately assess students' academic deficiencies. The findings will guide us to provide tailored support for the students' individual needs. Students will receive RTI intensive RTI instruction and their progress will be monitored on an ongoing basis so that instruction can be continually adjusted to meet the needs of each student. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? The ENL teacher will meet with each classroom teacher on a regular basis to provide support to content language teachers and analyze how the ELL student is progressing in reading, speaking and writing. AP Avila will meet with classroom teachers and will review and analyze the data from all ELL data and share the information on a monthly or a needed basis. 2018-19 SCEP-P 65  Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Entering ELLs are given standalone instruction as a homogeneous group. All proficiencies are given integrated instruction. Integrated instruction is given by grade level. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? All ELLs are given instructional time in accordance with the mandated minutes based on their proficiency level. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Students are taught in English with home language support given when necessary and possible. There are lots of visual cues and repeated exposure to content in the integrated areas. Modifications are made to lessons to accommodate the different ELL levels.. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Only one student is strong in all modalities of their home language. Student is given all content state exams in Spanish and English. Student is provided with content glossaries and bilingual dictionary for use in the classroom. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Newcomers are given a lot of letter recognition and sight word support to get them ready to read. Developing ELLs are given modified assignments and verbal directions as they become emergent readers. Long term ELLs are given guided instruction and extra academic support in the after-school programs. Former ELLs are provided with support as needed. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? N/A 2018-19 SCEP-P 66  7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? N/A 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. All instruction is given in English. The ELLs are all invited to participate in the after school and Saturday academy programs for additional support. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Workshops for parents showing how they can work with their child even if it is using their home language. For example, if a parent reads to their child in HL they can ask comprehension and story element questions. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All students are invited to participate in the programs offered. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. All classrooms are equipped with SmartBoards or Promethian Boards. Instruction incorporates both visual and auditory components when possible. The current math program being used has interactive lessons that allow students to gain better perspective on what is being taught. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Home language support is given verbally when appropriate and available. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Administration makes sure the ENL teacher is teaching students according to their level. In addition, the school is working on having home language support library in all classrooms. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? All classrooms are equipped with SmartBoards or Promethian Boards. Instruction incorporates both visual and auditory components when possible. The current math program being used has interactive lessons that allow students to gain better perspective on what is being taught. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). All students are invited to participate in all activities. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? N/A 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. 2018-19 SCEP-P 67  In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? ENL teacher consistently seeks out PD opportunities as they relate to the ELL population. The Information is turn-keyed to all staff (most have ELLs). ENL teacher receives weekly updates from the OELLS. When a PD is offered that applies to the students' needs . The ENL teacher signs up and attends PD. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Our school will provide professional development to all teachers and administrators that specifically addresses the needs of English language learners. A minimum of fifteen percent (15%) of the required professional development hours for all teachers prescribed by CR Part 80 must be dedicated to language acquisition, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English language learners. Professional development for Ms Goodson, and Mr. Avila will be scheduled through opportunities provided through the Brooklyn Borough Support Office as well as other ELL professional development issued by the department of education. An example of partner institutions that provide PD is the Hunter College series offered three times in the year. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? ENL teacher is constant communication with all parents in the program. Student progress for all students is shared during orientation and during the Principal state of the school address. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Overall parent involvement is low. All parents are encouraged to participate in school activities. We are constantly working on ways to improve parent involvement. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 SCEP-P 68  2018-19 SCEP-P 69 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Lisa Goodson, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 SCEP-P 70  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Fresh Creek School DBN: 19K325 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Lisa Goodson Title Principal Douglas Avila Assistant Principal Ricardo Fortuney Parent Coordinator Jose L. Rosa ENL/Bilingual Teacher Nicole Harrington Parent E. Estrella Teacher/Subject Area Dr. Thomas McBride Jr. Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 9/2018 9/2018 9/2018 9/2018 9/2018 9/2018 9/2018 2018-19 SCEP-P 71  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 19k325 School Name: Fresh Creek School Superintendent: Dr. Thomas McBryde Jr. The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this (*Primary) conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. We assess language preference school-wide from information filled out on HLIS and blue cards. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language The parents' preferred languages for both written and oral communication Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral 2018-19 SCEP-P 72  are: English, Spanish, French , and Haitian-Creole. 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency How do you Distributed to Families plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Student and Parent handbook, Parent Resource Handbook, PTA/SLT Calendar, email request form,trip request forms, and invitiations to the afterschool and Saturday programs. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Formal face-to-face meetings with parents throughout the year are: parent-teacher conferences, curriculum night, family night events (i.e. sports night and math night), parent workshops. Other interactions include: calls from nurse, school from attendance teacher to see why a child is absent, calls for incidents occuring in the school, and teacher speaking with parent during Parent Engagement Time. 2018-19 SCEP-P 73  3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) School will post signs in areas where parents can see and send home information as appropriate. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? School will monitor the quality and availability of services from parent survey and informal conversations parents have with the staff they are able to communicate with. 2018-19 SCEP-P 74 
