 32K347 School Name: I.S. 347 SCHOOL OF HUMANITIES Principal: JOHN BARBELLA 2018-19 SCEP-FL 1  School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Section 4: SCEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information I.S. 347 School of Humanities 32K347 333200010347 6-8 School Number (DBN): 35 Starr Street Brooklyn, NY 11221 718-821-4248 718-821-1332 Phone Number: Nancy Rodriguez Fax: Nrodrig23@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Dr. John Barbella Email Address: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: Ms. Tara Francis-Jones Ms. Kathy Rivera Mr. Alejandro Fernandez SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Ms. Raquel Reyes N/A N/A N/A District Information Geographical District: 32 Superintendent’s Office Address: Ms. Sheila Gorski Superintendent: 797 Bushwick Avenue Room 300 Brooklyn, NY 11221 sgorski@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-574-1100 Phone Number: 718-574-1245 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 3  Brooklyn North District 32 FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Bernadette Fitzgerald Executive Director: 131 Livingston Street, Rm. 501 Brooklyn, NY 11201 Bfitzge2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-935-3728 Phone Number: 718-935-3362 Fax: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the SCEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Dr. John Barbella Ms. Tara Francis Ms. Kathy Rivera N/A Ms. Raquel Reyes N/A N/A N/A *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Ms. Maria Andujar Ms. Sonia Irizarry Member/ Parent Member/ Parent 2018-19 SCEP-FL 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Ms. Ana Diaz Ms. Wendy Vera Mr. Robert Aviles Mr. Daniel Reiser Ms. JeannaWilliams Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Para-Professional Mr. Alejandro Fernandez, AP Member/ Chairperson Mr. Henry Baez Observer/Parent Coordinator N/A N/A Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 SCEP-FL 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) is a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. The process of developing and implementing the SCEP is aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding SCEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and SCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 7  In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement 2018-19 SCEP-FL 8  NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the SCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the SCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for SCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 9   Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 5: Build consensus around activities, strategies and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 6: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 7: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 10  Section 4: SCEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Our mission at IS 347 - School of Humanities is for students, teachers, administrators, all staff, parents and the community to work collaboratively in establishing a secure, challenging, teaching-learning environment that effectively empowers our students to achieve their highest potential and narrow the achievement gap. Through best practices, family feedback and teacher-student collaboration, our school is dedicated to fostering their academic, social, emotional and physical growth. In inspiring our students to become lifelong learners and leaders in society, we are committed to engaging them in data driven instruction that's differentiated and strategically planned by professional educators. We strive to promote higher expectations for performance through opportunities to explore and use technology and the arts, in an interdisciplinary setting. We believe that every constituent of our school community is an equal partner, working together to promote trust and coherence through collaboration. By having an appreciation for the cultural diversity in our school, we will bring out the best in every student! 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Our school is located in Bushwick, Brooklyn. We have a vibrant and very active parent involvement. This school year we have decided to focus on increasing our students' reading comprehension during all of our ELA classes as well as concentrate on exposing all of our students to algebraic concepts as a means to prepare them for the Algebra Regents Examination as we continue our work in the "Algebra for All" Initiative. We plan on continuing our partnerships with various outside organizations in the ARTS as we expose our students to all disciplines and career paths. We host over 6 arts exhibitions yearly which are student-led and designed. Our students are offered the opportunity to "major" in either Dance or Visual Arts as well as take classes after-school in drums or brass. Our students are offered the opportunity to participate in the "International Model United Nations" Competition during the school year which entails them studying international relations and foreign policy in an after-school format. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Our building consists of over 75 Special Education students all who have different needs as per their IEPs. Many of our students with IEPs exhibit significant delays in reading comprehension and fluency. For these students in our self-contained and SETSS classes, our school has implemented Mindplay, an individualized computer based program that adjusts to the student’s independent level and assigns activities designed to increase their reading comprehension levels, improve fluency, and to teach phonics skills. Within the content area classrooms, necessary scaffold are provided to students to enable them to achieve grade level standards. Additionally, there are over 75 ELL’s who are all provided with the necessary scaffolds to accommodate their levels according to their state scores on the NYSESLAT and both E.L.A. and Mathematics assessments. We will supplement the classroom skills-development with Achieve 3000 online differentiated reading activities twice a week that automatically adjust to their "just right" lexile levels, providing cognitive challenge that is within their reading level and allows them to grow in reading comprehension and writing, while at the same time supplementing Social Studies and Science content. Once a month, students take formal assessments that allow us to gather data that evidences steady growth in their lexile levels. This year we also implemented Dr. Kate Kinsella's Academic Vocabulary Toolkit Program with our ELL students. The program’s goal is to prepare students to become agile communicators in the Common Core State Standards era, expand understanding of new words with embedded grammar and syntax targets and to teach words in any order for cross curricular needs. We observed a significant growth in academic vocabulary usage both in oral communication and in writing. Also, an after school program (4 days per week) took place from October 2017 to June 2018. We anticipate continuing our After School ELL program. The main focus of the After School program was to meet the specific needs of ELL students. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 11  4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Rigorous Instruction: In our efforts to promote rigorous instruction (a key component of the Framework for Great Schools) we have incorporated specific modifications to all of our curriculums. A portion of our student population also consists of students who are classified as exceeding standards known as our higher achievers. In Mathematics, teachers will create a rigorous curriculum by infusing CCLS standards as well as key algebraic concepts for the upcoming grade level as a means to best prepare them for success on the Algebra Regents Examination. In the academic 2018-2019 academic year, all students who have met criteria will be enrolled to take the Integrated Algebra course and the Algebra Regents Exam. All teachers strive to challenge all students regardless of their classifications by exposing them to Higher Order Thinking problems on a weekly basis. In Social Studies, students participate in self reflections and peer reviews which promotes ownership of their learning. In addition, teachers also conduct critical thinking skills through real life applications tasks such as the analysis of actual court case decisions which results in an increase of student led discussions thus promoting and fulfilling our instructional focus. In ELA, teachers will focus on mastery of academic vocabulary so that all students will show an increase in their scores on measured assessments.achievers. ELA teachers will continue to modify the Expeditionary Learning Curriculum by providing CCLS aligned extensions to lessons for these select students. It is the goal of all ELA teachers to challenge students with rigorous tasks regardless of their classifications by exposing them to Higher Order Thinking questions on a daily basis. In Science, all students who reach or exceed mastery in in any particular science skill or task are provided with an extension activity that teachers have planned for in our lesson plans, despite most students not always being ready for. We prepare to have extension activities always ready in science learning stations, in the event a child or group of children are ready for additional challenges or extensions ahead of other students. In addition, these students are encouraged to independently investigate their interests and turn them into formal exit projects. Every year for the past 12 years, we have students present at the Annual Science EXPO at the American Museum of Natural History, which celebrates months of engaged focus on a real scientific investigation that students design, investigate give each other feedback and reflect on. We plan to re-introduce our students to the Living Environment Regents Exam in the future, therefore we envision redesigning our curriculum this summer with our Science Lead Teacher working on lessons and unit plans as well as providing Professional Development through out the summer and early September 2018. In Special Education, teachers update progress on IEP goals on a quarterly basis. Based on this progress and classroom performance, high achieving students are placed in less restrictive environments, such as an Integrated Co-Teaching setting. For the past 11 years, we have participated in the "International Model United Nations Competition" for middle schools. During this international conference, students debate and experience a taste of diplomatic relations. They utilize exemplary communication skills, applying knowledge learned in their ELA and Social Studies classrooms. Higher Level thinking skills are utilized and student writing is required and supported. Students learn to think “beyond” what is expected of them and understand that how world organizations work. Teachers implement lessons from the our ELA and Math curriculums. Teachers use the Depth of Knowledge (DOK) framework when revising lessons and to develop compelling questions that support authentic student-to-student 2018-19 SCEP-FL 12  discussion. Supervisors, coaches, Borough content specialists and the Borough Talent Coach engage in walkthroughs to reflect on teaching practice and the implementation of the core curriculum in ELA and Math using the HEDI scale and the Danielson Framework. When appropriate, the Borough Content Specialists provides follow-up support as teacher teams develop lesson tasks, scaffolds and extensions. The Principal and assistant principals use the HEDI scale and the Danielson Framework to rate teaching practice and post observation reports in Advance. The Principal and APs meet with teachers to provide actionable feedback and professional development support to improve teaching practice and outcomes for students. Our school is partnering with higher educational college institutions to prepare our students for college and careers. We are currently partnering with the "Bridging the Gap" program for our seventh and eighth grade students on Saturday’s through the New York City College of Technology. Students are taking courses in the fall and spring semesters. Parents have also been invited to workshops covering topics such as college and career readiness, the importance of standardized tests, information on financial aid and scholarships for citizens, residents, and undocumented students, and choosing the right colleges. We are also involved with Brooklyn College. Students in all grades are visiting Brooklyn College for a full day programs introducing them to college experiences and college expectations. This is a partnership that we have through our 21st Century NYS Grant. We are participating in the College Access For All initiative. Our Positive Behavioral Intervention System is crucial to the success of all of our students in our continued effort in raising student achievement. This year at I.S. 347, we have been working on increasing the effectiveness of our PBIS system. Our system is based on the acronym ROCKS, which stands for Respect, On-task, Citizenship, Kindness, and Safety. At the beginning of the year, we hold a kick-off assembly for all three grades, reintroducing them to the aspects of our PBIS system. Each time a teacher sees positive behavior exhibited based on the ROCKS rubric, the student is given a ticket. The students are able to trade these tickets for prizes and tickets to school events in our school store. Our PBIS team meets on a weekly basis to discuss the effectiveness of the program and to look at student data. Student referral forms were created to collect data on students who were continuing to have behavioral difficulties in school. These students were selected to be part of our “check-in and check-out” initiative. These students check in with our social worker when they come into school in the morning, receive a behavior-monitoring sheet, and receive points throughout the day. Each student has a daily goal, which he or she reviews with our social worker at the end of the day, and then has it signed by his or her parents. This year, we have created a calendar of events planned for students who exhibit positive behavior which include student and teacher sporting events, and dances. This year we have also begun to include parents by inviting them to our school events. Supportive Environment: Our building consists of over 75 special education students all who have different needs as per their IEPs. Many of our students with IEPs exhibit significant delays in reading comprehension and fluency. For these students in our self-contained and SETSS classes, our school has implemented Mindplay, an individualized computer based program that adjusts to the student’s independent level and assigns activities designed to increase their reading comprehension levels, improve fluency, and to teach phonics skills. Within the content area classrooms, necessary scaffold are provided to students to enable them to achieve grade level standards. Additionally, there are 75 who are all provided with the necessary scaffolds to accommodate their levels according to their state scores on the NYSESLAT and both E.L.A. and Mathematics assessments. We supplement the classroom skills-development with Achieve 3000 online differentiated reading activities twice a week that automatically adjust 2018-19 SCEP-FL 13  to their "just right" lexile levels, providing cognitive challenge that is within their reading level and allows them to grow in reading comprehension and writing, while at the same time supplementing Social Studies and Science content. Once a month, students take formal assessments that allow us to gather data that evidences steady growth in their lexile levels. In addition to tracking their lexile level gains via Achieve 3000, we will also track their growth on each of the NYSESLAT modalities (listening, speaking, reading, writing) aligning them to the new state categories for language acquisition. This year we also implemented Dr. Kate Kinsella Academic Vocabulary Toolkit Program with our ELL students. The program’s goal is to prepare students to become agile communicators in the Common Core State Standards era, expand understanding of new words with embedded grammar and syntax targets and to teach words in any order for cross curricular needs. We observed a significant growth in academic vocabulary usage both in oral communication and in writing. Also, an after school program took place from October 2017 to June 2018 four times a week. We anticipate continuing this program. The main focus of the After School program was to meet the specific needs of ELL students. Teacher Collaboration: Reflecting upon the work that was completed last year, one of our greatest successes was our work focusing on our teacher teams. Based on the 2017-2018 PPO, it was noted that "our teacher team meet frequently to assess instructional implication and make critical decision about appropriate modifications, and refinements using student work and data to ensure that all students including the school's particular subgroups have access to the curricula and tasks." Teachers' participation on different teams builds their own instructional capacity as well as employs teachers' expertise beyond classroom duties by contributing to school-wide initiatives and projects. Our Teacher Leader team achieved tremendous success in promoting our instructional focus of student to student discussions through modeling, inter-visitations and debriefs conducted by the team, professional development sessions as well as the implementation and revision of the school-wide common core aligned rubric known as the “Accountable Talk Rubric” which was used as a formal way to assess effectiveness quantitatively. This was a “true” teacher led team that took initiative based on the input of their fellow colleagues and wanted to improve their teaching practices to serve their student population. We will continue this work in the school year 2018-2019 as it is our instructional focus. This work truly emphasizes our belief in Collaborative Teachers. All of our teachers had multiple periods in their programs dedicated for common planning. These common planning sessions were either scheduled by grade, by content area or by subgroup need. For example, the teachers of Special Education Science were able to work together to plan lessons and scaffolds tailored to the needs of this population. During common planning periods, modifications are made to lesson plans to augment the units of study with effective scaffolds for struggling students such as ELLs and special needs students (SWDs) and extensions that increase cognitive demand. After every unit, teacher teams review data and student work to evaluate the effectiveness of the lessons/unit to determine if the unit is fully aligned with Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) and make necessary revisions and modifications. When gaps in the curriculum are identified, the Brooklyn Borough Instructional Leaders provide guidance and next steps to supervisors and coaches. Coaches support teacher teams to make further modifications such that desired outcomes for students are achieved. Teacher teams document this process by memorializing changes in a “Monitor and Revise” form that includes strengths, weaknesses and next steps for using lessons learned in future units of study. Adapted lessons are posted on Google Docs. Professional Development will be offered after school in order to further teachers’ knowledge. Time will also be allotted after school for the development of our new Curriculum maps and modifications of our units of study. Our Humanities program integrates Social Studies, Foreign Language, ELA, and Fine Arts. Content specific teachers collaborate in an effort to design and implement a rigorous interdisciplinary curriculum that enables students to interact with subject matter through different lenses. Our Social Studies department collaborates with the art teachers connecting topics in the eighth grade curriculum such as Immigration, the Holocaust, the Progressive Era as well as contemporary units of study including 9/11 and Terrorism. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 14  At quarterly intervals throughout the school year, the instructional leadership team consisting of administrators, coaches and lead teachers monitor and evaluate curriculum implementation for progress, effectiveness, and impact by assessing student data trends, looking at student work and reflecting on feedback and findings provided by teacher teams. Continuous assessment using NYCDOE periodic assessments and school-based common assessments are administered in both subject areas and is used to assess students’ knowledge of subject matter progress towards meeting CCLS. When additional support is required, Brooklyn Borough Instructional Leaders will be contacted to work with teacher teams, school leaders, coaches to provide feedback and next steps on lesson plan development aligned with CCLS. The borough instructional leads support assistant principals in the review of data and monitor the implementation of this action plan. Effective School Leadership: Our instructional focus for the year was student to student discussions. We instituted the concept of "Talking Tuesdays" as a means of promoting true accountable talk in every classroom. Together, the Supervisory cabinet selects three random classes to visit in an effort to gauge the level of accountable talk and to promote this school-wide initiative. The following day during our scheduled meeting time, we calibrate our findings and present the teachers with the next steps and feedback. This initiative proved to be beneficial and promoted a sense of school spirit in that the staff and students looked forward to the visits made by school administration. Together with our "Teacher Leaders", various professional development sessions regarding Questioning and Discussion Techniques were offered throughout the year. P.D. Plan - The school leaders meets periodically with the Professional Development Committee to review surveys administered to teachers to gauge the effectiveness of our PD Plan and make adjustments based on teacher feedback along with administrative input. Strong Family and Community Ties: In an effort to raise the level of parent involvement and strengthen our sense of strong family-community ties, we have created many opportunities for our parents to become welcome members of our school community. We began the school year with an open house opportunity for parents to come in and meet with our teachers. Our school community reviewed expectations in all subject areas and opened the door for ongoing communication with our parents throughout the school year. We have an automated phone communication system called School Messenger, which calls parents daily with ongoing school events and special messages. We offer classes for our parents, in the evening, in the areas of ENL and Computer Literacy Skills. Our Parent Coordinator also offers training for parents searching for careers. Our Parent Coordinator also works closely with our Empire State Grant providing ongoing workshops through the Center for Integrated Teacher Education. Our parents were surveyed in 2017 to address their needs and desires as far as topics to be scheduled throughout the school year. We began our workshops with parent input on the topic of Anti Bullying and Cyber Bullying. We are also offering workshops for our parents in the area arts education through the Empire State grant and our Urban Arts partners. As a school, we are proud to continue our work with the Center for Arts Education (CAE). We value arts education and consistently seek out ways to fund arts programs to enrich our students' overall school learning experiences. The 2018-19 SCEP-FL 15  program incorporated components of theater and visual arts, into our core curriculum. The focus for the program was to allow for the infusion of the arts into the regular core curriculum for all grades and all subject areas. We are also proud of having the Empire State Grant for the second year through the New York State Education Department. Through this grant, we have been able to have the opportunity to provide a rich after school program five days a week for all of our students. Our program consists of academic remediation in ELA, Mathematics, and ENL. Students also have an opportunity to participate in Karate, Dance, Chorus, and Photography and Drum line. The Empire State grant provides Professional Learning opportunities for Teachers and Parents. Professional Learning workshops are provided after school through CITE. Our parents and teachers choose the topics after they are surveyed on their needs. For the past twelve years we have participated in Urban Advantage. This collaboration is a standards-based partnership program designed to improve students' understanding of scientific inquiry through collaborations between urban public school systems and science cultural institutions. Teachers are provided with professional learning opportunities both inside and outside of the school throughout the entire school year. Our teachers receive a stipend to purchase science supplies that are aligned with the common core curriculum and discovery projects. Students and teachers receive vouchers to visit science cultural institutions. Parents are invited to engage in learning experiences with their children. This has strengthened our partnership with our parents in the learning process. We will continue our participation in the citywide initiative, "College Access for All" in which we expose all students to new career paths as well as introduce them to planning for college life. Our college awareness program prepares students for planning their long-term goals and charting a path as to how to achieve them. We offer college planning workshops for students, families and teachers led by current professors from different colleges around the state We will continue our work with CITE as we plan our family trips to colleges and universities such as St. John's University, Adelphi University, Long Island University, Brooklyn College, School for Visual Arts, etc. Our students are enrolled in the NYC CHAMPS program, which addresses their social and emotional well being particularly focused on physical health. Our students are given an opportunity to come in the morning before school for tennis, fitness, and volleyball classes. During the 2018-2019 school year, we plan on building on the successes of the previous year in offering rigorous instruction to our students by targeting reading comprehension all students during their ELA classes, expose all students to algebraic concepts, promote teacher/family/student collaboration through an Arts lens, provide a supportive environment to our students by creating a forum for them to express their opinions, and build upon the level of effective school leadership by working with teachers to improve their teaching techniques in discussion techniques. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 16  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 32K347 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 312 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 33 35 11 6 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 10 4 4 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 95.0% % Attendance Rate 92.0% % Reduced Lunch 17.0% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.3% 92.3% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 1.6% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 13.08 0% 13% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 19.2% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No No Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities N/A NO N/A NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A NO N/A N/A NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 28 28 92.3% 2.2% 24.0% 4.5% 1.3% 0.3% 4 25% 7.6 12.5% 29% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Yes No N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 17  Economically Disadvantaged N/A ALL STUDENTS N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 18  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed X x X X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Part 1b. Needs/Areas for Improvement : ELA Goal 1 STRENGTHS: Based on our end of year reflections for the ELA Department, we have identified the following to be part of our strengths. Teachers work in collaboration to periodically analyze students’ data to make instructional and curricular decisions based on students progress and identified needs. This information is used during common planning to make adjustments for curriculum as well as behavioral interventions and other accommodations.The team looks at students’ performance and makes collaborative instructional decisions on an interdisciplinary basis to improve student achievement. Lastly, technology is implemented in every classroom. Addition, literacy online programs are being implemented to support the development of comprehension and reading skills in ENL which further support the Social Studies content instruction. During our 2017-2018 PPO visit, it was founded that teachers meet frequently to assess instructional implications and make critical decisions about appropriate modifications and refinements using student and data to ensure that all students including the school's subgroups have access to the curricula and tasks. School leaders and staff consistently 2018-19 SCEP-FL 19  communicate with families via surveys, telephone, email and family engagement activities. Consistent communication, clear expectations and detailed feedback help families understand how to support their child's progress and prepares students for their next steps in learning. NEEDS/Area of focus: Data collected in the 2017-2018 school year shows that we have an increasing number of students struggling with reading comprehension therefore a need to dedicate more time during ELA is needed to assist students in increasing their knowledge in this area. A focus on "Read Attack" Strategies as well as written discourse is likely to increase student performance levels in all contents and performance exams. ELA teachers will work in collaboration with other departments to utilize "Read Attack" benchmarks for the 2018-2019 school year. These will be assessed through pre-, mid and post assessments. The data from these assessments will be made available through Datacation/ IO Education and to all content areas and parents for modification of curriculum and academic support. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all ELA class "Read Attack" Assessments will demonstrate an increase in their reading comprehension with a 10% increase as compared to initial pre-assessment data. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 20  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Professional Development on "Read Attack" strategies and implementation will be provided to all ELA teachers working with their respective classes. Teachers will then participate in common planning sessions to design lessons and assessments. ELA schedules will consist of 10 periods in order to adequately provide instructional services to all students in their attempt to achieve academic vocabulary mastery. ELA teachers will continue school-wide "Word of the Week" weekly Initiative which will be a vocabulary term that will be utilized throughout every content area. All ELA teachers 9/2018- 6/2019 Administrators, Department Teachers and Outside Consultants. All students 9/2018- 6/2019 ELA Teachers, and Administrators All teachers and students 9/2018- 6/2019 All teachers and students Families will be informed through on-going communication through PupilPath of their child's progress. Parents will receive the list of the vocabulary at the beginning of the year. Parents will have an understanding of the specific high frequency academic vocabulary words selected as a target. Parents will also receive notification of students’ performance and progress on a quarterly basis. Students, Parents, All teachers and Parent Coordinator 9/2018- 6/2019 Teachers and Parent Coordinator 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Families will be introduced to the "Word of the Week" at the beginning of the school year through an informational letter and a listing of each word for each week via telephone messages, Skedula, SLT Presentation, posted word of the week in the PTA room, school newsletter, etc. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We will reach out to request Professional Development from the NYC DOE Office of English Language Arts; our Instructional Leads as well as the ESL Teacher(s). Datacation will be utilized in the tracking of student progress and parents will be able to access the information via PupilPath. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 21  X X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding X X C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Progress monitoring will take place through the implementation of a pre-, mid and post assessment to measure growth in students’ proficiency in "Read Attack" strategies.. Teachers will also continuously assess reading comprehension in student to student discussions observing the citation of textual language and context clues. The mid-point benchmark will take place in late January, by then, there should be an evident growth of at least 5% proficiency in the use of the targeted words. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Pre, Mid and Post Assessment to measure growth in students' proficiency in reading comprehension utilizing "Read Attack" strategies.. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 22  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. SOP(s) Addressed N/A N/A X N/A Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Strengths: During the 2018 PPO, it was founded that "action plans are designed for each grade and class as needed. The strengths and areas in need of strengthening are shared across the grades for progress monitoring and transparency. The school is supporting and aiming to accelerate student learning via the effective use of the Read Attack Strategies with the support of consultants...these enhancements support college and career readiness for all students including the school's growing subgroups". Need/Area of Focus: An area that we would like to improve upon is that we would like for our students to feel comfortable enough to have a true relationship with at least one staff member based on trust and respect. We want for our students to understand that through collaboration with each other and staff, they will be exposed to proper behaviors and situations which will promote unity and respect. We use a school-wide PBIS program and data is monitored via surveys. If students can 2018-19 SCEP-FL 23  confide or have a mentor in the building, then they will be more inclined to participate in school-wide activities therefore meeting the social and emotional needs of our students. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools –Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, following monthly advisory meetings and various PBIS activities, 80% of students will state that there is at least one adult in the school that they can confide in. This will be measured by an increase from 75% to 80% as reported on triennial surveys conducted throughout the year. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 24  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Monthly Advisory Meetings will be conducted with representatives of each class as well as the School Guidance Team to gain student perspective on issues facing the school community. These findings will then be shared with the School Administration and SLT. All students 9/2018- 6/2019 Quarterly meetings will be conducted where the results from the monthly surveys will be shared, All students 9/2018- 6/2019 Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) -Guidance Counselor, Social Worker, SAPIS Counselor and PBIS Team -Guidance Counselor, Social Worker, SAPIS Counselor and PBIS Team - PBIS Team - Classroom Teachers Lesson Plans will be revised and delivered to all grade levels based on our PBIS Matrix. These lessons will focus on different ways to be respectful, on task, show citizenship, kindness, and be safe throughout the school day. These lessons will also include ways to use these skills outside of the school building, at home and within the community. Lesson plans regarding behavior will be taught on a weekly basis in September and on a monthly basis going forward. Lessons will be taught in all content areas and by all staff. Student and Teacher surveys will be given throughout the school year, and will be analyzed to see if there is a change in school culture. If needed, additional lessons will be created. The school will conduct a PBIS Kick Off assembly for all three grades in September to re-introduce students to our PBIS system. Additional PBIS assemblies will be held throughout the year to further reinforce positive behavior in the school and reward students who exhibit exemplary behavior. Incoming students will participate in the Scholarcentric and Sanford Harmony surveys to assess their social emotional needs. Data from this survey will be analyzed and used to provide extra support to students. Professional development will be provided to all staff on ways to use this data to increase resiliency and improve academic performance in school. Administrators will conduct walkthroughs for evidence of PBIS being utilized by teachers in classrooms and throughout the school. Observations conducted on Advance will include the use of PBIS in Danielson Component 2a, Respect and Rapport. The principal and All students 9/2018- 6/2019 Tier 2 and 3 students 9/2018- 6/2019 PBIS Team and Administrators Classroom Teachers 9/2018-6/2019 Administrators and PBIS team 2018-19 SCEP-FL 25  administrators will discuss progress with the PBIS team. Together they will monitor the implementation of the program and progress towards meeting this goal. The team will make recommendations and revisions to the plan, when necessary. Yearlong referral and suspension data will be monitored, tracked for trends and feedback will be provided to the principal to support the achievement of this goal. Parents will be invited to participate in various PBIS initiatives such as Movie Nights, Dances and Award Ceremonies in honor of student performance and achievement. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Parents and students 9/2018- 6/2019 Administrators and PBIS Team How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will be invited via School Messenger, PupilPath, and School Newsletters to participate in various activities. The Parent Coordinator, SLT and School Administration will host various monthly meetings to inform families on progress monitoring. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Supplies for PBIS activities and personnel to oversee activities including Scholarcentric and Sanford Harmony Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding X C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will be an increase of at least 3% of students that realize that there is indeed at least one adult that they can confide in as measured by monthly surveys and anecdotal data from quarterly meetings. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Student Surveys which will be administered on a quarterly basis. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 26  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by SOP(s) Addressed X X X N/A using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on our 2018 PPO, it was revealed that teacher teams meet weekly and consistently analyze assessment data and student work form their classes and benchmark exams. Inquiry practices have strengthened teacher instructional capacity and promoted the implementation of Power Standards". The impact of this work was that teacher teamwork promotes the achievement of school level goals and is clearly align to Common Core Standards. Teacher on teams collaborate to establish learning goals and plan interventions that enhance teacher capacity and lead to progress for groups of students. NEEDS/AREAS OF FOCUS: We need to effectively prepare our students to be able to complete the Algebra Regents Exam during the 8th grade. As a member of Cohort II - Algebra for All Initiative, we must begin this work during the 6th grade for ALL students. We want to expose all students to a rigorous curriculum encompassing the standards as well as tailored for each individual's needs. In order to successfully achieve this goal, we need to have 10 periods of Math for ALL students. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 27  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all students will be exposed to algebraic thinking to increase students' fluency in solving equations by infusing all mathematical properties. This will be evident by a 10% increase from the initial assessment to the final benchmark. This goal will meet the citywide "Algebra for All" Initiative. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 28  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Algebra specific Professional Development will be selected for Math teachers working with their respective classes. The anticipation is that our students will be exposed and familiarized with algebraic concepts in an effort to prepare them for 2019 Algebra Regents. All Math teachers 9/2018- 6/2019  Math schedules will consist of 10 periods for each class in order to adequately provide instructional services to all students in their attempt to achieve academic vocabulary mastery. All math teachers 9/2018-6/2019 Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Department lead teachers, Generation Ready Coach, administrators and participation in Algebra for All Cohort II Administration  Common planning sessions will be built into the programs for all math teachers so that a robust curriculum incorporating the needs of ELLs and SWDs. All math teachers 9/2018-6/2019 Grade lead math teachers and administration  Families will be informed through on-going communication through PupilPath of their child's progress. Parents will receive the expectations of the "Algebra for All" Initiative at the beginning of the year. Parents will receive notification of students’ performance and progress on a quarterly basis. Math teachers, parents, and students 9/2018-6/2019 Math teachers, parent coordinator and administration 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will receive more information regarding the Algebra for All Initiative at the beginning of the year and will receive on-going updates regarding their child's progress via PupilPath. SLT, School Administration, Algebra Teachers and Parent Coordinator will communicate regularly with students regarding the curriculum and performance. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 29  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We will reach out to request Professional Development from the NYC DOE FSC - Mathematics Department as well as the "Algebra for All" and our Math "Lead Teacher". Datacation will be utilized in the tracking of student progress and parents will be able to access the information via PupilPath. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded X P/F Set-aside SIG Grant X 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, students will have demonstrated a 5% increase in algebraic mastery as measured by the benchmark assessments administered in class. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Benchmark assessments with spiraled questions that will be tracked via Datacation. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 30  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.3 2.4 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). SOP(s) Addressed X N/A X N/A Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on our 2017 Quality Review, this was an area which was well-developed. It was founded that school and teacher leaders support the development of teachers with targeted feedback and next steps and the strategic use of observations and inter-visitation as well as the analysis of student data. Feedback to teachers analyzes student and teacher work to capture teacher strengths, challenges and next steps. The impact was that school leaders and teachers articulate clear expectations for teacher improvement that aligns with individual and school level goals and promotes teacher growth and reflective practices. In our 2018 PPO, it was noted that "teacher team members shared that the administration structures are embedded so that there is effective teacher leadership and shared decision making plays an integral role in all teams." Our school Instructional Focus is based on Danielson Framework 3b therefore we have decided to build upon our successes for 2018-2019 which is the promotion of student-student discussions in an effort to have more teachers utilizing discussion techniques/strategies continuously throughout their units of study. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 31  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART– Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, school leaders will create and implement a professional learning plan consisting of various "lead" teachers from each department in an effort to build teacher capacity to use differentiated questioning and discussion techniques so that 98% of all teachers will incorporate these techniques and student led discussions that will foster a higher level of student engagement across classrooms. This will be evidenced by an increase in each individual teacher's FINAL 2019 Average in Advance of .05% in Component 3b of the Danielson Framework. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 32  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). School leaders will conduct classroom visits on designated building initiative day known as "Talking Tuesdays" visiting random classes to gauge the level of accountable talk. School leaders then calibrate the performance together and share the feedback with teachers. Teacher Incentive Fund (TIF) Teachers will provide Professional Learning Sessions Cycles as needed to support the implementation of the "TIF Accountable Talk” Rubric and Demonstration Teachers will model on an on-going basis. Each teacher will choose a targeted sample set of students (according to data) that represents our school population to monitor student-led discussions in an inquiry-based approach, by utilizing the “TIF Accountable Talk” rubric. To maximize student achievement, as teachers monitor progress, teachers will add to and/or rotate the student inquiry group as children meet or exceed mastery on all components of the “TIF Accountable Talk” Rubric. Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) All teachers 9/2018-6/2019 School administration All teachers 9/2018-6/2019 Department leads and administration Students 9/2018-6/2019 Teachers Students and teachers 9/2018-6/2019 Teachers Provide Targeted, Coherent Professional Learning Experiences that provide continuity and build knowledge in Questioning and Discussion Techniques. Teachers 9/2018-6/2019 Administrators arrange for staff-wide and departmental leads differentiate for smaller groups of teachers More Learning Cycles from the Teacher Incentive Fund Team regarding Questioning & Discussion Techniques Teachers 9/2018-6/2019 TIF Team & Administrators 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Families will be introduced to the Accountable Talk rubric during Learning Walks and SLT meetings. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 2018-19 SCEP-FL 33  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Curriculum Materials and Online Research Materials, Common Planning Sessions and Teacher Development Coach, Access to Teachboost to provide feedback to teachers following Talking Tuesdays Walkthroughs. We also have a teacher leader team comprised of three lead teachers. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant X 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, individual teachers will show an increase in their observations of at least .025% in Component 3b as evidenced in Advance. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Observation reports by School Administration Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 34  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. SOP(s) Addressed X X N/A N/A Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths: During our 2017 Central-Led Quality Review, it was founded that parents shared that school leaders and staff designed monthly parent workshops and created a parent workshop calendar based on their requests. Parents also shared that the school communicates with them frequently and that they can use the online platform known as PupilPath to stay up to date on their child's progress. Needs: We want to build upon the successes in this area therefore we want to focus more on the daily interaction and communication between faculty and parents/guardians. We want to see our parents more active in school and to share the educational experience with their child. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 35  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. School Home Connection is pivotal for the success of all students through building a united partnership with all community stakeholders therefore by June 2019, there will be an increase of 20% in parental participation in various school ARTS exhibitions and showcases in addition to student-led ARTS achievement conferences. Parents will be involved in the planning of various ARTS events in school throughout the 2018-2019 school year. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 36  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Parents will be provided Professional Learning Experiences/ Workshops regarding Parent Learning Walks and DataCation, which will be translated as needed. During these quarterly workshops, parents will receive information and data specific to their own child, where students’ strengths and needs will be identified in order for parents to see how these are used to augment learning in the classroom, and brainstorm ways they can help out at home. Parents of ELLs, SWDs, and subgroups will be invited to participate. Parent Coordinator, PTA President and interested Teachers and Parents will facilitate the monthly School-Day Parent Learning Walks into Teacher Classrooms, and will be trained in a protocol to use during Debriefs to analyze and reflect upon their experience during the Learning Walk, as well as give and receive feedback. Parents will be invited to continue the conversation with their child’s teachers during Parent Engagement time on Tuesdays. In addition to Pupil Path via Datacation, the school will also utilize "School Messenger" as another means of communicating important information to parents through voicemail messages sent to their phones. This will ensure that all parents have access to the school notifications regardless if they have smartphones or not. Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Administrators will arrange the quarterly parent PD’s and Teachers will prepare the student data for the attending parents. Parents 9/2018-6/2019 Parents and teachers 9/2018- 6/2019 Administrators, Parent Coordinator and Teachers Parents 9/2018-6/2019 Administrators and Attendance Office Arts teachers will utilize planning time to strengthen the arts and to collaborate with teachers Teachers Center for Arts Education will provide parent workshops geared towards more exposure and understanding of the arts in their child's curriculum. Parents 9/2018-6/2019 9/2018-6/2019 All teachers and administration CAE Teachers, Parent Coordinator and administration 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Partnership with Center for Arts Education Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 2018-19 SCEP-FL 37  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Arts Matter Funding Partnership with American Ballet Theater Project Plie Program Access to free and reduced cost tickets/admission to select cultural institutions as a Title I school Center for Arts Education Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, parental participation will increase by 10% as evidenced from attendance reports. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Signed Attendance Sheets and Documentation via Portfolio. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 38  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Students that fell below the 1.95 score on the ELA exam Mathematics Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Students that fell below the 1.95 score on the Mathematics test Students who scored Level 1 on their MOSL assessment Students who scored Level I on their MOSL assessment Students that fell below the 1.95 score on either the ELA or Mathematics test Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Achieve3000 Push in Services When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During school and After school program MyOn Mindplay Carnegie Push in Services During school and After school program Achieve3000 Push in Services After school program Small group instruction Push in Service During school Small group instruction During school and After school program Smart Science Achieve3000 Achieve3000 MyOn Mindplay PBIS Check in Check Out System 2018-19 SCEP-FL 39  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) For the 2018-2019 school year, we have 47 Students in Temporary Housing. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. The services which we plan to provide to the STH population include free school uniforms, basic school supplies, classroom library books, bookbags, counseling services as well as opportunities for parental involvement and assistance. We have two social workers on staff to provide counseling as needed and PBIS initiative. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 40  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 41  Section 8: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Prior to hiring a candidate, their credentials are verified by our Borough HR Director to ensure that the candidate holds a valid NYS certification in that license area. The BEDS survey is reviewed by the Principal and the HR director who work with our school to ensure that every teacher’s assignment aligns with their license area so that all teachers are reported as Highly Qualified on the BEDS Survey. Strategies and activities used to attract high-quality highly qualified teachers to our school include: · Frequent communication with our Borough HR Director when vacancies occur. · Central Office of Talent and Recruitment partners with colleges and the Borough HR Director partners with Central for assistance and guidance and for candidate referrals · Participating in Central Hiring Fair events where pre-screened HQT candidates are interviewed and recruited. · Establishing a partnership with a local college to support the grooming of student teachers in our search of HQT candidates. · Interviewing HQT candidates from The Open Market Hiring System and The Absent Teacher Reserve (ATR) Pool · Establishing a rigorous interview protocol that includes intensive criteria for the selection of new staff members including demonstration lessons, interviews, and New York State certification/licensing. · Maintaining a teacher resource center and professional library to promote promising and effective practices. · Teachers will be provided with curriculum maps, instructional resources and professional learning opportunities. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 42  · Individualized PD plans are created for teachers to ensure continued improvement. · In the very rare event, if a teacher’s status was deemed not HQT, the principal would consult with the network Human Resources Director for guidance to ensure that the non-HQT teacher will meet all required documentation and assessment deadlines. This may include some form of counseling including encouraging the teacher to become HQT through the High Objective Uniform State Standard of Evaluation (HOUSSE) system. Describe the strategies and activities that will be used to attract Highly Qualified Teachers, as defined by "ESEA", or to ensure that current staff becomes highly qualified, in order to achieve this goal. In order to achieve the goal we will provide our current staff members with the following: o Professional learning surveys to assess the needs of our staff and satisfaction of the professional learning opportunities offered o Professional development will be offered based on the targeted areas of need o Mentors are assigned to support struggling and un-qualified teachers o Administration provides timely feedback to staff members o Individual Professional Development Plans are completed and updated as needed Once hired, new teachers are paired with a teacher mentor as well as offer professional development provided by our TIF team, TDC coach from Central, CITE consultants in the realm of classroom management,data analysis, and various teaching strategies. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). At IS 347, our school has an instructional team that consists of the Principal, Assistant Principals, a teacher representative from each major subject area and our I.E.P. teacher. Our instructional team meets at least twice a month. The team collaborates on all decisions pertaining to instruction and assessments. In the past the same team would plan all professional learning for the staff. Presently we have a Professional Learning Committee that makes decisions on all professional learning opportunities that are offered in the building and a menu of outside professional learning experiences. The Professional Learning Committee meets at a minimum of once a month. Teaching Matters consultants work with our lead teachers to identify target standards and create assessments tailored to the needs of our students. Lead teachers in all content areas identify target standards and create assessments. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 43  3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Team teacher meetings, department meetings and grade meetings are centered around the analysis of data and design/selection of assessments. In addition, we will use the state assessments, the NYC Performance Tasks, assessments from Achieve3000, eScience, MyOn and Mindplay to gather relevant data. Teacher teams are structured to allow teachers make decisions regarding multiple assessments measures. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (SCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) 5a, 5b, 5e Title I Part A (Basic) Federal 264,843 X 2018-19 SCEP-FL 44 Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 16,979 0 0 12,366 0 2,449,812 X N/A N/A X N/A X 5a, 5d N/A N/A 5a N/A 5a, 5b, 5c, 5d, 5e 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/SCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 45   Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 46  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Intermediate School 347, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Intermediate School 347 will support parents and families of Title I students by: · Providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; · Providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; · Fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 47  · Providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; · Sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; · Providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. The school will maintain this information. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: · Actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; · Engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; · Ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; · Support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; · Maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office. · Conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 48  · Provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; · Host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act; · Schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; · Translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; · Conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement · Holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; · Hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; · Encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; · Supporting or hosting Family Day events; · Establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; · Encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; · Providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; · Developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; · Providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand 2018-19 SCEP-FL 49 School-Parent Compact (SPC)  School-Parent Compact (SPC) Intermediate School 347 , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum · Using academic learning time efficiently; · Respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; · Implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; · Offering high quality instruction in all content areas; · Providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships · Conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; · Convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; · Arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; · Respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 50  · Providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; · Involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; · Providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; · Ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff · Ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; · Notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; · arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; · planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: · creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; · assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); · sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; · supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 51  · ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; · advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities · monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; · ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; · check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; · read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); · set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; · promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; · encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; · volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; · participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; · communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; · respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; · become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; · participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; · take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; · share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 52  Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities · attend school regularly and arrive on time; · complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; · follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; · show respect for myself, other people and property; · try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; · always try my best to learn. ● 2018-19 SCEP-FL 53  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): K 6 1 7 2 8 3 9 4 10 5 11 12 2018-19 SCEP-FL 54  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: The rationale for creating an after school program for ELL students who performed below Level 3 in Math and ELA State exams is because we found that these students could benefit of further language instruction that targets reading comprehension and academic vocabulary acquisition. Supporting students' academic language acquisition supports the achievement of higher levels in all content areas. Our students will receive direct supplemental instruction in an after school ENL program. Our after school program targets specific English Language needs such as language acquisition, reading comprehension and remedial reading and writing for our SIFE students. Our program addresses specific needs of ELLs who have been receiving services for a number of years and still haven't been able to pass the NYSESLAT. Another feature of our program involves the use of technological tools such as Google Drive to support college and career readiness for ELL students. Our after school program serves students in grades 6 through 8. Our program utilizes Achieve 3000 to create an individualized plan for ELL students. Two ENL teachers will work with 54 students. Our program will meet two times a week for the duration of approximately 30 weeks, starting in the first week of October 2018 and ending in the middle of May 2019. English is the language of instruction, support is provided in student's native language when necessary,. This support will be provided as necessary by using; bilingual textbooks, Internet based programs, and bilingual teachers support. For additional support, we have an experienced Bilingual certified administrator that organizes and mentors the teachers who are working with the English Language Learners. This supervisor will also continue his work in the after school program. The Materials that will be used in the after-school program includes the computer program Achieve 3000, ink, copy paper, headphones to accommodate listening practices, Internet connection, and Academic Vocabulary Toolkit workbooks. We anticipate that our after school ENL program will commence mid October 2018 and it will conclude in May 2019. *Program schedule: Wednesday 2:30-5:30, and Thursday 2:30-5:30 *supervisor of the Title III program will maintain all records pertinent to the program, including student attendance, program notifications, and letters in the parent's preferred languages. *The program is open to all ENL students in the school. *The program will hire two ENL certified teachers.. *There will be two sections of 20-25 students each. *Students will use the Vocabulary Tool Kit and Achieve 3000. Both programs are for the exclusive use of the after-school program. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 55  Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: The goal of upcoming ELLs after school program is to provide a rigorous quality of education for every child selected to receive the services. Our goal is to address the academic needs of the selected ELLs students and to provide parents the tools necessary to assist with their children's literacy development. Our ENL teachers will attend professional staff development workshops such as: Achieve 3000, Google Classroom, Vocabulary Toolkit and CCLS and ELL curriculum. These sessions and others will help our ENL teachers learn how to implement scaffolding strategies into their pedagogy to assist our struggling students. The diverse trainings and workshops have in the past given us the opportunity to work closely as a staff. On school professional development days, we work together to develop lesson plans that suit our ELLs. Rigorous test practice skills and the concentration of all ELL learning modalities have been our pursuit. We have also adjusted the teaching programs so that our teachers have the opportunity to work closely and plan accordingly. lThe Assistant Principal and ENL Teachers in charge will conduct a professional development for the opening of the program to introduce the after school curriculum to parents. Teachers will take part in teacher led collaboration once per month geared towards planning after school activities and lessons based on content area teachers’ observation and data. Teachers will also take part in Professional Development during the after school throughout the year. The tentative schedule for these Professional Development is as follow: We anticipate that our professional development will start mid October 2018 and it will conclude in May 2019. October, 2018 Introduction to the After School Program/ Expectations Led by Mr. Fernandez and ENL Teachers November, 2018 Achieve 3000 To ensure that teachers using the program are provided with the support and resources necessary to implement the program effectively. Led by Achieve3000 Staff December, 2018 PD to Assist Parents in Providing Services Led by Mr. Fernandez and ENL Teachers January, 2019 CITE Center for Integrated Teacher Education February, 2019 Effective use of Data to Plan Instructions 2018-19 SCEP-FL 56  Part C: Professional Development Led by Consultant March, 2019 How to best Prepare Students for Upcoming State Exams Led by Mr. Fernandez May, 2019• Differentiate for students by administering LevelSet: Access the LevelSet Learning Path in the Learning Center for specific tools and resources. * The supervisor will maintain all records pertaining to the program, including agendas and attendance sheets impact * ALL professional learning opportunities are designed to have maximum impact on student success. *All teachers will benefit from professional learning opportunities provided by consultants from CITE. * All PDs are at no cost to Titlle III. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: The parent coordinator, along with the Bilingual Assistant Principal and ENL teachers holds a workshop for parents who are new to the community and/or country to inform the parents about their child’s instruction, and the various programs offered to the students within the NYC public school system. In addition to the first orientation meeting, meetings are scheduled regularly by the school to inform the parents of related events within the school and their child’s program. The administration and parent coordinator are present at these meetings to inform the parents of the curriculum and various school issues. Together, we work with the parents to provide all students with quality educational programs that meet their needs. There are workshops held during the week that include E.N.L and computer skills. The parent coordinator (Henry Baez) is the instructor for these programs as well as consultants. The Coordinator contacts the parents by telephone and sends out notices in parent prefer language.The parent Coordinator conducts workshops for parents on Tuesdays and Thursdays from 4:00 PM to 7:00 PM. These workshops are scheduled from October 2018 to May 2019. Parents receive ENL instruction and computer skills.The following is a tentative scheduled, single topic sessions: October 2018 Language Learning and your child. Hands on experiences and discussion will provide opportunities to:• Understanding ENL (Standards, Laws, Rights, 2018-19 SCEP-FL 57  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities etc)• How to support ENL Students in becoming Proficient in the English Language• The Common Core and ENL StudentsNovember 2018 College Readiness. Hands on experiences and discussion will provide opportunities to:• High Expectations and Rigor• Self-Fulfilled Prophecies and Your Child's Education• ELLs and CollegeDecember 2018 Hands on experiences and discussion will provide opportunities to:• Understand the importance of reading and homework• Importance of School Engagement, Communication with Teacher, and Community Participation for your Child's Education• School Safety and Environment• Revision of Afterschool Program Successes and Future ExpectationsJanuary 2019. Hands on experiences and discussion will provide opportunities to:• Back to School and Routines• State Exams Information and Tips• State Exams Information and Tips Part IIFebruary 2019. Hands on experiences and discussion will provide opportunities to:• Parent Involvement and Children’s Academic Success• Preparation for the State ExamsMarch 2019 Field Trip TBAMay 2019 Two Language Households. Hands on experiences and discussion will provide opportunities to:• Explore the benefit of learning two languages (supporting Bilingualism)• Support and Maintain Native Language and the Importance of Bilingualism• Identify strategies that support two languages in the home School trips are planned so that students and parents have the opportunity to enhance their learning. Trips have become a vital part of our teaching since students are exposed to the theatre and other cultural experiences. * All parents of Title III students and parents of ELLs students will be invited to participate in all workshops offered. Translation services will be available. *All records of parental engagement activities will be maintained by the parent coordinator, including agendas, attendance sheets and invitations in parents' preferred language. *All parent activities are at no cost to Title III. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) 12366  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental. Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Per session 2018-19 SCEP-FL 58  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 12366 2018-19 SCEP-FL 59  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 32 School Name School of Humanities Borough Brooklyn School Number 347 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Dr. John Barbella Coach Catherine White ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Sandra Diaz Teacher/Subject Area Sandra Diaz Teacher/Subject Area Jennifer Ramos Special Ed. Related-Service Provider Kenelma Perez Superintendent Ms. Gorski Assistant Principal Alejandro Fernandez Coach n/a School Counselor Wilfed Viera Parent Silveria Hormiga Parent Coordinator Henry Baez Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 1 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 2018-19 SCEP-FL 60  D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 300 Total number of ELLs 66 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 22.00% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 4 3 2 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? The following formative assessments have been incorporated into our curriculum to guide instructional planning for our ELLs: ● Teacher-Created assessments - with the purpose to check for understanding throughout the unit. Teachers then craft lessons that have appropriate scaffolds and entry points that help students access the material ● Plickers- school initiative - all teachers of ELLs are required to incorporate this assessment tool to obtain data of ELLs progress/ comprehension during lesson. ● Achieve3000 - to monitoring students’ comprehension and writing skills, as well as lexile level growth and to match students 2018-19 SCEP-FL 61  to an appropriately-leveled passage. ● Exit cards - as an immediate feedback for teachers to plan lessons. ● Graphic organizers - to assess critical thinking skills, ideas and organizations. ● Reflections - at the end of a lesson, at the completion of a written piece or project for teachers to assess students understanding. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? A clearly-established structure has been established to support the effort of ensuring that our teachers effectively implement the use of formative assessment to guide instructional planning for our ELLs. Data collected from the formative assessments have to be uploaded periodically to Datacation for administration review as well as for teachers to plan instruction based on the data. During weekly Common Planning results of formative assessments, discuss effective strategies to use moving forward and plan accordingly. Another tool used to support this effort is observations. Teachers are observed formally and informally, and they are provided with appropriate feedback, as well as Professional Development to assist in the continuation of the implementation of formative assessments. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? ● ELL Fall and Spring Baseline Assessment - are used to inform teachers about ELLs progress and abilities in all four English Proficiency modalities. ● SCEP Academic Vocabulary Assessment for ELLs at the beginning, the mid and the end of the school year with the purpose to plan instruction of academic vocabulary. ● Unit pre, mid and post assessments from National Geographic Learning Inside curriculum. This assessment measures academic vocabulary, writing skills and reading comprehension necessary to succeed in the unit. ● Unit Pre, mid and post assessments from National Geographic Social Studies curriculum ● We use Achieve3000 to assess the lexile levels to match students to an appropriately-leveled passage. Using the results from the initial Level Set pre- assessment, students receive a Lexile measure. From that point on, their Lexile levels are measured and updated on the 1st of each month by the system as they work through the program. These assessments assist teachers in determining the scaffold necessary to facilitate students’ work in each unit lessons. It also helps determine Tier 2, 3 vocabularies that need to be reviewed before beginning the unit and which writing skills to focus on during the unit. ENL and ELL teachers share the collected data during common planning with other content area teachers to determine the appropriate scaffolds needed by individual students depending on the activity and subject. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? To ensure that our students receive the proper support after data has been gathered and evaluated we have a few structures in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered. Teachers are required to plan their next steps to implement in the units such as small group instruction, use data collected to plan with pull out/push in teachers, after school programs strategically delivered by the ELLs teachers to support instruction. More so, teachers are also required to share this data with students in a way it is easy to comprehend. This is done to promote academic growth and ownership of their education through specific, measurable, attainable, realistic, timed Goal setting. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] N/A 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. NYSESLAT - It helps teachers monitor the progress of our ELLs. These results help us determine the type and amount of services needs to be provided to ELLs in Bilingual Education and English as a New Language (ENL) programs. The NYSESLAT also 2018-19 SCEP-FL 62  provides valuable insight on students’ language needs that needs to be share both with other content area teachers as well as students for goal setting. ELA/Math and MOSLs - They are used as reliable and objective measures of our ELL ‘s abilities. These exams help teachers focus on essential content/skill and provide appropriate data to plan instruction and guide students in setting individual content and language objectives. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? ● Common planning - teachers have time allocated in their schedules to, in collaboration, disseminate student data trends and make proper adjustments to the curriculum in the form of scaffold and/or differentiation. ● Departmental meetings - Department wide data trends are analyzed in collaboration and decisions are made as to what strategies to use to best serve the needs of students according to the weaknesses revealed by the data. ● Departments select a set of Standards to track and assess throughout the school year. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Our building currently offer three Standalone ENL classes for 6th, 7th and 8th grade. Students with a mixture of native language backgrounds and heterogeneous English proficiencies comprise these cohorts. Assigned full-time ENL teachers provide them also with tailored content area instruction in social studies. In addition to the ENL classes, push in/pull-out intervention is also in place. ELLs in these groups are assigned to a general education or special education classrooms. These students, however, receive their mandated ENL services via several of three interventions provided: push-in, pull out and/or standalone. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? We adhere to the DOE regulations and ELL Policy Reference Guide Entering 360 180 180 integrated ENL/ELA 0 Emerging 360 90 180 integrated ENL/ELA 90 Transitioning 180 0 90 integrated ENL/ELA 90 Expanding 180 0 180 integrated ENL/ELA or other content area Commanding 90 0 90 integrated ENL/ELA or other content area 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 63  Content area instruction is given by a licensed teacher and at times is assisted by an ESL teacher. Instruction is given in English. Teachers in content areas are supporting language development thru the use of computer based programs (i.e. Mindplay, achieve3000, My Own). The school is also focusing on building academic vocabulary skills through the “Word Up” school initiative. Teachers assess unit vocabulary before beginning units and common plan vocabulary geared instruction. Another of our school’s initiative is to build effective conversation and discussion skills through accountable talk in every classroom. The school has adopted writing portfolios in every content area classroom where students will build on their writing skills. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? ENL teachers give various assessments to students to monitor their growth and needs. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Differentiation of instruction and multiple entry points are afford to all students regardless of their classification. All former ELLS are afforded services up to two years after exiting status. All testing accommodations are given to students as per DOE rules and mandates; such as time and half and a separate location. Plan for SIFE students and students with 2 or less years in the country. Push-In/Pull-out services Title III After school services that targets special academic needs of SIFE student Team Teaching Special needs: Setss Services Small class size Title III After school program Plan for For Long-Term Ell's • Independent Reading • Authentic Author Studies • Teaching of the 5 Writing Genres • Genre Studies • Accountable Talk • Literature Circles • Poetry Workshops • Book Discussion Groups • Conferencing • Word Walls • Use of Culminating Cultural Projects as an Assessment Tool 2018-19 SCEP-FL 64  • Use of Portfolios as an Assessment Tool • Use of Rubrics as an Assessment Tool • Implementation of a Model of Differentiated Instruction. Multiple entry points, scaffolds, and extensions • Provision of After School Programs 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? We also have Team Teaching which has assisted students in both ENL and in the content area curriculum. At times the ENL teacher starts the lesson by introducing vocabulary using ENL methodologies . The content area teacher proceeds with the lesson while the ENL teacher uses multiple entry points and scaffolds to assist the Ells. All ENL teachers use Q-Tel, Excell, and other programs that have proven successful. In addition, every Monday content specific teacher teams meet to discuss and practice ENL strategies. There are also books available in other languages such as Arabic and Spanish. Students are able to read these books during independent reading. Content area books are also available in Spanish. Cognates are frequently used in the content area to facilitate language acquisition. Our Ell's -(Swd) are served using a push-in model. An ENL teacher provides services in their classroom. The teacher is able to collaborate with the content area teacher so it doesn’t interfere with instruction. The teacher utilizes methodologies that helps students in their acquisition of the new language. They are also served using a pull out model affording them an opportunity of having small group instruction , targeting their needs. These (Ell-Swd) are also able to participate in gym activities, computer lab, and Foreign Language integrated with the rest of the school population. Teachers utilize a variety of instructional strategies based on the various needs of our students. Content area subjects use ENL support in the forms of Push-In by a Licensed ENL Teacher; scaffold which is discussed and elaborated in conjunction with Special Education Teachers and ENL Teachers; and language targeted lessons with CCLS specific on the building of vocabulary and language skills. Certain students/ and or classrooms also have the aid of a Bilingual Paraprofessional. Teacher's take into account the primary language and culture of student in planning units. Time is another valuable resource in working with ELL-SWDs. ELL-SWDs are provided with extended time in the completion of periodic assessments and other assignments. We have included them in our Title III program to give them additional help in test-taking skills, reading, listening and writing. Our after school program caters to the needs of all students. In addition teachers also have resources that are readily available for our Ells. We have dictionaries in the languages of most of our students, encyclopedia and a full equipped library that meets the needs of our Ells. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? All subject area curricula are aligned with CCLS. Teachers use formative and sumative data to plan lessons that provide students multiple entry points, scaffolds and extensions. Our master schedule allows for SWDs flexible programming as specified by their IEPs. When appropriate flexible programming is used to maximize time spent with non-disabled peers. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. A team of teachers assist in classes that have ELL students. This will especially assist newcomers and long term Ell's that are in need of remedial help. Instruction in content area classes are provided in English. Native Language is used as a scaffold to support language development in the content area classes. Teachers translate tasks when appropriate to use as reference for newcomer students. Grouping is also a strategy where students with a common native language share information. Paraprofessionals provide native language support when appropriate. Visuals support and instruction of academic vocabulary is part of every content area. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 65  9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Academic Vocabulary 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Achieve 3000 EScience [achieve 3000] Mindplay MION Vocabulary Inside National Geographic Title III after school program Century 21 after school program We have an after school program that meets the needs of all our students. ELLs are encouraged and invited to attend. ELLs are also invited to any other program offered before and after school. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. We have a school library that caters to the needs of our Spanish speakers. We also have dictionaries and some story books in Spanish, Arabic and Chinese. We have a mini lab specially designed for ELLs Our school utilizes a variety of instructional strategies and materials. Computer based program Achieve3000- to support writing, vocabulary and reading skills in all content area classes. smart-board activities as scaffold to support comprehension of content presented in classes. Teachers supplement lessons with online websites, videos and programs for ELLs. Students lead lessons are created to incorporate student’s culture and interests in content area instruction. National Geographic Learning- Inside Curriculum is Common Core aligned infused with content area instruction. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Our ENL program delivers instruction in English. Student’s native language is supported by the use of glossaries and dictionaries. Most of our teachers are bilingual and support our newcomers in Spanish clarifying concepts. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Our ENL program follows the mandates of the New York State Department of Education. Texts used are leveled; students are afforded scaffolds appropriate for their grade level. Students’ levels are monitored by teachers and instruction is modified as per student need. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? We have a school library that caters to the needs of our Spanish speakers. We also have dictionaries and some story books in Spanish, Arabic and Chinese. We have a mini lab specially designed for ELLs Our school utilizes a variety of instructional strategies and materials. Computer based program Achieve3000- to support writing, vocabulary and reading skills in all content area classes. smartboard activities as scaffold to support comprehension of content presented in classes. Teachers supplement lessons with online websites, videos and programs for ELLs. Students lead lessons are created to incorporate student’s culture and interests in content area instruction. National Geographic Learning- Inside Curriculum is Common Core aligned infused with content area instruction. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 66  16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Our parent coordinator, guidance counselor and administrators track new comers. There are formal and informal meetings held with ELLs and their parents. Some of the activities that are in place to assist newly enrolled ELL students before and during the school year include Open School Nights in which teachers (translators available) explain to parents how to assist their students in order to succeed. The parent coordinator, Mr. Baez, is constantly presenting Bilingual Workshops for Parents to support Common Core Instruction and learning. Throughout the year Assemblies are scheduled to help students better understand school procedures and initiatives. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Spanish, French 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? IS 347 opted in the new core curriculum for ELA and mathematics, sponsored by New York City. As part of the ongoing Professional Development all our ELA and Math teachers have attended PD in the implementation of the new curriculum. Teachers were trained in modifying instruction for ELLs and SWDs. Some of the proposed topics to be addressed: • History of Bilingual Education in the U.S, New York State and New York City • Compliance Issues and Implications For Instruction • Stages of First and Second Language Acquisition • Total Physical Response (TPR) Approach • Cognitive Academic Language Learning Approach (CALLA) • ENL through the Content Areas (Math, Social Studies and Science) • Adapting Materials and Curriculum to Meet the Needs of English Language Learners (ELLs) • ENL for Daily Living through a Realia Based Approach • ELA Standards vs. ENL Standards • Levels of Language Proficiency • RTI and AIS All ESL professional development workshops conducted at the school level will incorporate a hands-on collaborative approach. Teachers will work in large groups, small groups, and individually and be given the opportunity to explore various 2018-19 SCEP-FL 67  learning modalities by participating in a variety of different activities. They will be encouraged to share their prior knowledge, develop their skills and voice their concerns and opinions in a comfortable, non-threatening environment. Topics for additional staff development related to ENL will be elicited from the participants as the sessions continue. Participants will also be afforded the opportunity to develop and share sample lesson plans, using the strategies and methodologies that have been presented to them. All ENL teachers will also receive ongoing professional development through attendance at various workshops, meetings, conferences, etc. within the school, and also on a citywide or state-wide basis. Within the school there will be monthly departmental meetings, conducted by the Assistant Principal overseeing the ENL programs. He will provide turnkey training and dissemination of data to appropriate staff members based upon relevant information received through central and the district. CITE coaches and TIF coaches work with all of our teachers providing training in how to engage with the Common Core Learning Standards. Teachers have an opportunity to share best practices and to observe instruction delivered by model teachers. Teachers are trained in ELL methodologies and strategies. Information is turned keyed during Faculty conference, Grade conferences and Department meetings. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Our guidance counselor and social worker assist staff by conducting PD sessions regarding transition from elementary school and into high school. They make certain that all staff is aware of the different programs available for students citywide: Dual Language (DL) Dual language programs provide instruction in two languages. Students become proficient in reading, writing, and speaking in English and in the target language of the program (e.g. Spanish, Chinese). The DL model used is based on student demographics in the school and district. Transitional Bilingual Education (TBE) Transitional Bilingual Education programs provide instruction in English and students' native languages to develop English proficiency, by gradually reducing the amount of instruction in their native languages. Schools provide English Language Arts (ELA), Native Language Arts (NLA), and subject area classes in students' native languages and English. As students develop English proficiency, time spent learning in English increases and native language instruction decreases. Freestanding English as a New Language (ENL) ENL programs are offered in all NYC public schools, and are taught in English to develop English proficiency. ENL programs may vary. Some schools may offer standalone ENL classes, while others may incorporate ENL instruction embedded in subject area classes. Our school provides professional development to all teachers and administrators that specifically addresses the needs of English language learners. A minimum of fifteen percent (15%) of the required professional development hours for all teachers 2018-19 SCEP-FL 68  prescribed by CR Part 80 must be dedicated to language acquisition, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English language learners. A combination of CITE coaches, TIF coaches, Administrators and ENL teachers have developed a series of PD sessions to be delivered on Monday afternoon professional learning times. These sessions satisfy the 15% of pd hours for all teachers. Agendas and attendance are recorded and filed in the PL binder kept by the Assistant Principal. Some of the proposed topics to be addressed: • History of Bilingual Education in the U.S, New York State and New York City • Compliance Issues and Implications For Instruction • Stages of First and Second Language Acquisition • Total Physical Response (TPR) Approach • Cognitive Academic Language Learning Approach (CALLA) • ENL through the Content Areas (Math, Social Studies and Science) • Adapting Materials and Curriculum to Meet the Needs of English Language Learners (ELLs) • ENL for Daily Living through a Realia Based Approach • ELA Standards vs. ENL Standards • Levels of Language Proficiency • RTI and AIS Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Once a child has been identified as an ELL from the Home Language Survey, all parents are invited to an initial parent orientation where the parent is interview by the ENL coordinator. The parent coordinator also holds a workshop for parents who are new to the community and/or country to inform the parents about their child’s instruction, and the various programs offered to the students within the NYC public school system. The parent makes the decision about which program would best meet their child’s needs. The programs of the school are then presented to the parent and if the parent feels that the school doesn’t have a program that would benefit their child, they are offered an alternate placement. In addition to the first orientation meeting, meetings are scheduled regularly by the school to inform the parents of the happenings within the school and their child’s program. The administration and parent coordinator are present at these meetings to inform the parents of the curriculum and various school issues. Together, we work with the parents to provide all students with quality educational programs that meet the needs of the students. Translation services are available. School trips are planned so that students and parents have the opportunity to enhance their learning. Trips have become a vital part of our teaching since students are exposed to the theatre and other cultural experiences. As with other school programs translation services are available. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Parents of ELLs are invited to participate in all school wide activities. Parents of ELLs are members of the SLT and PTA. They participated in all meetings and workshops offered to parents at school. The parent coordinator is responsible for inviting parents and making sure that translation services are available. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 69  Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 70 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, John Barbella, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 71  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: 347 School DBN: 32K347 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) John Barbella Title Principal Alejandro Fernandez Assistant Principal Henry Baez Sandra Diaz Parent Coordinator ENL/Bilingual Teacher Silveria Hormiga Parent Kenelma Perez Teacher/Subject Area Jennifer Ramos Teacher/Subject Area Catherine White Alicia McCann Coach Coach Wilfedo Viera School Counselor Sheila Gorski Tatyana Ulubabova Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member na na na na Other na Other na Other na Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 na na na 2018-19 SCEP-FL 72  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 32K347 School Name: IS 347 School of Humanities Superintendent: Lillian Druck The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. We collect data utilising ATS, HLIS, and parent survey reports. In addition, our parent coordinator and our ELL coordinator interview parents and assess their language needs. Regular meetings are held to ensure that our parents are aquainted with the school and they can freely discuss their language needs. Over 80% of our parents preferred language is spanish. The parent coordinator with the support of our teachers maintains a report with the languages that parents speak by class and grade. The report is kept in the main office, the parent coordinators’office and the AP’s office. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 73  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language The languages spoken by are parents are Spanish (majority), we have some Arabic and Chinese. As previously stated periodic meetings are given by the parent coordinator. 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Parent Compact, Letters, Invitations, Surveys. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide We will conduct four Parent Teacher meeting after school as per DOE calendar. We will also have monthly Parent workshops, and PTA interpretation service(s)? 2018-19 SCEP-FL 74  meetings. As per the new UFT contract every Tuesday afternoon our teachers reach out to parents. Parents are invited to meet with staff and discuss their child’s progress. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) The majority of parents speak Spanish the Translation and Interpretation Unit is used on rare ocasions. We mostly utilize in-house translators from our staff. However for our Community Education Council meetings we do request their assistance. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? During parent meetings surveys questionnaires will be provided in order to collect relevant information to ensure that adequate services are available. A focus group inclusive of all cultures and languages represented in the school will gather feedback and best practices 2018-19 SCEP-FL 75 
