 21K410 School Name: ABRAHAM LINCOLN HIGH SCHOOL Principal: ARI HOOGENBOOM 2018-19 SCEP-FF 1  School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Section 4: SCEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 SCEP-FF 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Abraham Lincoln High School 21K410 3321000-11410 9-12 School Number (DBN): 2800 Ocean Parkway, Brooklyn, NY 11235 718-333-7400 Phone Number: 718-946-5035 Fax: AriA Hoogenboom ahoogen@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Email Address: Ari A. Hoogenboom Robert Polinsky Joanne Brown Joseph Renna n/a LalushBatel Ariella Pena N/A District Information Michael Prayor Superintendent: 1830 Shore Blvd. Room F11 Brooklyn, NY 11235 mprayor@schools.nyc.gov Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 21 Superintendent’s Office Address: Superintendent’s Email Address: Phone Number: (718)368-8515 ext. 1118 718-368-8517 Fax: 2018-19 SCEP-FF 3  B’klyn South, Team 6 FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Field Support Center (FSC) Richard Grzelewski Executive Director: 419 89 th Street, Brooklyn, NY RGrzelewski@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718 759-4932 Phone Number: 718 759-3909 Fax: 2018-19 SCEP-FF 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the SCEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Ari A.Hoogenboom Robert J. Polinsky Joanne Brown and Candace Maria Hunte LalushBatel Ariella Pena Jennifer Baumfeld Joseph Renna Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Ass’t Princ./staff Teacher/Staff 2018-19 SCEP-FF 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Shade Gottgens Teacher/Staff Joanne Brown Candace Maria Hunte SadrachSantiago Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Parent Parent Parent Member/ Member/ 2018-19 SCEP-FF 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) is a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. The process of developing and implementing the SCEP is aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding SCEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and informed by New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and SCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a 2018-19 SCEP-FF 7  comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality 2018-19 SCEP-FF 8  Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the SCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the SCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for SCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 9   Step 4: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 5: Build consensus around activities, strategies and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 6: Implement at least one USDE Turnaround Principle (e.g., redesign the school day, week, or year; modify the instructional program to ensure it is Evidence-based, rigorous, and aligned with State academic content standards; provide time for collaboration on the use of) beginning no later than the 2018-19 school year.  Step 7: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 8: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 10  Section 4: SCEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Abraham Lincoln High School is a community where all members help one another pursue their potential. To bring this vision into reality, we celebrate the talent and ability of each member of our community by providing a highly supportive environment with follow-through. We believe in integrity, open-mindedness, and lifelong learning. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Lincoln is the school where students have every opportunity to pursue their potential. Through a partnership with the Johns Hopkins University’s Talent Development High Schools, the school developed its Small Learning Communities (SLC) model. Students receive the individualized attention of Small Learning Communities and the resources of a large comprehensive high school with Specialized Programs. We offer a state-of-the-art photo studio, animal science labs, a vast library, multiple computer labs, three gyms and a pool. Our extensive electives, including Advanced Placement, College Now and SUPA classes, empower our academic achievers to complete up to a year of college credit. The majority of teachers are engaged in structured, inquiry-based professional collaborations voted on in our SBO. These collaborations promote the achievement of school goals and the implementation of the CCLS, resulting in strengthening the instructional capacity of teachers. Inquiry teams are content based and focus on achieving Regents mastery through Common Core aligned expectations. At Lincoln, distributive leadership structures are in place so teachers build their leadership capacity and have a voice in key decisions that affect student learning across the school. For example, there is a teacher team leader for each academy. In addition, the school has implemented a UFT Teacher's Center, which plays a key role in decision-making that affects student learning across the school. Our once-a-month Professional Learning menu workshops are organized by our Teacher Center and facilitated by Lincoln teachers. Structures are in-place to ensure that each student is known well by at least one adult who helps to coordinate attendance, social-emotional learning, youth development and guidance/advisement supports that align with the student’s learning needs. In the SLCs, teachers meet in common planning time to discuss the academic and social/emotional needs of their students. These groups of adults know the needs, strengths and aspirations of each student well, monitor the student’s progress and provide the academic support needed. The school maintains a culture of mutual trust and positive attitudes that supports the academic and personal growth of students. For example, in a special initiative to reduce suspensions and build trust between teachers and students, the school has had 35 teachers trained in Restorative Circles training. Restorative justice has been implemented for minor incidents. The Cabinet has also been trained in Restorative practices. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. We serve a diverse community, and strive to provide an excellent education to all our students including about 375 ELLs and over 350 SWDs. Our ELLs benefit from a strategic collaboration with Project RISE and the International Network, through which our teachers have transformed our ELL pedagogy into a more student-centered, project-base approach. For SWDs, we aim to provide the least restrictive education possible, and our Special Ed and Gen Ed teachers participate in PL on effective ICT partnerships throughout the year. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 11  Our great strength at Lincoln is our Collaborative Teachers; this year we look forward to utilizing this strength to make progress in Rigorous Instruction, particularly Common Core aligned instruction that leads to Regents mastery for all students. 5. Identify at least one USDE Turnaround Principle (e.g., redesign the school day, week, or year; modify the instructional program to ensure it is Evidence-based, rigorous, and aligned with State academic content standards; provide time for collaboration on the use of data) to be implemented in the 2018-19 school year. This year we are members of the Mastery Grading Collaboration. Selected faculty members will attend their workshops, conferences, and professional development, and they will then turnkey this information to our faculty. In weekly CPT, Content Collaboration meetings, and in monthly Professional Learning workshops, our teachers will collaborate and receive the necessary support in order to successfully implement this initiative. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 12  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 21K410 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 1998 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 223 226 23 32 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 52 34 8 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 77.0% % Attendance Rate 74.1% % Reduced Lunch 18.7% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.6% 22.7% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 20.0% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 14.08 3% 13% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 78% 72% 67.1% 12.2% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No No Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups - Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A YSH NO NO YSH Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO NO YSH NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES NO NO YES No N/A 253 237 10 5 87.0% 2.3% 15.0% 40.3% 15.7% 1.3% 18 16% 7.3 N/A N/A 84% 77% 80.2% 20% N/A No Yes N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A YSH YSH N/A NO YSH YSH NO N/A NO NO YES YES N/A NO NO 2018-19 SCEP-FF 13  2018-19 SCEP-FF 14  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed X X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Abraham Lincoln High School has had important successes in implementing rigorous curricula aligned to the CCLS. We received a score of Well Developed on our most recent Quality Review in the area of curriculum. This is the result of our successful participation in the Common Core Pilot, run by the DOE central offices. We were at the forefront of developing performance assessments aligned to the CCLS and were asked to speak on behalf of the NYC DOE at conferences in Charlotte, NC and Orlando, FL about our work. We are embracing Equity and Excellence for All by embedding the Advanced Placement curriculum in our Global History class. Our area for growth is having our Regents results match the quality of our curriculum in the content areas. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 15  By June of 2019, teachers of Global, Living Environment and Algebra will work collaboratively to develop embedded formative assessment practices to improve students’ academic performance, as measured by a 5% increase (10% in Algebra) on Regents results for first-time takers. CC Algebra to 60% LE to 67% Global to 78% 2018-19 SCEP-FF 16  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Professional development on formative assessment provided for teachers on staff development days and during PL time. All teachers Sept 2018-June 2019 Administration Team Leaders & Coordinators Teacher Leaders Principal and APs; Team Leaders and Coordinators, & Teaching Staff All teachers Sept 2018- June, 2019 Students, teachers Sept 2018-June, 2019 Principal, APs and Teaching staff Weekly peer directed professional learning, department and academy meetings for faculty will focus on design and implementation of weekly assessments aligned to the Common Core. Use of formative assessments to diagnose student needs, implementation of technology based resources, such as Achieve 3000 for ELL students and Math and Read180 for students with disabilities, will be used to impact student achievement for these specific populations. Use of pupil path, portfolio implementation, and student-led conferences in the 9th grade to effectively communicate student achievement results with parents and families Students, teachers, families Sept 2018-June, 2019 Principal, APs, Team leaders and Academy Coordinators Development of Lincoln Literacy Center and teacher Writing Council to infuse daily writing linked to assessment in all subject classes. All teachers Sept 2018-June 2019 Principal, APs, Writing Council 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Families will be informed of student progress toward standards through communications through Skedula, at family informational nights(scheduled 4 times a year), monthly PTA meetings and at SLT meetings. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 17  Weekly schedule adjustments allow for continuing and ever more in-depth PD during regular teacher time. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, all students scheduled to sit for a Regents exam will have participated and gotten feedback on at least one mock Regents examination and teachers will have made a plan to address missing content based on the results of this assessment. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Mock Regents exams in Global, CC Algebra, and Living Environment results entered in Skedula. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 18  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. X X X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Students entering the ninth grade at Abraham Lincoln High School have a multitude of built in supports to ease their transition to high school and to provide Equity and Excellence for All. We offer a Ninth Grade Academy, which functions as a Small Learning community with dedicated guidance and instructional staff members to ensure that each child is known well and has an adult she or he can confide in. In our 2016-17 Quality Review we were rated Well Developed in both Positive Learning Environment (1.4) and High Expectations (3.4). That being said, we have implemented even more supports for the ninth grade, including an advisory program that uses Restorative Circles, increased student voice through Academy Councils, student-led conferences, and a Pathways Program for our most at-risk students. In 2016-17, we had 52 fights; in 2017-18, we had 32 fights; in 2018-19, we want to lower this number to 25. We have seen positive improvements in both physical fights (B36/B24) and attendance over the last 2 years. Our overall attendance rate has gone from 86.8% in 2016-17, to 88% in 2017-18. For 2018-19, we plan to be 90%. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 19  We will build on our gains this year by retaining our 10th grade Advisory Program and establishing an 11th grade mediation class. For our zoned students we are instituting a 5-periods-a-week Advisory with a curriculum designed by Outward Bound. We are expanding the use of Restorative Practices and Student Academy Councils and a school-wide student senate. Last academic year, we established an internship program and we now have a comfort dog at Lincoln. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools –Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all school staff will deepen and expand work around Advisory and Restorative Practices through professional development, programming, and our Comfort Dog initiative to lower school-wide disciplinary incidents by 5% (from 150 incidents in 2017-18 to 142 in 2018-19) and suspensions by 5% (from 152 in 2017-18 to 144 in 2018-19). 2018-19 SCEP-FF 20  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Professional Learning in Restorative Practices and Advisory curricula All teachers Sept 2018 Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) AP, PPS & AP Security Curricula for Advisory will be updated and/or adopted. All teachers August 2018 Advisory Committee An Advisory period and program will be programmed for all 9 and 10th Graders; A unique Advisory curriculum will be developed through Outward Bound for our zoned 9th graders. Sept 2018-June, 2019 AP PPS Sept 2018-June, 2019 AP, PPS Outward Bound 9th, 10th graders Zoned 9th graders; Advisory teacher A student-teacher team will implement primary tiered behavior interventions and supports to celebrate and cultivate our core values All students Sept 2018- AP PPS and AP Security June, 2019 Shared practices will be developed for assessment and ICT strategies to support all students. All students, students with disabilities Sept 2018- All APs, UFT Teacher June, 2019 Center All students will move towards college and career readiness through a partnership with Follow Us All students Sept 2018-June 2019 AP ELA, College Advisor 2018-19 SCEP-FF 21  20 more faculty members will be trained in Restorative Circles. Integrate Comfort Dog (Nina) in life of the school and integrate Mutt-i-gree curriculum in Advisory. Special Red-Flag Attendance Days Selected Faculty Sept 2018-June 2019 All students All students Sept 2018-June 2019 Sept 2018-June 2019 AP, PPS AP, PPS AP, PPS, faculty 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Families will be informed of the opportunities of student voice initiatives, and our use of Restorative Practices, and our College Office initiatives through communications through Skedula, at family informational nights, and at special presentations at regularly scheduled PTA meetings, and at SLT meetings. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Ninth and tenth grade schedules will be adjusted to allow for the advisory period. To train teachers in restorative practices, funds will be made available to cover classes. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) X Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. OORS data and attendance data will be examined at the end of January 2019 (at the end of the first semester). This will be compared to the previous year's data, demonstrating a 5% decrease in year to year comparison data. We will also examine physical fights (B36/B24) and overall year to date attendance. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. OORS data and attendance data Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 22  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. SOP(s) Addressed X X X 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. X 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Abraham Lincoln High School has had important successes in embedding student-centered teaching strategies throughout the school. We have had school-wide adoption of high-leverage moves such as think-pair-share, Socratic Seminar, and collaborative annotation, which all foster high levels of student engagement. These practices were highlighted in our latest QR, in which we scored a Proficient in Pedagogy and a Well-Developed in Teacher Teams and Leadership Development. In addition, through our SBO and UFT Teacher Center, our teachers collaborate weekly in Content Collaboration meetings and in monthly teacher-led Professional Learning. In this PL program, teachers are provided a menu of up to 12 different workshops to attend to extend their professional learning. Through these changes, we are advancing in the continuum of providing Equity and Excellence for All, and we are determined to continue our improvement. Our area of need includes improving the systems for teachers and students of using formative and summative assessments to increase achievement. Our focus this year will be to systematize mastery learning in the ninth grade and to routinize our school-wide use of formative assessments, including writing, by embedding them in the daily lesson format, and using various ways to teach students and their families how to understand the assessment process and use the information it provides to strengthen progress toward achievement goals. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 23  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, through in-school Professional Development and Content Collaboration support, all teachers will embed formative assessment strategies in daily lessons and unit plans. These strategies will result in a 5 point increase on Regents scores on Global and Living Environment Regents exams (73% to 78%, 62% to 67%, respectively), and a 10 point increase on the Algebra Regents (50% to 60%). 2018-19 SCEP-FF 24  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Weekly Professional Learning Meetings in Content Collaboration, Affinity Groups, Department Meetings, Academy Meetings, and Menu PL Maintenance of a UFT Teacher Center(weekly teacher mentoring meetings, monthly PL teacher-led PL workshops, and collaborative planning) (4.2, 4.3, 4.4, 4.5) Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) All Faculty Sept 2018-June 2019 Principal, AP Supervisor, Teacher Center Coach All Faculty Sept,2018-June, 2019 Teacher Center Coach, Faculty Weekly collaborative grade-team planning meeting to align instruction using student assessments (4.2) All Faculty Sept 2018-June 2019 Department APs, teachers Develop a teacher-led "Writing Council" to meet monthly and to visit classroom to develop and propagate writing in the classroom. ICT teachers attend PL specific to learning effective co-teaching practices to support our ELL and SWD populations. (4.4) All teachers will give assessments on Fridays to check student progress and report results to teacher teams and department APs. (4.5) Selected teachers from each department ICT Team Teachers All Faculty Weekly teacher-led teacher teams use student assessment All Faculty data to develop strategies for improving student outcomes (emphasis on SWDs, ELLS, and high-need student subgroups) (4.5) 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Sept 2018-June 2019 Principal, AP ELA Sept,2018- June, 2019 Sept 2018-June 2018 Sept 2018-June 2019 Teacher Center Coach, Assistant Principals Department APs AP ENL, AP ISS, UFT Teacher Center Coordinator How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 25  Families will be informed of student progress toward standards based on formative assessment benchmarks and check-ins through communications through Skedula, at family informational nights, regular PTA meetings and at SLT meetings. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. SBO vote to incorporate professional learning time into the day on Fridays. Weekly schedule adjustments allow for continuing and ever more in-depth PD during regular teacher time. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant X 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, all teachers will have been observed 2 times using formative assessment strategies during supervisory visits. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Mock Regents examinations in LE, CC Alg, and Global that will be assessed in January 2019. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 26  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. x X X 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The leadership at Abraham Lincoln High School has repeatedly been commended for making organizational and programmatic decisions to create a positive learning environment. We use a substantial portion of the budget to create small learning communities, to fund teacher-leader positions, and to sustain multitude of clubs and plethora of varsity level sports teams. Our budgeting decisions deliver the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement and leads us towards the Chancellor's vision of Equity and Excellence for All. In our Central-Led Review of 2015-16, our only area of Focus was in QR 1.2 (DTSDE Tenet 4.2) in developing teacher pedagogy aligned to the Danielson Framework for Teachers. The overarching finding was: "The school is in the process of extending instructional practices so that all classes are representative of the school's instructional vision and all learners have opportunities to access content, thereby resulting in student work products that demonstrate mastery of the standards." Our 2016-17 QR ratings found us Well-Developed in the Schools Culture area (1.4 and 3.4) and largely Proficient (with one Well-Developed) in Systems for Improvement. Our Area of Focus is 1.2/Pedagogy and our Area of Celebration is 1.4/Positive Learning Environment. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 27  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART– Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the implementation of mastery grading , combined with a quarterly review of assessment data (with an emphasis on identifying key standards and skills), will result in 83% of Cohort X students earning 10 or more credits. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 28  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Mentoring of new teachers New teachers Sept, 2018- June, 2019 A.P.’s, UFT Center Teacher mentor Weekly, teacher-led professional learning programs, department meetings and academy meetings All teachers Sept, 2018 – June, 2019 Additional resources used in classes with ELLs and SWDs(Achieve 3000, Read180, Math180 ELLs, SWDs Partnerships programs such as STEM ELL, SAGA for Math, Parent Meetings.(ELL, PTA, SLT) Parents, students Sept,2018-June, 2019 Sept 2018-June, 2019 Principal, APs, UFT Center Teacher mentor Principal, APs Principal, APs, Parent Coordinator Partnership with Mastery Collaborative to achieve greater efficacy with assessment, learning, and grading. All teachers, 9/18-6/19 Principal APs APs AP teachers, 9/18-6/19 Principal Teacher Center Partnership with Lead Higher Initiative at Equal Opportunity School. APs APs Equity Team 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Families will be informed of student progress toward standards based on formative assessment benchmarks and check ins through communications through Pupil Path/Skedula, at family informational nights, at regular PTA meetings, and at SLT meetings. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 29  Mentoring activities will be accomplished as part of the regular duties of Assistant Principals and as a C-6 assignment for mentoring teachers. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. At the end of the first semester, Cohort X pass rates and credit accumulation will be examined to see the percentage of students on track to achieve 10 plus credits for the year. If 83% or higher of Cohort X students have 5 or more credits, we will be on track. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Report cards will determine credit accumulation at the end of the first semester. We will be looking for 83% or more of Cohort X to have 5 or more credits. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 30  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. X X X X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In recent years, we have created several online platforms (Pupilpath, Naviance, and an updated school website, http://www.alhs.nyc) for communicating with parents, and our survey results show an 86% success rate in the "Outreach to Parents" section. We will continue to use these programs and build on this success. However, we remain below the borough and the city average. To help parents feel more involved as shared stakeholders, we are instituting the following special evenings at Abraham Lincoln High School: College Information Session/ The Application Process: Scheduled for October 18th during the monthly PTA meeting. This session will familiarize parents with the college application process and timeline for the senior year. We will also provide support strategies for parents of underclassmen. FAFSA Filing Dinner: Scheduled for November 15th during the monthly PTA meeting. During this session, we will provide assistance in filing the required FAFSA (Free Application for Student Aid) and TAP (Tuition Assistance Program) financial aid applications. To promote participation, dinner will be provided. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 31  ALEAP Parent Session: Scheduled for November 29th before Parent-Teacher Conferences. Parents of 9th, 10th and 11th grade ALEAP students will be invited to discuss our goals for the ALEAP program, review post-secondary options and offer resources that will help them support their childrens' academic futures. College Cafe: Scheduled for the Spring of 2019. This is a general information session regarding college- readiness, the application process and financial aid. ELL Family Nights: We host three family nights for the families of ELL students. These events offer resources specific to the ELL experience, and the agendas are set in response to what parents report they need (e.g. free legal advice, information about the college application process through the DREAM Act, etc.) We also recognize the need to more closely partner with the community in providing training across all areas to support student success. Towards this end, in 2017-18, Abraham Lincoln High School developed a viable internship program. In the Fall semester, 19 students were placed in internships with 12 partners throughout the community; in Spring 2018, this program expanded to 43 students placed with 19 partners. For 2018-19, our target is 70 placements in the Fall with 22 partners and 75 placements in the Spring with 25 partners. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the "Outreach to Parents" section in the 2018-19 School Quality Guide will be at or above the borough average (4 points higher) and above the city average (2 points higher). 2018-19 SCEP-FF 32  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Establish SLC-based, PTA subcommittees to increase parent outreach. Provide relevant resources for parents at parent events to encourage participation. These resources will range from financial management to health and nutrition information and conversation classes for our parents who are new learners of English. Parents Sept, 2018 – June, 2019 Our automated phone system, School Messenger had added the capacity to provide a greater number of translations from English into numerous home languages. This will engage parents with Limited English Proficiency. Parents Begin June, 2016, cont through June 2019 We will revamp our records in order to be able to effectively update family contact information for both current students and alumni. The capacity to maintain accurate and accessible records will allow us to better serve the needs of our students while they are at Lincoln and beyond. Parents Sept, 2018 – June, 2019 Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Parent Coordinator, Assistant Principal of ENL, LAB/BESIS Coordinator Parent Coordinator, Assistant Principal ENL, Assistant Principal of Pupil Personnel Pupil Accounting Secretary, Program Chair, Assistant Program Chair Recruit students to serve as translators at Parent-Teacher Conferences and to represent the school at articulation events. Parents Sept , 2018 – June, 2019 Pupil Personnel Team Train teachers and faculty to more fully use our new website, www.alhs.nyc All faculty Sept 2018-June 2019 Assistant Principal, PPS 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. We partner with Follow Us to Success for several of our initiatives, including the College Office, ELL parent outreach, the Trailblazer program to help high-achieving students apply to competitive colleges, and our ALEAP program. Our partnership with Follow Us focuses on increasing the college success rate for graduates. We partner with College for All and Lead Higher Equal Opportunity Schools in our work to create greater college access and AP course access for our students. In addition, we partner with the Jewish Community Council of Greater Coney Island with our Horizons program, which offers tutoring, and college counseling to Lincoln students. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 2018-19 SCEP-FF 33  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We will use Title 1, Title III, and Priority/Focus funds to pay for parent events. During our Professional Learning Fridays, teachers will be trained in use of our website. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By the end of January, 2019, we will review attendance records for the PTA meetings, ELL Family Nights, and the College Access for All Evenings. We will also assess all outreach efforts and parent usage of our website and Pupil Path. We will also assess the success of the fall semester of internships and make necessary adjustments. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Attendance records of College Access for All workshops, PTA meetings, and ELL Family Nights. Usage records of website (alhs.nyc) and PupilPath. Internship records. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 34  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Formative, Interim and Summative Assessments; Mock Regents; NYS Regents results Formative, Interim and Summative Assessments; Mock Regents; NYS Regents results Formative, Interim and Summative Assessments; Mock Regents; NYS Regents results Formative, Interim and Summative Assessments; Mock Regents; NYS Regents results At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Students with disciplinary incidents; students with low attendance; under accredited students Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Tutoring; Regents review classes; scaffolds in class; Horizons; Read180, K-Class Curriculum Tutoring; Regents review classes; scaffolds in class; Horizons; Math180; Saturday School; SAGA Math program Tutoring; Regents review classes; scaffolds in class; Horizons; Saturday School Tutoring; Regents review classes; scaffolds in class; Horizons; Saturday School; Partnership with Kingsborough Community College Restorative Justice practices; Advisory groups; Academy interventions; PBIS; Pathways; Lutheran Health Clinic Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) One-to-One, When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Both during and after school Small Group One-to-One, Both during and after school Small Group One-to-One, Both during and after school Small Group One-to-One, Both during and after school Small Group One-to-One, Small Group Lunch periods; Advisory periods; After school 2018-19 SCEP-FF 35  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 20 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. We provide clothes, school supplies, and toiletries for all STH students. The attendance teacher, who is trained in all McKinney-Vento regulations and procedures provides them with support. In addition, all STH students meet regularly with a school social worker. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 36  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FF 37  Section 8: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. School administrators regularly attend recruiting events in order to fill vacancies with teachers who are already highly qualified for their positions. Great care is taken in arranging teacher programs to take advantage of the individual strengths and knowledge of all staff members. We strive to locate and hire individuals with dual certifications to serve our most at-risk populations (Instructional Support Students and English Language Learners). In addition, we have created a position for a Peer Collaborative Teacher who works closely with our UFT Teacher Center in creating and executing high quality professional development 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Establishment of a UFT Teaching Center in the building has led staff to an organic integrated professional learning environment for all teachers. The teacher in charge of the center is highly experienced, and produces a cyclic professional learning calendar each year. One of the four cycles of this calendar is a Professional Learning Workshop Day, in which 10-12 teacher designed and led workshops are provided for the ongoing development of all staff members. Workshops range in topic and progress in depth, ensuring that any teacher from the newest to the most experienced have an option which is relevant to their teaching assignments. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. na 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program 2018-19 SCEP-FF 38  Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). na Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. At Lincoln, teachers meet in Content Collaboration every Friday to plan the shared assessments that will be administered the next Friday. These assessments allow us to judge which skills have been understood by the students and which skills must be retaught. Teachers have received PD in using DDC to quickly review assessments. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (SCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) x x x N/A Column B Section Reference(s) 5C, 5E 5A, 5B, 5E N/A Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Title I Part A (Basic) Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Title II, Part A Federal Federal Federal Federal $1,449.471 $16,979 $368,740 0 2018-19 SCEP-FF 39  Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Local 0 $36,952 $11,624,300 N/A x x N/A 5B, 5E 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/SCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-2018-19 SCEP-FF 40  quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 41  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Abraham Lincoln High School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA) Act, is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Abraham Lincoln High School will support parents and families of Title I students by:  providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology;  providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and  decision making in support of the education of their children; fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress;  providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments;  sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand;  providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; 2018-19 SCEP-FF 42  The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will:  actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact;  engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills;  ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and  strategies as described in the school’s Parent InvolvementPolicy and the School-Parent Compact; support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills;  maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home;   provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report;  host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Elementary and Secondary School Act; schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help;    2018-19 SCEP-FF 43  The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement  holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference;  hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year;  encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; supporting or hosting Family Day events;   establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents;  encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers;  providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parentsinformed of their children’s progress;  developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress;  providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) [ Abraham Lincoln High School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA) Act, is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will 2018-19 SCEP-FF 44  share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. 1. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards;  using academic learning time efficiently;    offering high quality instruction in all content areas;  providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA) Act; Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships     conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education;  providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact;   providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information;  ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff 2018-19 SCEP-FF 45  Provide parents reasonable access to staff by:  ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents;  notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff  member; arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities;  planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents    creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents;   ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as  described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Elementary and Secondary School Act Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; 2. II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities  monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent;  ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games;     promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time;  encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child;   participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; 2018-19 SCEP-FF 46   communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested;   become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact;  participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child;   3. Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities       attend school regularly and arrive on time; complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; show respect for myself, other people and property; try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; always try my best to learn. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 47 Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components: 1. 2. 3. The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers. Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. 1. 2. 3. 4. High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” 1. Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences. Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. 1. These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 3 9 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 5 11 12 2018-19 SCEP-FF 48  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the · · · · · · rationale subgroups and grade levels of students to be served schedule and duration language of instruction # and types of certified teachers types of materials Begin description here: At Lincoln, we have a very diverse group of ELLs. We have just over 350 current ELL students and over 90 former ELLs who tested CM within the past two years. Among current ELLs, about a third are EN/EM, a third, TR, and a third EX. Our students speak twenty-six different languages. We aim to use our size and diversity as a strength. We want students to receive high-quality instruction in engaging activities that allow them to learn from one another, explore their interests, find a home in our community, and experience independent performance-based tasks that build their confidence as scholars. To this end, we would like to use our Title III LEP money to continue our already successful Regents-based tutoring and continue to improve on this year's Language Expedition Clubs. These programs will occur outside the student's regular school day and will supplement and enrich their school-day experience. Parents will be notified by mail, in English and their home language, and also at our first ELL Family Night, where interpreters will be available. All of these programs would be offered to students in grades 9-12. Regents-Based Tutoring (After-School and Saturdays) We already provide Regents tutoring to ELLs12 from 11/24/18 to 1/19/19 and 5/18/19 to 6/15/19, skipping 12/22/18, 12/29/18 and 5/25/19, (3 hours x 11 weeks = 33 hours; 33 x 5 subjects = 165 teacher hours). Tutoring is open to all grade levels, 9 through 12. Students will receive support in their home languages through language partners, dictionaries, audio translations and iPad translators, as they do in our regular classes. Teachers will submit attendance for every tutoring session in order to get paid. Ms. Baumfeld will use the attendance sheets and other student performance records to monitor the effectiveness of the program. AP Supervision for Saturday School (3 hours x 11 weeks = 33 supervisor hours) Language Expedition Clubs These clubs are designed to build academic language skills, provide a welcoming environment for all ELLs, introduce students to topics and places they might not otherwise see, and build their confidence as independent scholars. All Expedition Clubs will be based on a curriculum designed to build student's academic language skills. Expedition Clubs will culminate in a project that requires students to work together and present a project that demonstrates what they have learned through speaking and writing. These clubs are open to all grade levels, 9 through 12. Students will receive support in their home languages through language partners, dictionaries, audio translations and iPad translators, as they do in our regular classes. Teachers will submit attendance for every club meeting in order to get paid. Ms. Baumfeld will use the attendance sheets and other student performance records to monitor the effectiveness of the program. ELL Leaders - Students who wish to develop leadership skills tutor peers, do leader-building activities, and go on trips to build community, practice English and gain confidence. (with Ms. Gomez) Cultural Celebration Club - A group designed to celebrate all cultures represented in the ENL Academy through celebration, crafts, trips, and performance. (with Ms. L. Zhang) Acting Studio Students will co-write and produce a play which will be performed for a live audience! (with Mr. Majmin ) 2018-19 SCEP-FF 49  Previous Next Per session Per diem Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Per Session Costs: Each club meets once a week and participates in one Saturday for a trip or celebration. (1 hr x 42 weeks + 3 hrs x 1 Saturday = 45 hours per year. 45 hours x 3 club leaders = 135 teacher hours) Saturday programs require an AP Supervision in the building (3 hours x 2 Saturdays = 6 supervisor hours) OTPS for Direct Instruction: Each Expedition club will receive $1500 for approved expenses (total: $4500) We will spend $1900.00 on approved supplies for tutoring such as books, notebooks, writing utensils, calculators, chart paper, markers, whiteboards, etc. This will depend on what teachers report they need to make the best use of tutoring sessions. Compare Versions: · · $46,286 · · $34,517 589 teacher hours at $53 rate + 60 supervisor hours at $55 rate · $0 · · · $11385 $0 $0 $0 $49742 Must be supplemental. Additional curricula, instructional materials. Must be clearly listed. High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. · · · · · Begin description here: rationale teachers to receive training schedule and duration topics to be covered name of provider 2018-19 SCEP-FF 50  Part C: Professional Development Our department has three main goals for Professional Development. We would like to use our PD budget to develop as team leaders and teaching professionals, update and refine our curriculum for ELLs, and develop better practices as co-teachers. The teachers providing the PD will seek outside PD. This outside PD is TBD because we have not yet identified an organization, but when we do, these lead teachers will have the administration's support in attending outside PD to support ELL-specific in-school PD. 1. Teaching Our Coworkers About Best Practices for ELLs Six of our ENL teachers will each present a school-wide PL on Best Strategies for ELLs. (Ms. Edwards, Ms. Kharlashkina, Ms. Zak, Ms. Azam, Ms. Li, Ms. Zhang). Each of these teachers will have two hours for planning. (6 presenters x 2 hours = 12 teacher hours) Teachers will need to submit timecards and upload PL presentations to our shared drive in order to get paid. These PDs happen every fourth Friday of the month from 12:45-2:30 pm, as part of the school's "Menu PL" days, where teachers choose from a menu of teacher-led workshops. 2. Improving Our Curriculum A team of four ELL teachers and the AP ENL (Ms. Edwards, Ms. Schnall, Mr. Nemenz and Ms. Baumfeld) will work to standardize curriculum, put all curriculum online, create resources for creating better curriculum for ELLs, and plan and lead PLs on writing quality curriculum for ELLs one with teachers to review and improve curriculum units. The group will meet four times a year for one hour at a time, and each participant will receive 4 hours to finish projects started in committee (3 teachers x 12 hours = 36 teacher hours; 1 supervisor x 4 hours = 4 supervisor hours) All meetings will be recorded using agendas, attendance sheets and minutes, and teachers will need to submit timecards and upload created curriculum to our shared drive in order to get paid for Curriculum Development. The meetings will occur on the second Tuesday of October, November, December, and February, after school. 3. Getting Better at Co-Teaching Our three co-teaching teams will meet with Ms. Baumfeld plan throughout the year, in addition to shared planning time during the day. (6 x 1 + 10 planning hours x 6 teachers = 96 teacher hours, 6 x 1 = 6 supervisor hours) These groups will meet on the third Wednesday of September, October, November, February, March, and April, after school. In case of a vacation, they will meet the following Wednesday. OTPS for Professional Development: We do not have any OTPS expenses for Professional Development. rationale schedule and duration topics to be covered name of provider how parents will be notified of these activities Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. · · · · · Begin description here: We currently run three parent events each year, and we would like to continue to improve these events. We consider parent feedback in planning these events, and so the topics can vary based on the feedback we receive. Past topics have included college admissions, SAT prep, immigration legal support, information about scholarships, and ENL classes for families. For each event, we have an average of two faculty and five interpreters, and so the bulk of our money 2018-19 SCEP-FF 51  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities will be spent on funding supportive staff to welcome and assist families so they can get the most out of these events. We do also provide food, school supplies with Lincoln logos, and SAT prep books as ways to welcome parents and thank them for being involved in our community. (2 faculty x 3 events x 2 hours per event = 12 hours) Each of these events occurs on the first Wednesday of the month (for October, December, and April) and runs from 5:30-7:30 pm. We partner with Follow Us to Success for college information sessions. The rest of the workshops are planned by Lincoln staff, including the AP ENL (Ms. Baumfeld) and the guidance counselor assigned to the ENL Academy (Ms. Khan). Our mailing go out in our top ten languages, and we will keep a record of these flyers and the mailing list used to inform parents. We will use attendance sheets to keep a record of who attends our Family Nights. The Agendas and Powerpoint presentations used at these events will be uploaded onto our Shared Drive. In addition, hard copies will be filed in Ms. Dame's office. In order to organize these events, we would like to pay one point person on staff to make sure all materials are translated and that parents are informed multiple ways (phone, mail, web) in a timely fashion. (1 support person x 3 events x 2 hours per event = 6 hours) We also plan to offer ENL classes for families on the same Saturdays we have classes for students. These will run Saturdays from 11/24/18 to 1/19/19 and 5/18/19 to 6/15/19, skipping 12/22/18, 12/29/18 and 5/25/19 OTPS for Parent Engagement: We will budget $750 for stamps and envelopes, $1500 for food and supplies to welcome parents, and $1250 for interpreters at these events. (TOTAL - $3000) Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 609 teacher hours at $55.23 rate + 49 supervisor hours at $56.79 rate books, notebooks, writing utensils, calculators, chart paper, markers, whiteboards, $36,418 $0 $9,868 Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) 1. 2. Purchased services 1. Per session Per diem High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials 2. Must be supplemental. Additional curricula, instructional materials. Must be clearly listed. 3. 4. Educational Software (Object Code 199) $0 2018-19 SCEP-FF 52 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Travel Other TOTAL $0 $0 $46286 2018-19 SCEP-FF 53  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 21 School Name Abraham Lincoln High School Borough Brooklyn School Number 410 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Ari A. Hoogenboom Coach ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Stephanie Edwards Teacher/Subject Area Karen Li/Math Teacher/Subject Area Related-Service Provider type here Superintendent Michael Prayor Assistant Principal Alyson Dame Coach School Counselor Naela Khan Parent Parent Coordinator Kimberly Taylor Field Support Center Staff Member Aaron Perez Other (Name and Title) Kelly Ritchie, BESIS Crdntr. C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 8 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 2072 2018-19 SCEP-FF 54 Total number of ELLs 387 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 18.68%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 2 4 3 K Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? We use teacher-created assessments aligned to the skills found in the NYSESLAT in addition to EDAT data about the NYSESLAT itself. In CPT meetings, Inquiry groups analyze these assessments to identify gaps in student understanding. In the past year, we identified writing as an area of high need. We used this information to plan our Inquiry Initiatives for the year: thematic units ending in Regents-based essay tasks. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? The ENL Academy includes all teachers who teach ELLs and we meet twice a week for CPT. Each Friday, we have "Assessment Fridays" in which every teacher gathers evidence of student understanding using shared assessments. This gives us student work to consider and helps keeps conversations meaningful. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 55  3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We use several data points to evaluate the success of our program. Two major metrics are our NYSESLAT scores and our Regents pass rates, particularly in math and English because they drive AYP. Other important data points which we consider are pass rates and progress toward graduation, interim assessments and progress within the year, and the number of parents meaningfully involved throughout the year, as measured by attendance and survey results. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? CPT meetings, Friday Content Collaboration meetings, and a Curriculum Committee that assists the whole ENL Academy in adapting curriculum to meet the needs identified in summative assessments. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] n/a 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. We use the NYSESLAT and the ELA Regents to decide how to program students. Students in an EN/EM/TR band receive ICT teaching in two classes (including one ENL/ELA ICT class), and EN/EM students receive a stand-alone ENL class as well. Our EN/CM students have one ICT core content course. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? ENL Academy CPT, coordinated efforts among ELL AP and the Curriculum Committee, ongoing adjustments to programming. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. In the ninth-grade, students are scheduled into a "block" based on level. We have one EN/EM/TR block of students and one block of EN/CM ENL students. The EN/EM/TR block has an ENL teacher in two of their classes, who helps to teach language acquisition through content. The EX/CM block follows a General Ed schedule, including one co-taught class in ELA. All ninth-grade EN/EM/TR ENL classes meet in 73-minute periods. Entering and Emerging 9th graders receive a Stand-Alone ENL class in addition to their Integrated content courses. In the 10 th , 11 th , and 12 th grades, EN/EM/TR students are programmed into ungraded, heterogenous ELL classes where content and language instruction are fully blended. Among these students, EN/EM students also receive a standalone ENL class in addition to their regular schedule. EX/CM students in the three upper grades take most classes with the general population, but have Integrated instruction in Social Studies. b. TBE program. If applicable. n/a c. DL program. If applicable. n/a 2018-19 SCEP-FF 56  2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? For our EN/EM/TR 9 th graders: These students are with an ENL-certified teacher for two block classes: an ELA class and a Social Studies class. Each of these periods meets for 365 minutes per week, for a total of 730 minutes. For our EN/EM/TR 10 th , 11 th and 12th graders, students are in two classes taught by a content teacher and an ENL-certified teacher. Currently, ENL teachers push into the English and Social Studies classes for these students. In addition, our EN/EM students take one stand-alone ENL class. Our EX/CM students take most of their classes with the general ed population, but receive one Integrated class a day, co-taught by an ENL and ELA teacher in 9th grade, and an ENL and Social Studies teacher in grade 10, 11, and 12. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. For the past four years, all of our teacher attended Project RISE PD designed to help Lincoln learn from the best practices of NYC's International Schools. As a result of this collaboration, we have adopted several key principles for ENL instruction. Our teachers work to create lessons that use group work and project-based learning to engage students in all four modalities of language, we use home language strategically to help students engage with rigorous, grade-level content, and our teachers plan together in order to fuse content and language instruction. Our classes are mixed-level, and our ENL teachers work closely with content teachers to provide scaffolds so that all students can meaningfully engage in the lessons. All instruction at Lincoln High School is aligned to the Common Core standards. Stand-alone ESL classes focus on project-based learning, and each unit culminates in a project designed to teach language and address a known area of need in a Regents subject. All content courses use CCSS-aligned curriculum. This is true within the ENL department and throughout Lincoln High School. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? When available, students are given Regents exams in their home languages. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Within the classroom, the ENL and content teacher plan for all levels, which means that both texts and tasks are differentiated. We often use project-based learning to create group projects that engage all students, but with different tasks designed for different learning needs. The scaffolds provided are meant to create access to rigorous, grade-level content for ALL students. Because they take place within content-based classes, they can include rigorous critical thinking tasks within the content that push our Expanding students to take on new and more varied language tasks. We also realize that Entering students, Long Term ELLs, and SIFE students may need supplemental instruction, and so we use Title III money to provide after-school and Saturday instruction designed especially for students who need support in either literacy or basic English language proficiency. The Salvadori Project is an afterschool program that teaches STEM content and skills through hands-on, project-based learning. We offer this program to our Entering, Emerging, and Transitioning ELL students in order for them to work on speaking and listening modalities, engage with grade-appropriate critical thinking tasks, as well as to introduce them to 2018-19 SCEP-FF 57  opportunities in STEM fields. SIFE and Newcomer students receive 1:1 iPads, ST Math support, support with Achieve3000, Lincoln Center theater programs to practice spoken language, and a Salvadori curriculum designed to support ELLs with hands-on STEM activities. Developing ELLs have access to all of those supports and rigorous Regents-based classes designed to prepare them to graduate college-and-career ready. They also are offered a designated class for TR ELLs who need extra support developing independent study skills. Long-Term ELLs have access to 1:1 technology and programs like ST Math and Achieve3000 to build academic skills. They are included in our ELL-specific Advisory program, where non-academic factors to their success are openly discussed and addressed. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Teachers use Achieve 3000 to differentiate reading instruction. They also regularly create graphic organizers and adapt text by chunking, adding vocabulary support, etc. These teachers meet with our AP ISS, David Robinson, to brainstorm ISS strategies best suited for the students in their class. Specific examples of a tool we use with ELL-SWDs is Playposit, where students can learn content at their own pace using videos, and OneNote, where students can dictate text and have text dictated to them. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Students are provided specific supports identified in their IEPs. We use technological tools like Microsoft Teams to create specific projects appropriate for the learning needs of individual ELL-SWD students. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Two examples of target groups are our 11th-grade advisories and our INquiry target group. The 11th-grade advisories target 11th-grade students who are on track fro credits, but falling behind in Regents. These stduents meet monthly in an Advisory group to develop a path to college and receive both academic and social supports, e.g. guided college searches and Regents prep courses. Our Inquiry target groups are composed of students who have not progressed on the NYSESLAT for two or more years. Teachers will spend the entire year looking closely at their writing and adapting instruction to try to help these students. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We have found that our students tend to begin to fail classes at the beginning of their junior year. We hypothesize that they may lose hope after failing Regents at the end of their tenth-grade year. Next year, a concerted effort will be made to off incoming juniors faculty buddies and after-school tutoring that targets exactly what they need to learn for the Regents. We have a successful school-wide "Senior Buddy" program and we want to create a similar "Junior Buddy" program for our ELLs. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? We are not discontinuning any programs. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Our Pathway Coordinator, Yamilet Gomez, is working with our AP ENL, Alyson Dame, and our Academy Director, Jennifer Baumfeld, to plan three parent orientation nights. At the first of these, there will be coaches and student club advisors on hand to discuss with parents the opportunities available to their child. In addition, Ms. Gomez runs an ELL Leaders club and we 2018-19 SCEP-FF 58  use that as a forum to hear from students how we could better involve ELLs in the life of the school. We also receive a grant from the DOE to support our school musical, and that grant is specifically designed to encourage more ELL and SWD involvement. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. We use Achieve3000 to build literacy skills. We have word-to-word dictionaries in all the languages our students speak. Every classroom is equipped with a Promethean Board or a Smartboard that allows us to integrate visuals and video into our lessons, and to use online translating services to address misunderstandings during the lesson. We often use iPads and students always have the option to sign out an iPad for the day if it will help them. In addition, we are promoting the use of PlayPosit, Thinglink, and Microsoft Learning Tools in OneNote, all of which offer digital tools to help ELLs. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Through Project RISE PD, ENL teachers are trained in strategic grouping and in the benefits of strategic uses of home languages. Whenever possible, students are able to work out a complex or abstract idea in their home language before articulating their thought in English. All students have access to word-to-word dictionaries, and teachers provide translations of key terms in students' home languages. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Our ENL classes adapt content and material from the general education curriculum. The content is not simplified; it is scaffolded. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? We use Achieve3000 to build literacy skills. We have word-to-word dictionaries in all the languages our students speak. Every classroom is equipped with a Promethean Board that allows us to integrate visuals and video into our lessons, and to use online translating services to address misunderstandings during the lesson. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Kelly Ritchie, our BESIS Coordinator, welcomes parents and gives them information about our program and their academic options. She personally introduces students and their families to Naela Khan, our ENL Guidance Counselor. Once students have begun, they have access to our Academy Room, which is a space for tutoring, doing work, and community events. Yamilet Gomez, our Pathway Coordinator, oversees this space and is an informal mentor to all ENL students. Three times a year, we offer Parent Nights specifically for the families of ENLs. Parents of newly-arrived ELLs can learn about all the opportunities at Lincoln at these events. We publicize these events in students' home languages through back-packed letters, mailed letters, and phone blasts. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? We offer Spanish and Chinese classes at Lincoln. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 59  In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? n/a Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? At Lincoln, every Friday is a PD day. Teachers work together in Content Collaboration three times a month, and on the fourth Friday, the teachers put on about 12 workshops, and their peers choose two to attend. For every one of the Friday PLs, the ENL Academy offers a teacher-led workshop about teaching practices pertaining to ELLs. In addition, we use Title II funds to support teacher teams that meet regularly to work on ELL curriculum and improving our co-teaching practices. Finally, the ENL Academy meets in CPT twice a week and engages in Inquiry and Lesson Studies. Lincoln uses CCSS-aligned "Task Bundles" in all content areas, and teachers are well aware of the standards. The NYSESLAT has shifted our ENL instruction into greater alignment with the Common Core Standards. While explicit PD on the standards themselves is no longer urgently necessary, all of our PD assumes adherence to CCSS, and new instructional inititiatives are always considered in light of the Common Core standards they address. Non-pedagogic staff receive PD through the BFSC as appropriate. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Our 9 th -graders are part of an academy structure. They travel with the same class all day, and a team of teachers meets daily to address their progress. We have two academies that house ELLs: the Expanding 9 th -grade ELLs are part of our Ninth Grade Academy and the Entering, Emerging and Transitioning ELLs are part of our ELL Academy. ELL teachers get at least half of their PL in-house and this PL is dedicated to teaching ELLs. ENL teachers meet in CPT twice a week and the Pathway Coordinator uses these meetings to look at data specific to our ELL students and discuss instructional strategies for helping our ELL students. Dolan Morgan from Project RISE comes once a week to work with teachers on strategies that have worked at NYC's International Schools for ELLs. Also, once a month, all ELL teachers and content teachers who work on ELL ICT teams meet together to discuss best practices for ELL ICT. Teachers also choose to attend several PL sessions of their choice, and many of these sessions also address ELLs specifically. In order to make sure th staff as a whole also has access to PD specific to ELLs, we make sure to offer several ELL-specific PD options during our "Menu PD Fridays." Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Kelly Ritchie, our BESIS Coordinator, sends each family an invitation in their preferred language. The family may come on their given date or request to reschedule. The meeting is with a parent, the student, and at least one teacher. Others, such as a guidance counselor, may attend depending on the case of the child. At the meetings, we provide an interpreter if there is a staff member available who speaks the family's language. If not, we call Interpretation Services to make sure we can 2018-19 SCEP-FF 60  understand one another. In the meetings, we discuss the student's progress on recent NYSESLAT exams, as well as discussing progrss in classes through a mastery-based grading lens. Parents are made aware of all the extracurricular opportunities for ELLs, such as the Salvadori program or our Actor's Studio theater group. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. We host three Parent Orientation nights specifically for parents of ELLs. At these meetings, parents receive information about other school activities in their preferred language. Parents are also invited to cultural events coordinated by our student clubs, such as a celebration of Nazruv, an Uzbeki holiday. And, on Saturadys, we provide ENL classes for family members of ELL students. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. n/a 2018-19 SCEP-FF 61 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Ari Hoogenboom, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 62  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Abraham Lincoln High School School DBN: 21K410 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Ari A. Hoogenboom Title Principal Alyson Dame Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator Stephanie Edwards ENL/Bilingual Teacher Karen Li Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Irina Katsyf School Counselor Michael Prayor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 SCEP-FF 63  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 21K410 School Name: Abraham Lincoln High School Superintendent: Michael Prayor The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Alyson Dame AP Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. We use our HLIS forms and the HL listed in the RESI to determine the language we use to communicate with given families. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral ENGLISH 1177 57.84 1161 57.05 2018-19 SCEP-FF 64  SPANISH RUSSIAN URDU ARABIC BENGALI UZBEK CHINESE ANY HAITIAN CREOLE UKRAINIAN TAJIK FRENCH GEORGIAN PUNJABI ITALIAN TURKISH TWI ALBANIAN ARMENIAN BURMESE FULANI NAHUATL VIETNAMESE JAMAICAN-CREOLE PASHTO SLOVAK CANTONESE MANDARIN QUICHE 285 149 125 93 39 38 37 36 9 7 6 6 4 3 3 3 2 2 2 2 2 2 1 1 1 0 0 0 14 7.32 6.14 4.57 1.92 1,87 1.82 1.77 0.44 0.34 0.29 0.29 0.2 0.15 0.15 0.15 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.05 0.05 0.05 0 0 0 283 154 137 95 38 38 28 35 9 7 6 6 4 3 3 3 2 2 2 2 2 2 1 1 1 5 5 1 13.91 7.57 6.73 4.67 1.87 1.87 1.38 1.72 0.44 0.34 0.29 0.29 0.2 0.15 0.15 0.15 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.05 0.05 0.05 0.25 0.25 0.05 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. n/a Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 65  Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to Info Sheet for Families School Calendar September September Bridge Program Information May PTA Meeting Schedule once a month parents. DOE Translation service DOE Translation service DOE Translation service in-house bilingual staff 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Parent-Teacher Conferences twice a year ELL Family Nights October, December, April PTA Meetings once a month Family Welcome Nights for Incoming Students May or June interpretation service(s)? We use the Over-the-Phone interpretation service provided by teh DOE. We hire interpreters from Big Word using out Translation and Interpretation budget. We pay bilingual staff per session to provide interpretation services. We pay bilingual staff per session to provide interpretation services. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Our School Messenger system offers translations. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. All staff are made aware of the Chancellor's Regulation before the start of school and get reminders before each Parent Teacher conference night that parents have a right to communicate about their child in their preferred language, and are given a reminder about how to use over-the-phone translation service. Additionally, teachers are trained on Remind, a messaging app that offers a translation service. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 66  Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Any flyer about an event that features interpreters will be both translated itself and include an announcement about the availability of interpreters. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? We will use the informal method of event surveys and the formal method of the NYC School Survey to monitor how effective parents feel our outreach has been. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 67 
