 14K586 School Name: LYONS COMMUNITY SCHOOL Principal: KAREN ONISHI 2018-19 SCEP-FL 1  School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Section 4: SCEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Lyons Community School 14K586 331400011586 6-12 School Number (DBN): 223 Graham Avenue, Brooklyn, NY 11206 718-782-0918 718-782-5283 Phone Number: Fax: Taeko Onishi taeko@lyonscommunityschool.org School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 14 Superintendent’s Office Address: Email Address: Taeko Onishi Wuta Onda Ruth Tapia Margarita Jimenez Minerva Cantor Jaime Huezo Elmer Hernandez Carlos Sanchez District Information Kathy Pelles Superintendent: 335 Adams Street, Brooklyn, NY 11201 krehfield@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-923-5181 Phone Number: Fax: 718-923-5145 Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 3  Affinity FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Alexandra Anormaliza Executive Director: 131 Livingston Street, Brooklyn, NY Aanorma@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-935-5618 Phone Number: 718-935-5941 Fax: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the SCEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) TaekoOnishi WutaOnda Ruth Tapia Jessica Figueroa Jaime Huezo Elmer Hernandez Carlos Sanchez HectorSanchez *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Administrator 2018-19 SCEP-FL 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Karen Achaia JaquelineCruz Jody Madell Brian McCormack Sheba Extavour Margarita Jimenez x x x x x Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/Parent Member/Parent Member / Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 SCEP-FL 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) is a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. The process of developing and implementing the SCEP is aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding SCEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and SCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 7  In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement 2018-19 SCEP-FL 8  NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the SCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the SCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for SCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 9   Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 5: Build consensus around activities, strategies and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 6: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 7: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 10  Section 4: SCEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Lyons is entering its 12th year, but continues to be committed to our initial vision. We emphasize three aspects of our program, that intersect like the three curves of our logo, the triskilion. ● New Experiences and Ideas: We believe students learn best when given the opportunity to have engaging experiences. Our signature class, Field Studies, where students are out of the building one afternoon each week to study at various sites across the city, continues to develop and improve each year. It is becoming increasingly inquiry-based, academically challenging and cohesive. ● Being Known, as a person and student: To whatever extent possible, we work to personalize our work with young people to meet their particular and ever changing needs. We pay attention to the strengths and vulnerabilities of our students, and adapt our work to their academic and social-emotional needs. ● Community: We work to build a community where everyone is cared for, and takes responsibility for the others in the community. For that reason, we are a Restorative Justice school and continually work to find the balance between individual and community. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. In addition to initiatives and practices mentioned above, the following are worth highlighting: ● Recognition for our work in Restorative Justice: recipient of City Council funding to mentor other schools in RJ work, prominent feature in documentary “Growing Fairness” by Teachers Unite, a piece on This American Life in October 2014, invitation to present at numerous conferences and panels for both staff and students, visitors from across the country to learn from our work. ● Increased teacher-student feedback and support through use of technological systems, such as family communication through Skedula, Google Classroom, google apps and widespread use of Chromebooks. ● NYS Consortium Schools program: We joined the Consortium four years ago to become one of the Regents exempt schools, allowing us to more actively pursue our inquiry-based instructional core. We have always had significant performance based assessments at the end of many Field Studies units, but in the 2014-2015 school year we also had our first school wide Roundtables in all four core classes, grades 6-12 in both January and June. This year, 2018-2019, we continue our school wide Roundtables, and the class of 2019 will be the third class of seniors to will graduate with "all PBATs" by demonstrating proficiency on graduation level PBATs in all four core subject areas in addition to the ELA regents and required coursework. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Lyons is committed to serving a high needs population. This not only means students whose families qualify for free/reduced lunch, but having a higher percentage of students who are court-involved, living in public housing, STH, students with incarcerated family members. To serve this community we involve social service partnerships to support their various life needs. ENL students receive instructional supports in accordance with CR Part 154 through Stand-Alone ENL instruction and Integrated instruction in ELA and Core Content areas. Students with Disabilities will receive ICT, SETTS, Speech Services, Counseling, Physical Therapy and One-on-One Paraprofessional Support in accordance with the needs outlined in their IEPs. Teachers will regularly discuss student progress and communicate with families through the use of our online grading system which offers capabilities for standards-based grading, Skedula, with a particular focus on the needs of students in the lowest third. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 11  4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Our strength as a community is trust and effective school leadership coming in the form of collaborative teachers and a supportive environment. In the coming year we are focusing on improving our student academic outcomes through both PBATs and our middle school benchmarks. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 12  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 14K586 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08,09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 496 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 5 5 7 8 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 46 41 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 89.0% % Attendance Rate 87.7% % Reduced Lunch 13.5% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.0% 59.3% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 2.6% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 11.26 7% 15% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 15.5% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 69% 5% 64.2% 0.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No No Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups - Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities N/A NO N/A NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A YSH N/A N/A NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient N/A YES N/A N/A No N/A 151 147 3 83.0% 2.2% 24.8% 37.1% 1.0% 0.0% 2 28% 5.8 6.5% 30% 55% 3% 78.8% 8% N/A No Yes NO N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 13  Economically Disadvantaged YES ALL STUDENTS YES 2018-19 SCEP-FL 14  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed x x x x Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. We are a NYS focus school because of our low MS exam scores and HS graduation rate. Looking at our recent NYC School Quality Guides, similar trends are apparent. In June 2014 we had our all time low graduation rate of 46%, and in the subsequent years we had graduation rates of 64.8% in 2015, 65.4% in 2016 and 65.4% in 2017, and 70.7% in 2018. In June 2014 we also joined the NYS Performance Consortium. Our first cohort of students to graduate with PBATs were in June 2016, and with all four PBATs in 2017. In order to improve our graduation rate, we must improve our students' abilities to do competent PBAT work in all four core subject areas (math, ELA, science and social studies). We must also make sure this work is aligned to the Common Core expectations that will enable greater success for our MS students on their state exams, and builds up over the six or seven years to produce strong PBAT work. Our focus must also continue to be making this work increasingly rigorous, providing our students with more opportunity to be college ready, not just to graduate. On our MS state exams for 2016-17, we had 6.2% of our students at Level 3 or 4 in ELA, but only 0.7% of our students scored Level 3 or 4 in mathematics. In 2017-18 we achieved 14.7% proficiency in ELA and 6.9% in Mathematics. While these scores are not yet where we need them to be, this improvement is the result of more targeted academic support, and a more unified program for MS literacy across all the subject areas and use of Connected Mathematics to unify our 2018-19 SCEP-FL 15  math program. This makes it even more important to integrate the CC work for both mathematics and ELA into our Roundtable work, which are the cumulative presentations an projects done by our students each semester in each core content area. Our average ELA proficiency in 2017 was 2.19 and 2.31 in 2018. In order to continue to improve students' reading proficiency, based on research, PD and piloting a smaller scale program last year, we implemented a literacy initiative that includes regular reading assessments, intervention of multiple types, and double blocks of ELA for 6th graders, and across the MS this year. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will successfully implement 'first year' implementation with MSQI to improve student literacy, and performance across the entire Middle School. As a result of this initiative, and other MS literacy work, we are aiming for 23% of our students to achieve either 3s or 4s on the MS ELA State Exam in the Spring of 2019. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 16  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff)  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). MS teachers will implement various aspects of MSQI literacy initiative, including reading interventions, independent reading, guided reading and regular tiered assessments aligned to the MS State exam. This includes the first round of DRP (Degrees of Reading Power) assessments, secondary assessments (Fountas and Pinnell Running Records) for students who score below a certain score on the DRP, common literacy strategies across ELA, reading/writing, social studies and science using Accountable Talk and the Kylene Beers' Notice and Note signposts work. From our initial DRP assessment we have 15 students (10%) of our students at grade level, and another 16% approaching grade level. Teachers July – Oct 2018 Department chairs The second round of DRP (Degrees of Reading Power) assessments will be give. Teachers will continue to implement literacy strategies mentioned above, and include this work in January Roundtables. To reach our goal of 23% proficiency in this year's state exams, we aim to be at 18% on or above grade level on our midyear DRP assessment. Professional Development for the MS literacy team will continue throughout the year, focusing on Accountable Talk, Reciprocal Teaching, Notice and Note strategies, and use of assessments in lesson and unit planning. Post MS Exams, teachers will continue to implement the literacy strategies practiced and honed over the year, using assessments and coaching feedback as well as inquiry work done in departments and through intervisitations to solidify practices, and finish the year with final DRP assessments. Our final DRP assessment should demonstrated at least 23% of our students on or above grade level. All students, teachers Jan 2019 Literacy teachers, MSQI coach and coordinator Teachers October 2018 – May 2019 MSQI coach and MSQI coordinator teachers May/June 2019 MSQI coach and coordinator 2018-19 SCEP-FL 17  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Families will attend a Curriculum Night, and three subsequent Conference events have access to Skedula, and be called and/or texted on a regular basis about the student's academic work. The primary contact person on staff for families will be the student's advisor. Advisors will have regular contact with families, and will discuss curriculum and student progress. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. PD time during department meetings, coaching support, Consortium resources and materials for PBATs, planning meeting time for PBAT/Roundtable (task assessments) planning, alternate schedule for Roundtable Week both in January and June. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded X P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding X C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Based on last year exam data point of 14.7% ELA proficiency and this year's initial DRP 10% on or above grade level measure, and our goal of 23% proficiency on the Spring 2019 ELA exam, we are aiming to have 18% of our students on or above grade level when we do our mid-year DRP in January 2019, and at 23% or higher when we do the final DRP assessment in June. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Kiwi MSQI tracker and dashboard. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 18  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. x x x x SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? On our 2017-18 Learning Environment Survey 81% of our students thought that most or all of their teachers wanted them to be better thinkers, not memorizers, 93% agreed that their teachers respect their cultural background, 92% said they felt safe in classes, and 74% said most or all their teachers gave specific suggestions on how to do better in class. 92% of our students agreed or strongly agreed that they feel safe in their classes, 82% agreed or strongly agreed that they feel safe in hallways, bathrooms, locker rooms and the cafeteria, and 68% of students agreed or strongly agreed that discipline is applied fairly at school. At the same time, only 46% of our students believed most or all of their teachers support them when they are upset. Through our classroom, hallway, and common space observations, interviews with teachers, youth advocates, students, and families, and feedback from our most recent Quality Review in 2015-16, it became clear that though we were making progress on creating an environment that students felt part of as a community, and reducing punitive consequences across the school, but we needed to formalize many of the measures we were using informally in order to be consistent across the school. During the 2017-18 school year we improved the use of School-Wide Practices Student Handbooks in order to clarify expectations for how to continue to build our Supportive Environment, to be more 2018-19 SCEP-FL 19  transparent with students and families, and to improve communication among all stakeholders. We continue to focus on Restorative Justice through resolving conflicts between students with peer mediators, use of Restorative Circles and Reconciliation Conversations, Collaborative Problem Solving (CPS), Justice Panel and other methods. Building positive community through Advisory is also a cornerstone of our program. Due in a large part to the high number of vulnerable youth at our school, there are still too many altercations between students, arguments between students and staff, and unruly behavior in classrooms for students to feel 100% safe, supported, and challenged to learn to their fullest capacity. As we work to address this, we work to ensure that students and staff alike understand the overlaps between restorative and punitive measures. This year, we will continue to work to build common language among students, families and staff around Restorative Justice practices and by more explicitly identifying and celebrating positive behaviors by actively articulating and discussing our 'Core Values' with students. We continue to formalize our Peer Mediation Program through Restorative Justice classes where students are trained in Restorative Practices and serve as peer mediators and/or Justice panel members. We changed our student information systems to a standards based grading program, Skedula, with a robust referral system, but are moving back to Skedula with their improved tracking and communication systems, including automated texting of families. We'll still be able to track positive anecdotes aligned to the Core Values, and will document narratives of parent contact, behavioral incidents, restorative interventions and other follow up. Using this system, Advisors, and any staff member who is logged on, will be able to view students' progress on learning standards, attendance and all of logged information related to the student in order to better inform daily interactions, parent communication and intra-school communication, allowing us to be more clear and aligned in our communication with students and families. To better support teachers in communicating more effectively to Intervention Team and Administration, a subsection of the Joint Steering Committee revised and clarified the Behavior Response System to more clearly identify and define student infractions as either Level 1: Disruption, Level 2: Disrespect, or Level 3: Threatening Safety, the most appropriate response and intervention for each incident type, how it should be communicated, and who will respond. The Intervention Team has also developed two structures for communicating back to staff resolutions to referrals: a daily rundown/email blast, and a weekly update on referral response progress. Once a month, the Intervention Team will review referrals at the Middle School and High School levels with the purpose of identifying repeat offenders, to create more targeted intervention for the goal of changing behaviors and reducing referral rates. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools –Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will see at least a 20% decrease in incidents from the 2017-18 school year. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 20 Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Assistant Principals, Principal, Restorative Justice Coordinators, Restorative Justice Liaisons (grade team representatives), Middle School and High School Guidance Counselors, School Social Worker Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Train staff on the use of Skedula for reporting student behavior infractions aligned to our three-tier system for classifying behavior infractions, and corresponding response. September - October 2018 Teachers, YAs, RJCs Counselors, Grade Team Leaders Each grade team has an RJ Liaison or RJ Coordinator who is responsible for ensuring that follow-up for intervention requests has taken place and has been documented. This includes organizing student-led restorative justice interventions called "Peer Assists", family meetings and other methods. Intervention Team (RJCs, YAs, AP) will meet daily to review open referrals and execute or delegate follow-up. (Ongoing throughout the year.) Convene a bi-weekly PPT to field referrals from the Grade Team Leaders of students who are most at risk of not promoting for behavioral and academic reasons (ongoing throughout the year). The PPT will make recommendations for further student support, including: administration/family interveantions, planning interviews, student program changes, SBST referrals, counseling referrals. Improve common advisory and circle structures in grades 6 - 12 through more support from the RJ coordinators, and the guidance support team. Creation of a support system for students (vulnerable youth) repeated committing Level III infractions that include a teacher, member of guidance team, and member of RJ or All students September 2018 - June 2019 Intervention Team, Advisory teachers, Counselors, Admin 2018-19 SCEP-FL 21  administrative team to oversee a personalized plan for the student. This team would track the number of Skedula referrals each of those students are getting. Improve grade level Restorative structures, and HS interns (10-12) for Restorative Justice. We have added the use of Peer Assists to simplify the work of Justice Panel and allow for more students to be involved in the process. The Intervention Team will track number of referrals for the most vulnerable students and develop extended intervention plans for them. All Advisors, RJ teachers, Intervention Team, Students Oct through December 2018 Advisors, RJ Teachers, Student RJ Leaders, Intervention Team Offer and organize ongoing professional development in Restorative Circles, Therapeutic Crisis Intervention for Schools, and Suicide Ideation Recognition and Reporting. Offer and organize appropriate training for the members of the Intervention Team and Guidance Staff on proper methods for reporting and responding to in-school and off-campus student incidents, related to behavioral items, bullying, and suicide ideation. All staff Sept 2018 – June 2019 Intervention and Guidance Teams Counselors, Admin, Intervention Team, Affinity Support Center Counselors, Admin, YAs, Deans, Affinity Support Center 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Families will be invited to participate in circles and other restorative and community building activities. Families will also be invited to meet with members of the Restorative Justice team to discuss and collaborate on the particular work being done with their children on an ongoing basis throughout the year. Restorative Justice Liaisons will coordinate family meetings, and Intervention Team Members (APs, RJCs, YAs) will ensure that family meetings are called when needed. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Per session for RJ committee to meet over the summer and time for them to meet during the school year. Two paraprofessionals who take on the role of Youth Advocates and a teacher Restorative Justice coordinator. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded X P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other 2018-19 SCEP-FL 22  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. The Intervention Team will review OORS data on a monthly basis to track occurrences, both for time frame and location, and make changes to support team's schedules and foci based on the data. When we compare month to month last year to this year we will see at least a 20% decrease each month. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Skedula Comments, OORS Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 23  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. SOP(s) Addressed x x x 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. x 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In June 2014 we had the opportunity to apply to be a PROSE school. We were accepted and are working on a pilot Evaluation Program for our teachers. We wanted to give our teachers more time to pursue their teaching practice inquiries, and motivation to take their authentic questions to the next level. By giving them the latitude to explore their inquiry, they can do this work in a more organized and official manner, which in turn will also us to bring the work to scale and to others in our community so everyone can benefit. Our PROSE option, which is 40% of the MOTP score, includes:  Each teacher developing an inquiry question that will drive her/his work, and be the focus on his/her “presentation.”  Demonstrating at the presentation how he/she has worked towards answering the question, sharing physical artifacts as appropriate.  Using three of the eight Danielson indicators that best align with the individual’s inquiry.  The “presentations” would be self-evaluated and evaluated by other members of the cohort and at least one member of the administrative team. PROSE evaluation cohort will present their mid-year findings at least once in an after-school staff meeting, leading up to a culminating presentation in June. At that presentation, the cohort will share their inquiry explorations at their 2018-19 SCEP-FL 24  Structured Plan presentations, that includes a strategy for sharing their work beyond themselves, and some members of the 2016-17 PROSE cohort lead inquiry groups this past year on sub topics to enable more teachers to be involved. Work done by last year's PROSE cohort led to the creation of choice based PLCs and several school wide school instructional and support initiatives. We measure the success of this program by the ways this work starts to become the fabric of our school. This year we also added an additional option for teachers who select the PROSE option, which is to be part of an intervisitation triad. Triads will identify areas of focus using the Danielson Rubric or other problems of practice, observe each other, and then debrief observations This coming year, we'll integrate the intervisitation work into department and PD work around aligning and coordinating our literacy initiatives. Last year, we worked on increasing coherence in our academic program through adopting common practices such as strategies for student to student interactions and increasing the DOK level of our questioning in class, through revisiting best practices for school wide planning practice and identifying the skills students must master in order to succeed on PBATs in the four core content areas. We will continue to implement and develop these practices this year, and track student growth in these skills through the use of Skedula and our inquiry studies. Teachers will be working in teams to increase data driven instruction with the implementation of a Middle School reading initiative, the research for which took place in a 2016-17 PLC, grounded in reading assessment data and targeted reading intervention, and to increase the level of rigor in learning tasks throughout the school through the use of looking at student work protocols, unit planning in department teams, tools like the Depth of Knowledge, and classroom observation feedback from colleagues and our partnership with MSQI. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 80% of our teacher will have participated in intervisitations, increasing the amount of regular feedback teachers receive on their practice. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 25  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Establish PD schedule (three cycles of intervisitation each semester) that allots time for department meetings to do intervisitations and analyze student work. All Teachers July 2018 Create Intervisitation groups based on departments, and instructional goals. All teachers By October Monthly department chairs meetings, and bi-weekly department chair/admin meetings to monitor progress and plan future meetings and PD. Department Chairs 2018 September 2018 - June 2019 Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Admin and Teacher Leaders Admin, Teacher Leaders Admin, department chairs Share out of best practices through Option PROSE inquiry projects Cohort members, teachers May and June 2019 Option PROSE cohort members 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Advisors will call families on a regular basis to create joint strategies for the support of the children. Teacher teams will meet with parents to address student needs and to co-create action plans. Advisors will reach out to families and schedule meetings with teacher teams on an ongoing basis throughout the year, but especially during the first and third quarters of they year. Parents will have access to Pupil Path (Skedula) in order to track student progress on Common Core Learning Standards. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. department chair stipend, PD schedule and teaching schedule to create time for team meetings. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA P/F Set-aside 21st Century C4E 2018-19 SCEP-FL 26  X Title I 1003(a) Title III PTA Funded X SIG Grant School Achievement Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Teachers will participate in intervisitation as part of their professional development around increasing higher order thinking through student to student interactions. By the end of January each teacher should have been on at least three intervisitations. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Feedback forms, intervisitation notes, and Department meeting notes google doc Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 27  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). x x x x SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to our 2017-18 School Quality Guide, 93% of our teachers say that our curriculum is well coordinated across grade level. For the past year, departments, which meet weekly have been working on curriculum and skills alignment across the grades. After our initial years working through PBATs and Roundtables, we noticed clear trends from our own internal observations as well as outsiders from the Consortium, and comparing our work, and more importantly our students' work, to more established and successful Consortium schools. Our work has been spiraling and cyclical, creating a graduation level PBAT as a team, then breaking it down into skills, figuring out when those skills and content where already being taught, how successful that teaching had been, then what next steps were for stronger alignment and hitting the areas or highest need. Then the next version of the graduation level PBAT would be better, and more rigorous, as would the building block Roundtables. Comparing PBAT scores of students in 2016-17 to those in 2015-16, we saw clear improvements. Despite this work, many of the PBATs produced our graduates are still only competent, and it is clear that the amount of support and scaffolding needed for students success too high and that students reading below grade level has implications both on Middle School test scores and on students' ability to engage in rigorous research and PBAT writing. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 28  We recognize that students spend too much time waiting to have meaningful academic interactions with teachers or waiting for feedback about their work, and that improving student-to-student academic interactions will greatly improve academic rigor overall. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART– Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, each core subject area teacher will have implemented Accountable Talk work in their classes, using this work to increase the academic level of discussion in their classes. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 29  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Students will engage in student-to-student interactions that use Accountable Talk at least once a week in each of their core classes. Each teacher will be part of a department that will do three cycles each semester of focused work on improving student-to-student academic interactions using Accountable Talk as a grounding concept. Provide support to department chairs to facilitate protocols for looking at teacher and student work around Accountable Talk and student-to-student interactions. . Teachers in subjects other than ELA will receive support for incorporating literacy strategies into the work of their classes, including tools like a school-wide literacy strategies based on Accountable Talk and DOK higher order thinking. all students November 2018 - June 2019 Teachers, Department Chairs all Teachers Dept Chairs All teachers September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 September 2018 - June 2019 Department Chairs, Administration Administration, Department Chairs Teachers, Administration 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Families will be reached by phone, email and text to keep them in the loop around parent leadership and engagement opportunities. Families will be informed about the academic initiatives, and offered workshops to support their child's reading and literacy at home. Families will also be informed about Roundtable and PBAT performance tasks in advance of the final due dates and presentations in January and June and will be in consultation with students' teachers and Advisors about support that can be offered outside of school, and/or additional supports being offered at school outside of regular class time. Advisors will communicate with families about the rationale for Roundtables and PBATs, which in turn will explain the school leaderships' strategy of focusing on the support and development the school's work on Performance Assessments in order to continue to increase rigorous instruction and improve educational outcomes for students. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 30  Time for co-planning, intervisitations, looking at student work and literacy data, and reflection with other department members on student-to-student interactions and Accountable Talk, and regular observations and lesson debriefs with members of administration. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded X P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By the start of second semester, we should have a unified plan for our implementation of Accountable Talk across the school. At the end of each five week cycle, the Executive Council will evaluated progress on this goal. The monthly department chairs meeting will also be a place to review progress toward this goal to make sure we are developing a school wide understanding of Accountable Talk, and strategies for implementing Accountable Talk in departments that deepen student thinking. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Reading assessment data, observations via intervisitations and administration, existence of a unified plan for raising the academic rigor of student-to-student interactions across the school. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 31  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. x x x x SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Through interviews with families, examining of internal data (family/advisor conference sign-in sheets, PTA/SLT sign-in sheets), and studying our school survey results, we discovered that though we have strong relationships with a small number of our families, and though between 60 and 70% of our families attend family/advisor conferences each year, we need to work harder on engaging a larger percentage of our families on an ongoing basis throughout the school year. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Increase family presence at school in 2018-19, and staff-family communication throughout the year. Families will be invited and encouraged to come to school for a wider range of reasons. We will increase the number of families visiting the school by 10% through work with our partner organization, Epiphany Blue, and increase the school-family 2018-19 SCEP-FL 32 communication about student learning through use of the Skedula Student and Family Portal, where parents will be able to track student progress on specific Common Core Learning Standards. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 33  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Work with Epiphany Blue to plan monthly family events for all families grades 6-12, and create a structured plan for family outreach. Advisors will be in regular contact with the families of advisees. Reach out to a target group of families for ongoing communication and attendance at events, and for specific meetings about individual students. Follow up with families who have attended at least one event to see what would increase participation at the following event. Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) All Families Aug 2018 – June 2019 September 2018 - June 2019 Sept 2018 – June 2019 Families who filled out initial survey at conferences Families who have shown interest and ability to attend events PTA, Parent Coordinator and Assistant Principal, Epiphany Blue Advisors, Assistant Principal, Guidance Counselors, Parent Coordinator, Epiphany Blue Grade Team Leaders, Guidance team, Epiphany Blue and Assistant Principal Special attention will be given to families of higher needs students, including Sped students, ELLs, and 'vulnerable' youth. Collect family surveys throughout the year. All families Sept 2018 – June 2019 Assistant Principal, Parent Coordinator, Epiphany Blue 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Grand Street Settlement, Counseling in Schools, Epiphany Blue Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Time for phone calling shifted to grade team meeting time in place of some of the C6 time throughout the day. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 34  X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded X P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. We will look at attendance sheets and sign-in sheets for conferences, parent meetings and orientation events that have been held so far this year. We will log attendance at workshops and meetings held for families. We will monitor use of programs like Skedula to see if they are improving family communication about student progress. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Attendance sheets from events, visitor sign in, Skedula comments to log family contact made by school staff members, Skedula data reports of usage of Parent Portal. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 35  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Students who scored below a level 2 on the State ELA Test, scored in the bottom 5th of the baseline reading assessment, are not “approaching standard” onRoundtablesin January,or scored below a 65 on the ELA Regents Students who scored below a level 2 on the State Math Test, scored in the bottom 5th of the baseline math assessment,or are not “approaching standard” on Roundtablesin January. Students who scored below a level 2 on the State ELA Test, orare not “approaching standard” on Roundtablesin January. Students who scored below a level 2 on the State ELA Test, or are not “approaching Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small group, small class, one-to-one tutoring During the school day, after-school tutorial Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) SAL Reading, Wilson Reading, Regents Test Prep, Repeated Targeted Skill Instruction Book Groups, Theater Literacy SAL Math, basic skills groups, math intervention classes Small group, small class, one-to-one tutoring During the school day, after-school tutorial Small group, small class During the school day, after-school tutorial Research skills classes, in depth study of a given subject (ie: zoology) in small elective choice groups Research Skills classes, in depth study of a given subject (ie: Small group, small class During the school day, after-school tutorial 2018-19 SCEP-FL 36 At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) psychology) in small elective choice groups Individual and group counseling services, anger management groups, girls/boys groups standard” on Roundtablesin January. Students who have displayed disruptive behaviors in classrooms, have a pattern of absence, lateness, or cutting, or have a history of emotional trauma Small group, individual During the school day 2018-19 SCEP-FL 37  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 59 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. We have a plethora of supplies for our STH students, in addition to providing them with academic, social/emotional and resource support. We reach out to each student individually to let them know that we are aware of their STH status and what resources are available to support them. This support can be material support as well as academic or social/emotional support. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). n/a 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 38  n/a 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. n/a 2018-19 SCEP-FL 39  Section 8: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. In order to have instruction that best meets the needs of our students we need to have the best teachers. Having great teachers does not simply benefit the students directly, but when there is substantial opportunity for collaborative teacher work, as there is at our school, there is also a benefit to the entire teaching staff. We work hard to not only attract, but to keep, the best of the best. All of our teachers are HQT. We attract the best HQT through a rigorous recruiting process. ● In addition to using official DOE structures for finding potential candidates, we make extensive use of various education listservs, our personal and professional connections as long time educators in the small schools movement, and through New Visions, our PSO. Through these connections we receive hundreds of resumes and cover letters. ● We invite select candidates to group interviews where we hear recollections about learning experiences from candidates as well as look at student work with them. ● From this group, our hiring committee selects individuals to come in for a demo lesson, a more extensive interview and a writing sample. ● Finally, we reach out to multiple references before we offer candidates a position at Lyons. We do not even consider candidates unless they are HQT as defined by NCLB. While at Lyons, we make sure teachers are provided with sufficient professional development to maintain their HQT status, as well as support for professional growth far beyond the mandates. More than any other quality, we look for teachers who are interested in continually improving their teaching practice and are highly reflective about their work. As described above we have a wide range of teachers with a wide range of skills and experiences, so we vastly differentiate the professional development we offer our teachers. ● After PD starting in 2010 with the Danielson Framework for Teaching, each teacher co-created a personalized PD plan with the support of a member of the school leadership. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 40  ● In addition to the full group professional development, each teacher is a member of a grade team, professional learning community, and department where professional development is honed towards the needs of the particular group. ● Also, we have several staff members who do extensive coaching for our teachers. Depending on need, teachers work with their coach for a number of cycles, ranging from two to ten, throughout the year. These coaching cycles consist of a pre-observation meeting, observation, mid-cycle meeting, follow up observation and cycle ending meeting. In each cycle, the coach and teacher decide on a specific skill or focus for the cycle. All of this work is in addition to the observations and follow up meetings with an administrator. Teacher assignments are determined by staff preference surveys, level of qualification for particular teaching roles, scheduling needs and students programming needs. We do not give preference to teachers with more experience and instead work to match teacher experience and expertise with our students with the greatest need. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). At Lyons we are committed to continually improving professional practice. Regardless of level of experience, all of us should have professional (and personal) goals. We firmly believe that one of our responsibilities to our staff, to our students and to our whole community is to hold staff to the highest possible standard as an educator. This means a willingness to be responsive to what others observe about work and be reflective about our practice. We are committed to helping each other achieve our goals. There are many ways of developing practice at Lyons. As a school that holds collaboration and strong relationships as essential to growth and development, we work hard to be an environment where everyone gets the necessary support. At the same time, our commitment is primarily to our students and we need to have a staff that provides our students with the best possible education. Goal Setting: At any given time staff should have both short and long term goals they are working on as an educator. During the year, staff will have an opportunity to update their goals. All of these goals should be recorded in a shared personalized PD google document. Teachers involved in our PROSE Evaluation Pilot have a Structured Review Plan where they describe their year-long inquiry. Periodically throughout the year staff members will meet with a member of the leadership team to discuss these goals. At these meetings we will refine these goals and create a plan to help accomplish them. The number of meetings will depend on experience as an educator, requests and needs. With the Advance system, staff members will have an initial meeting (IPC - initial planning conference) with an administrator where staff members will decide which observation plan they wish to follow, as well as look at the Danielson self-evaluation, goals and the MOSLs (measure of student learning) that will effect Advance rating. There will also be an end of the year meeting to look at progress through Advance as the year progresses. While we do not use the official Advance system, all teachers get feedback in a way that meets and in most cases exceeds that of the Advance expectations. Non-teachers will have a comparable system set up. Coaching: There are a few teachers (members of the Executive Council) who have formal coaching responsibilities at Lyons. In addition other teachers and staff may take on informal coaching roles. We'll continue with having our coaches work in “coaching cycles.” A coaching cycle consists of 1) a pre-observation meeting where the coach and teacher will determine the focus for the professional development work. 2) A planned mini-observation where the teacher is working on the focus strategy. 3) A follow up meeting to discuss the observation and plan a next lesson 4) A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 41  second observation focusing on the same strategy and 5) Another post-observation meeting. The leadership team in conjunction with the individual teachers will determine the frequency and pairings for these coaching cycles. Team Meetings/Inquiry Work: Most teachers are part of both a grade team and subject area team. The work of these teams is part and parcel of professional development for teachers. Both teams will spend time doing inquiry work - using the inquiry cycle to look at students work, determine a potential strategy to support student growth, implement the strategy, then look at student work again. Grade and subject area colleagues are the greatest source of support and ideas that will improve teacher practice. Collaboration: We use our structures around collaboration, co-teaching and team meetings to improve practice. Each time teachers/staff members work together there is an opportunity to observe, ask questions and gain insight. We have a remarkable staff with a great deal of experience. While experience and education counts for a lot, it certainly doesn’t preclude great ideas coming from everyone and anyone. Staff members should question ideas, be curious, challenge people’s ideas (but with respect and an open mind). While we are committed to collaboration we are not interested in tacit agreement. Pushing people to think and questions their own beliefs will make our entire community stronger. Leadership meeting: Each month, each staff member will meet with a member of the executive council to discuss their work. The purpose of this meeting is to touch base about the staff member’s work and meeting of expectations at Lyons. This meeting is designed to provide a formal place to discuss issues that have arisen and check in around growth and school wide goals and initiatives. The principal was a host principal for LPP for the past three years, and was also a mentor principal for a Wallace Fellow last year and a LEAP Fellow the year before. Through both these programs she received PD through the city with the likes of Ellie Drago-Severson and Lee Teitel. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. n/a 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). n/a Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). 2018-19 SCEP-FL 42  n/a 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. n/a 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (SCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Title I Part A (Basic) Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 394,034 16,979 134,154 0 12,366 0 3,170,240 x x x n/a x n/a x Column B Section Reference(s) 5A, 5B, 5C,5D, 5E 5A, 5B, 5C,5E 5D, 5E n/a 5A, 5B n/a 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, 2018-19 SCEP-FL 43  State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/SCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent 2018-19 SCEP-FL 44  representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 45  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Lyons Community School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Lyons Community School will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 46  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent-Teacher Association, as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 2018-19 SCEP-FL 47  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand School-Parent Compact (SPC) Lyons Community School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum 2018-19 SCEP-FL 48  ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; Skedula provides an automated translation feature for texting ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 49  ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 50  ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 51  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): K 6 1 7 2 8 3 9 4 10 5 11 12 30 2018-19 SCEP-FL 52  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: After School Academy takes place over 38 sessions over the course of 13 weeks, meeting three times a week: on Thursday afternoons starting in the week of September 5, 2018 and ending on the June 13, 2019. There will be three groups of 5-8 students from grades 6-12. The three groups will be organized to put students of similar ages together. The target population will be 15-20 English Language Learners from grades 6-12 to be subscribed and trained in using a computer based language acquisition program. The goal of the program is to build literary skills, background knowledge and enhance their academic behaviours in a small-group setting. The heterogeneous nature of the program plus low (7-1) student/teacher ratio will greatly enhance the acquisition process. The students will meet in room 323 from 3:15 to 4:30. The program is Pearson's iLit for ELLs. There will be one TESOL certified teacher plus a rotation of one content licensed teachers as needed. The program will translate for all our ELLs, prioritizing English acquisition but serving our Spanish, Arabic, Haitian-Creole, Fulani and Barbara populations. The program will be open to families as space allows. Home language support will be that the subscription will be accessible for home use via the subscription. Notifications will be translated emailed and sent home in hard copy with students. Students attendance will be recorded and effect the availability of their spot. We will call home if students do not maintain their participation. Progress will be automatically tracked by the program. Families will be updated via Skedula messenger. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: PD sessions for Title III teachers are led by ESL Department Chair Laura Paddock and take place every other Monday afternoon from 3:00 to 4:20 pm, beginning the first week of school. Dates of these workshops are: 9/17/18, 9/24/18, 10/1/18, 10/15/18, 10/22/18, 10/29/18, 11/5/18, 11/19/18, 11/26/18, 12/3/18, 12/10/18, 12/17/18, 1/7/19, 1/14/19, 1/28/19, 2/4/18, 2/11/18, 2018-19 SCEP-FL 53  Part C: Professional Development 2/25/18, 3/4/19, 3/11/19, 3/18/19, 3/25/19, 4/1/19, 4/8/19, 4/15/19, 4/29/19, 5/6/19, 5/13/19, 5/20/19, 6/3/19, 6/10/19 and 6/17/19. Both Title III teachers participate in each of these PD sessions. The PD sessions cover the following topics, in this order: (1) Approaches to developing reading comprehension for ELLs in content-area classes, (2) Explicit strategy instruction for reading comprehension, (3) Cultivating metacognition as a literacy skill, (4) Developing academic vocabulary through schema-building in clusters and super clusters, (5) Enhancing vocabulary retention, (6) Using the writing process with academic language functions, (7) Signal words and academic language, (8) Using the WIDA rubric to evaluate writing in ESL, (9) Building a comprehensive framework for performance-based assessment in ESL literacy. ESL teachers are paired with content area teachers, so that their knowledge can be conveyed to teachers who may not have direct ESL support in their classrooms on a daily basis. The chair of the ELL department will file agendas and notes from bi-weekly meetings, as well as attendance sheets from the meetings in both digital and paper files. This work, in addition to support for regular classroom teachers in supporting ELLs, will be monitored through monthly department chair meetings, and by looking at student data (grades in all classes, and progress on assessments including the NYSESLAT. This component of the program is of no additional cost. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Our parent outreach to families of ELLs this year is focused on three events; The World Religions Tours, January Roundtables, June Roundtables, and the Spring Musical. Teachers and out of classroom staff spend time making phone calls, and doing visits to neighborhood businesses where our families work on a case by case basis. This is how we let parents know that they are invited to school events, and that their participation enhances the impact of these events on our students. More specifically, 9th Grade parents are required to go to the Metropolitan Museum of Art on March 31st and April 1st to participate in the 9th grade World Religions Tours. During the 90 minutes student run tour the parents are not only required to ask questions but are an active part in the decision making process for deciding on grades. During June Roundtables the parents are given the chance to hear presentations from their children's peers, lead a small group discussion, and give feedback on their learning. The presentations usually happen at Lyons but will occasionally take place at an off-site location which the students have visited several times during the semester, such as the Brooklyn Museum. Parent Coordinator, Minerva Canto ensures that all necessary translations pertaining to these events occurs and periodically conducts mailing to fill all parents in on what is happening at school. Students and family members are encouraged to attend the annual Spring Musical and it has historically been a with all segments of our population. The attendance at these events and well as the use of support structures such as translation services will be documented and maintained 2018-19 SCEP-FL 54 Part D: Parental Engagement Activities by the ELL department chair. She will also keep invitations in the appropriate languages and evidence of the use of Skedula messenger to provide this support. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. The bulk of our budget will go towards per session to compensate our instructors in the after school program. Resource texts and notebooks for students. Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) 12,166  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL . 200 2018-19 SCEP-FL 55  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 14 School Name Lyons Community School Borough Brooklyn School Number 586 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Taeko Onishi Coach Assistant Principal Laura Rubin Coach ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Laura Paddock Teacher/Subject Area Erica Hansen/SPED Teacher/Subject Area Peter Litman/ENL Related-Service Provider Sara Catalinotto Superintendent Kathy Pelles School Counselor Carmen Acosta Parent Jolanta Rutkowski Parent Coordinator Minerva Cantor Field Support Center Staff Member Jocelyn Santana Other (Name and Title) N/A C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 2 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] D. Student Demographics 2018-19 SCEP-FL 56  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 478 Total number of ELLs 66 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 13.81% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 3 0 4 0 2 0 5 0 6 0 7 0 8 0 9 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Teachers are using teacher-created assessments, including projects, essays, quizzes and presentation tasks, in addition to Fountas and Pinnell reading assessments. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Structures to support this effort include: ENL Department meetings where teachers review student work and progress, observations and planning sessions with our Assistant Principal, a Professional Learning Community (PLC) group focused on reading intervention and instruction, on site Professional Development to support use of UbD planning strategies to develop 2018-19 SCEP-FL 57  performance assessments, school visits to International Schools and teachers attending professional learning sessions specifically geared toward ENL instruction and literacy at our Affinity Support Center. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Summative Assessments used to identify baseline progress and areas of need include teach-designed projects, presentations, essays and tests. Students also participate in Roundtable Performance Assessment Tasks at the end of each semester. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Teachers utilize the department meeting time structure to review student work in ENL Department meetings. Through this review, teachers discuss how to adjust instruction. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Data collected on the NYSESLAT, NYSITELL and Spanish Lab are used to guide instruction in that students are programmed for Stand-Alone ENL Courses and/or Push-In instruction according to these assessments. Teachers utilize this data in curriculum planning for various groupings. Teachers also use data collected from teacher-created formative and summative assessments, ELA Regents practice tests and MyOn online reading assessments to tailor lessons and curriculum to students' strengths and areas for growth. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. NYSESLAT, ELA Regents 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? ENL teachers are on grade teams and meet with teachers to review student work and strategies for supporting ENL students in content classes. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Students receive a mix of ENL class and Push-In services depending on their needs according to CR Part 154.2. Freestanding ENL classes are mixed grade level. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? 2018-19 SCEP-FL 58  a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Students are programmed into Stand-Alone ENL classes according to their most recent designation and under CR Part 154.2. Students are also grouped strategically in other classes, particularly ELA, in order to deliver the appropriate number of Push-In minutes. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Core content is primarily delivered in content classes and is complimented and supported in the curriculum design of Stand Alone ENL classes. Core Content is delivered in English, with a focus on performance assessment, inquiry-driven instruction and Common Core aligned reading and writing instructional strategies. Students work in groups, interact with multiple modalities (visual images, video, sound, text, etc.). 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? The Spanish Lab is administered when applicable. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status SIFE and Newcomer ELLs students receive additional reading support and explicit grammar instruction. Students are also assigned mixed groupings in order to receive peer support and modeling. Developing students are given increasingly challenging texts and learning tasks. Long Term ELLs receive continued reading support, grammar and vocabulary assessments, reading responses and writing assessments. Former ELLs are supported through Push-In or Pull-Out work for continued support on reading and writing. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? ELL-SWDs are provided with supports and scaffolds in order to access academic content areas and accelerate English language development such as developing vocabulary glossaries through the context of reading texts, structured presentation and discussion protocols, reading annotation strategies that help students identify confusion and use "fix-up" strategies to comprehend text and structured writing scaffolds to help students craft coherent essays align to Common Core Standards. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Students are programmed for a mix of ENL support and SPED support depending on their specific needs in both areas. Teachers utilize common practices throughout the school, such as reading annotation, in order to provide students with some consistency while working with multiple staff members. Students are also offered additional support through Push-In/Pull-Out or ICT Team teaching where their specific needs according to their progress as ELLs or their IEPs are addressed. Some students may be scheduled or grouped in order to facilitate Push-In/Pull-Out time with ELL or SPED teachers. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Our school offers an after school targeted intervention program for English literacy to ELL students using the iLit program. Additional English literacy intervention is provided through the scheduled school day for many students in the form of 2018-19 SCEP-FL 59  MyOn Reading Program, Fountas and Pinnel Reading Assessments, and the SPIRE and Rewards Reading intervention programs. Students receive tutoring in Math and other areas as needed. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We will expand and continue our use of Fountas and Pinnel reading assessments, SPIRE phonics intervention and the MyOn online literacy support program. Teachers are also being trained in Guided Reading and Rewards intervention program during the summer of 2017. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All students are offered access to sports teams and after school clubs in our building. ELLs in particular are offered an English Literacy intervention program using the iLit program. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Teachers design projects and lessons for their classes, including use of the iLit program, MyOn reading, and Fountas and Pinnell assessments. Students routinely use laptops for MyOn reading, to create PowerPoint presentations, for vocabulary or language interpretation support, to access media such as video, music, newspaper articles, and to conduct digital research. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Spanish Lab assessments are conducted for Spanish speaking students in the ENL program. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Students are programmed for the majority of their program according to age and grade level, and stand alone ENL classes are programmed based on considerations of age, grade level and English Language proficiency and NYSESLAT designation. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? In addition to our school specific social worker and counseling staff, all students attending school in our building have access to the Social Worker working in the Woodhull Hospital Clinic on the first floor. All students have access to the School Based Support Team in the building as well. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). New students to the community are invited to an orientation event and family barbecue at the end of August, and throughout the year the primary way new students are supported to be introduced to the community is through Advisory. ELLs share advisories and mentor each other in this way. Staff members who are part of the New Student Orientation include Youth Advocates, Teachers, Counselors and Administrators. Advisors to ELL students are the ELL teachers. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? ELL students are offered the same options for electives as the rest of the student body. Elective options include ELA based curriculum and public speaking based curriculum, such as Debate. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 60  In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Professional Development is offered both through the school and through the Affinity Support Center. This school year, ENL teachers were coached by the Associate Director for ELLs from the Affinity Support Center. Teachers were also part of Professional Learning Community (PLC) groups which conducted Action Research projects related to their practice. All teachers on staff were also supported with inquiry-based unit planning using the research-based Understanding by Design model. Next school year, teachers will continue to receive support with planning, co-teaching and ENL specific instruction. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Please see above. Records are kept through meeting notes and agendas. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Advisories are programmed such that ELLs are grouped together and their Advisor is an ENL teacher. Advisors are the primary contact person for families and schedule meetings with parents of ELLs outside of DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences. Interpretation services are offered either through in-school personnel who speak the parents' language, or using the DOE provided interpretation service on speaker-phone. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Parents of ELLs are invited to all community events, like the New Student Orientation, and are invited to the after-school language acquisition program offered to students. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Students benefit from ELL specific Advisories which provide community, social emotional support and additional academic support. This structure also facilitates strong communication between ENL teachers and ELL students' families. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 61  2018-19 SCEP-FL 62 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Karen Onishi, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 63  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Lyons Community School School DBN: 14K586 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Taeko Onishi Title Principal Laura Rubin Assistant Principal Minerva Cantor Parent Coordinator Laura Paddock ENL/Bilingual Teacher Jolanta Rutkowski Parent Oscar Bravo/SPED Teacher/Subject Area Peter Litman/ENL Teacher/Subject Area Jocelyn Santana N/A Coach Coach Carmen Acosta School Counselor Kathy Pelles Jocelyn Santana N/A N/A N/A Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Associate Director for ELLs Other N/A Other N/A Other N/A Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 06/29/18 06/29/18 06/29/18 06/29/18 06/29/18 06/29/18 06/29/18 06/29/18 06/29/18 06/29/18 06/29/18 06/29/18 06/29/18 06/29/18 06/29/18 2018-19 SCEP-FL 64  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 14K586 School Name: Lyons Community School Superintendent: Kathy Pelles The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) Minerva Cantor Parent Coordinator No No * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Language preferences of our parent community is culled from various sources, including PCL lists of new students, Home Language Identification Surveys, ATS Reports, Student Emergency Contact cards and through the outreach of students' Advisors, ENL and SPED teachers. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 65  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral 1 1 1 206 405 1 Bengali Chinese (Any) Fulani Spanish English (American) Sign Language .16 .16 .16 33.12 65.11 .16 1 1 1 204 404 1 .16 .16 .16 32.81 65.06 .16 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. English, Spanish Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families After School Program Information 09/10 PTA Notices 09/10, 12/15, 03/25 Important Dates Sheet 09/10 Report Cards and Report Card Letters 11/1, 01/1, 04/01, 06/1 Student/Family Handbooks 09/01 Letters from Grade Teams 09/05, 01/01, 06/5 Summer Opportunities Notice End of year scheduling updates 06/01 05/01 Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. School secretaries and Parent Coordinators translate using google translate, phone interpretation services, and bilingual skills. " " " " " " " " " " " " " " 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 66  Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? School secretaries, Teachers and Parent Coordinators translate using google translate and bilingual skills. Family/Advisor Conferences 09/2 PTA Meetings 09/2, 12/2, 03/2 Curriculum Night 9/1 School secretaries, Teachers and Parent Coordinators interpret using bilingual skills and NYC DOE Interpretation service. School secretaries, Teachers and Parent Coordinators interpret using bilingual skills and NYC DOE Interpretation service. School secretaries, Teachers and Parent Coordinators interpret using bilingual skills and NYC DOE Interpretation service 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. We utilize the telephone interpretation service offered by the Department of Education. When possible, we ask bilingual staff members to communicate with family members if they share language proficiencies. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Pertinent Chancellor's Regulations are referred to and hyperlinked in our staff handbook. In September, Administration sends reminders to staff with the phone number and instructions for accessing the DOE's language interpretation service. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents 2018-19 SCEP-FL 67   Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) We will utilize translated signage, translated informational fliers and outreach by our Parent Coordinator and students' Advisors utilizing interpretation services provided by the DOE to communicate to parents their right to receive information. This will also be communicated during PTA meetings and Parent Workshops. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Parent Surveys, PTA meetings, and family/advisor conferences that are translated in print using google translate, and through interpretation services in person. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 68 
