 17K600 School Name: CLARA BARTON HIGH SCHOOL Principal: RICHARD A. FORMAN 2018-19 SCEP-FF 1  School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Section 4: SCEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 SCEP-FF 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Number (DBN): 17K600 Clara Barton 331700011600 9-12 901 Classon Avenue Brooklyn, NY 11225 718 636 4900 Phone Number: 718 857 3688 Fax: Richard Forman rforman@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Email Address: Richard Forman Ellen Brody-Kirmss Marcee Roberts Feiona Maxwell Bridget Charles Esther Williams Jermaine Catul Tabitha Parker-Badmiss District Information Geographical District: 17 Superintendent’s Office Address: Michael Prayor Superintendent: 1830 Shore Blvd Room F11, Brooklyn, NY 11235 mprayor@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718 368 8515 Phone Number: 718 368 8517 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 SCEP-FF 3  Brooklyn South FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Mauricierre DeGovia Executive Director: 415 89th st Brooklyn NY 11209 mdegovi@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718 923 5171 Phone Number: 7187593909 Fax: 2018-19 SCEP-FF 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the SCEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Richard Forman Ellen Brody-Kirmss MarceeRoberts RenwickPaul Bridget Charles Esther Williams Jermaine Catul Jennifer Zisler FeionaMaxwell Monique Antoine Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ CSA Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher 2018-19 SCEP-FF 5  LakeishaMoffatt Angela Smith Crystal Barton Sampson Timtin Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/ Student Member/Student Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 SCEP-FF 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) is a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. The process of developing and implementing the SCEP is aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding SCEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and informed by New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and SCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a 2018-19 SCEP-FF 7  comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality 2018-19 SCEP-FF 8  Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the SCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the SCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for SCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 9   Step 4: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 5: Build consensus around activities, strategies and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 6: Implement at least one USDE Turnaround Principle (e.g., redesign the school day, week, or year; modify the instructional program to ensure it is Evidence-based, rigorous, and aligned with State academic content standards; provide time for collaboration on the use of) beginning no later than the 2018-19 school year.  Step 7: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 8: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 10  Section 4: SCEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? At Clara Barton High School for the Health Professions we envision an environment in which all our constituent partners: teachers, guidance counselors, administrators, supervisors, educational support personnel, students, parents and community partners nurture and respect the essential contribution and value of others. In order to provide a 21st century education that prepares students to make informative decisions that will enhance the quality of their lives, we endeavor to strengthen their intellectual capacity through engagement with cognitively rich instructional tasks across the curriculum. To achieve our vision, we will engage the entire school community to provide students with a safe, supportive and tolerant environment. Each student will be prepared for decision-making using values taught at Clara Barton High School. The school will instill these values and skills by example, modeling, and instruction. The climate of civility and accepted multicultural diversity and respect will be contagious. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. We present multiple educational opportunities including the following programs: Gateway (Honors Science/Mathematics Program), Health Careers (Practical Nurse, Nurse Assistant, Medical Assistant, Dental Assistant, Dental Laboratory Technology, Vision Technology, Emergency Medical Technician and Pharmacy Technician), Advanced Placement courses (Biology, English Language and Composition, English Literature and Literature , Government and Politics, United States History, Calculus, Computer Science and Art History), Business Computer Applications; Medical Billing & Coding, Medical Transcription, Fine Arts (Music, Ceramics, Drawing, Painting, Computer Graphics), internship opportunities, College Now, peer tutoring, mentoring, and leadership, medical science, health professions recruitment and exposure program (HPREP), science and technology entry program (STEP), Liberty Partnerships, and Upward Bound. To further leadership and support initiatives we have: peer mediation/conflict resolution program, SAPIS (Substance Abuse Prevention and Intervention Program), student government, senior council, PRIDE, and LGBTQ Alliance. Our PSAL sports teams include: boys-baseball, basketball, cross country, indoor track, outdoor track, and girls-basketball, cross country, indoor track, outdoor track, softball, tennis, volleyball, Co-ed bowling. Our partnerships include: The Leadership Program, The Crown Heights Youth Collective, Liberty Partnership, SUNY Downstate Medical Center, Kings County Medical Center, Methodist Hospital, Woodhull Hospital, Wyckoff Heights Medical Center, Dr. Susan B McKinney Nursing and Rehabilitation Center, The City College of New York, Pace University, Weill Medical College of Cornell University, Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons, Long Island University, Kingsborough Community College, Medgar Evers College, New York City Technical College, Arthur Ashe Institute for Urban Health, Pizzi Dental Studio, and Aim Dental Laboratory The health theme is integrated into courses across the curriculum. All students have an opportunity to enroll in pre-requisite classes during 9th and 10th grade. Students formally apply for a health career major during the spring semester of 10th grade. Health Care professionals interface with our students at external clinical facilities including hospitals and nursing homes, as guest speakers during in-class instruction, during quarterly advisories and via membership in professional organizations including Health Occupation Student Advisory. All health career professional programs possess an advisory with the affiliated external partners. A survey course has been integrated into all Ninth grade health core classes whereby students receive an overview of each of the six New York State accredited health career programs. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. 90% of our ELLs speak Haitian Creole as their home language. Many newcomers are classified as SIFE. In addition there are significant number of former ELLs and students speaking Haitian Creole as their heritage language. Both ELLs and former ELLs need support in academic English Language development. They struggle with reading comprehension and academic writing, especially supporting their written claims from evidenced read in the text. Additionally the students need additional support in their Haitian Creole language development. Our ELLs, former ELLs and students with IEPs require Intensive academic language development related to health careers in order to prepare them to 2018-19 SCEP-FF 11  enter a health major in 11th grade. 32 ELLs out of 90 need instructional support service due to their variety of of disabilities. 253 students have IEPs. 56 of those students are cognitively impaired. This cohort of students are enrolled in our ACES program. ACES students need support in life skills development, basic literacy development, and socio-emotional learning. The majority of the Regents-diploma - bound students with IEPs need support in academic literacy skills development and in social and emotional learning. They need help learning to self-monitor and self-direct their learning, to recruit teacher attention and ask for help when necessary. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. The strengths of Clara Barton High School are reflected in our increased graduation rate of 72% for Cohort T, Class of 2018, including August 2018 graduates. We are demonstrating increased credit accumulation and graduation rates for ELL, Special Education and lowest third cohorts. Currently we have 8 Career and Technical Education (CTE) programs and are continually seeking additional health professions and professionals to add to our Health Career majors. In August 2018 we had 100% passing rate on the NCLEX licensure examination for Practical Nursing. We are focused on increasing lower than anticipated Global History and Mathematics Regents results in addition to increasing credit accumulation for students in grades 9 and 10. The tenet that demonstrated the highest level of growth was #3., curriculum development and support. We created a sub-cabinet of Lead Teachers and a Collaborative Peer Teacher who plan and turnkey Weekly Professional Development to our teachers in Horizontal Grade, Course specific, Vertical Departmental and Cohort identity: Gateway, Advanced Placement, Health Care and ACES. Collaborative Planning Groups are held on Mondays from 1:40-2:50 P.M. We have added curriculum offerings in Leadership as well as incorporated Advisories to support the social and emotional growth of our students which addresses tenet #5. Academic literacy, including reading comprehension and academic writing coupled with designing cognitively rich instructional tasks serves as our instructional focus for the 2018-2019 school year. In all classes across the curriculum students navigate complex texts in order to formulate, write and orally defend their evidence-based claims. Students are navigating a variety of different types of texts through annotation, close reading, and formulating both text-based and text-dependent questions. 5. Identify at least one USDE Turnaround Principle (e.g., redesign the school day, week, or year; modify the instructional program to ensure it is Evidence-based, rigorous, and aligned with State academic content standards; provide time for collaboration on the use of data) to be implemented in the 2018-19 school year. One of our main foci this year is improving the use of assessment data to inform instruction. We will provide ongoing professional development on the use of data to inform instruction immediately following assessment. In doing this teachers have formed data teams where they examine assessment data and plan collaborative units based on their data evaluation results. They have also been using multiple data sources such as regents item analysis, diagnostic and benchmark assessment data, teacher-designed assessment data, teachers anecdotal records including scholastic and social-emotional data to collaboratively align curriculum and instructional practices to the student' s needs. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 12  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 17K600 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 1221 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual YES Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 189 211 11 16 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 13 8 5 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 77.0% % Attendance Rate 73.6% % Reduced Lunch 9.8% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) 1.1% 7.0% 1.1% % Black or African American % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 11.66 0% 8% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 83% 66% 69.1% 4.2% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No No Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups SWD Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A NO YSH Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A YES YES No N/A 104 102 40 87.6% 3.8% 18.4% 87.1% 1.3% 3.5% 14 12% 5.4 N/A N/A 75% 73% 79.5% 17% N/A No Yes N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A YSH N/A N/A N/A YSH NO N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A YES 2018-19 SCEP-FF 13  2018-19 SCEP-FF 14  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed X X X X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to our 2017-2018 School Quality Snapshot, our Common Core English Regents passing percentage was 69% while our Common Core Algebra Regents passing percentage was 57%. Our average Regents completion rate was 38.5% with a college readiness rate of 13.3%. Our CTE programs are a strength in getting students college ready, but the students who do not enter a major are not as well prepared. We are continually working to align our curriculum with the Common Core learning standards and beginning cross-walks with The Next Generation Learning Standards., As we do this, we are raising the rigor in our classrooms with instructional tasks requiring reading, writing, inquiry and critical thinking. Our strength is that we are committed to collaboration for subject and grade level supports. We are engaging in professional development this year to increase teacher competency in their use of formative and summative assessments, increasing rigor, writing, oral defense of student work and the integration of common core and The Next Generation Learning Standards into daily instruction. This will be used to develop collaborative unit and lesson plans that incorporate high expectations, college and career readiness which will guide our students to the next level. Our priority is to prepare our students not only to pass the Regents exam but to be knowledgeable and prepared to move on to the next course and then eventually college. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified 2018-19 SCEP-FF 15  priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, school leaders and teachers will provide rigorous instruction by strengthening literacy components of instruction across all content areas; by providing multiple entry points for learning and student engagement, which will result in a 3% increase of student achievement on the June 2019 New York State Common Core Algebra Regents compared to June 2018 and a 5% increase on the January 2019 ELA Regents compared to January 2018. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 16  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). After identifying 9th grade students with knowledge and skills gaps, the 9 th grade students will be assigned 12th grade mentors to help them navigate their first year of high school. 9 th grade students September 7 2018– June 20 2019 Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Assistant Principals Administration/Pupil Personnel Services and Guidance Counselors. Students will meet on a 1:1 basis with their guidance counselors every semester. Students who fail two or more academic students will meet with their guidance counselor after the issuance of each report card. Progress monitoring cards will be distributed to students who are failing two or more academic subjects. The cards will be turned into guidance counselors on Fridays and a new weekly set will be then be distributed. Lab Aids Biology class for incoming 9th graders who present with Level I in ELA and Mathematics. This course is designed to build science and literacy skills before entering a regents science class. Literacy Center created where students can go during their lunch, before, or after school. English and English as a New Language teachers will recommend the students with greater writing needs attend English Literacy workshops several times a week. Professional development focused upon aligning Common Core curriculum to the NYS Subject Specific Learning Standards and providing a cross-walk to The Next Generation Learning Standards, Science Scope and Sequence., Social Studies Scope and Sequence Common Core library, Science Scope and Sequence, Social studies Scope and Sequence, and Passport to Global Studies. Learning to scaffold, support and extend instructional units and lessons for English Language Learners, Former English Language Teachers September 7 2018– June 20 2019 Principals, Assistant Principals, Teachers, Central Office 2018-19 SCEP-FF 17 All students September 7 2018– June 20 2019 Principals, Assistant Principals, Teachers 9th grade ELL and special education students September 7 2018– June 20 2019 Teachers, Assistant Principals, Parent Coordinator, Educational Paraprofessionals Learners, Students in Temporary Housing and Students with Disabilities. Inter/intra-school visitation to observe best practices in cross-content area of writing and research. Partner triad schools will visit host school. Professional Learning communities will meet to assess student work using a standard tuning protocol, track student progress, analyze performance of sub-groups, utilize digital platform (I.O.) for item analysis, tag standards and design examinations. Targeted data analysis will guide customization of daily instruction. Unit and lesson plans will be modified in order to address student needs. Regents item analysis as well as diagnostic tests results analysis will be used to track and assess student progress. Horizontal grade meetings will be held so that teachers who have the same students in different subjects can meet to discuss student progress , plan interdisciplinary lessons, and develop strategies for addressing student needs. 9th grade ELLs and special education students will have after school academic literacy as a New language classes with ENL and content area teachers. Parent IEP meetings are held to discuss services offered and understanding of the IEP. ELL and Bilingual parent meetings will be offered during the school day and during evening forums to address the issues for newly arrived students who are learning English. Translators attend to assist parents with their understanding. Instructional support parent will meet in AM and PM offered in instructional forums to address curriculum, assessment and pupil personnel issues. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 18  Our parent coordinator will coordinate our efforts to engage families. We will hold a curriculum night in September and February to help parents understand the skills and competencies their children will be required to master. We will provide parent workshops through PAC/Title 1 funding in order to help parents and guardians support their children at home and will communicate regularly using the IO Messenger on our electronic grade book. We will hold informational orientations replete with breakfasts for parents in group and individual cohorts: Health Career, Gateway, NLA/Bilingual, Instructional support and Seniors.. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Literacy Center staff Common core textbooks Chrome books SAT Books for all Eleventh Grade Students Guidance, teachers, and deans to work with and counsel students Per session for school aides, educational paraprofessionals, supervisors and school safety Lab Aid Science Kits Laboratory Technician Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant X 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, school leaders and teachers will provide rigorous targeted instruction by focusing on improving academic reading and writing across all content areas as students strengthen their ability to read, analyze informational text and utilize text based and text dependent evidence to write and defend an evidence based claim. This will result in a 5% increase of student achievement in the January 2019 New York State Common Core ELA Regents, 3% increase in the June 2019 Common Core Algebra Regents and an increase in the number of students being retained in all CTE Professional programs as compared to January 2018. an increase in the number of students being retained in all CTE Professional programs as compared to January 2018. .. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. January 2019 New York State Common Core ELA , Scholastic results on Common Core Algebra students in January 2019, Mock Algebra I Regents (March 2019) and Common Core Algebra Regents administered in June 2019. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 19 Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 20  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. X X X X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? According to OORS during the 2017-2018 school year we had 74 principal suspensions 14 superintendent suspensions and 30 teacher removals. According to our School Quality Guide for the 2017-2018 school 74% of our students had over 90% attendance. We continue to work on improving communication and having all constituents understand the urgency of presenting and expecting high expectations for all students and staff across content areas. Our cabinet and lead teachers meet frequently to discuss the modification of curricula in response to student learning needs and improved scholastic outcomes School climate and culture of the school is being transformed through the hiring of an Assistant Principal Administration/Security and Student Life who has created a multi-constituent School Culture and Climate Committee. She will present the following Professional Development Workshops for our staff, students and parents during the 2018-2019 school year: RULER introduction and ongoing training during the next three years, Emotions Matter- An introduction to Social Emotional Intelligence, Bullying and Cyberbullying, Girls Empowerment Training, Internet Safety for Parents, Guardians, Restorative Justice, General Response Protocol., AED and Sexual Harassment. Our priority is creating a safe , supportive, tolerant and welcoming environment for all of our school constituents.. Part 2 – Annual Goal 2018-19 SCEP-FF 21  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools –Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 a variety of social and emotional programs will result in a 5% decrease of superintendent, principal suspensions, and teacher removals as compared to June 2018 , as evidenced in the NYCDOE – Online Occurrence Reporting System (OORS). 2018-19 SCEP-FF 22  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Students who have a history of inappropriate behavior and/or under-credited students will be identified to be placed into socio-emotional learning advisories and programs during the day and after school through the partnership with community based organizations. We will support and refer all students in need including our ENL, SIFE, and SWDs experiencing social and/or emotional challenges with respect to adjusting to High School. Families will be invited to various informational and ceremonial events throughout the year in learn about the curriculum, assessments, multi-tiered supports and external resources. Students with behavioral challenges,, overaged/under credited students, SIFE, ELL’s, STH, returning LTA students. September 2018– June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Teacher, Deans. Attendance teacher, Guidance Counselors, Language Acquisition, Coordinator, Clinical Practitioners, Community Partners Partner with Community Based Organizations to provide supports to "at-risk" students. Literacy classes will continue to be an instructional focus. Summer Bridge, P.M. and Saturday Support classes have been programmed for students. ELL's attend monthly group counseling sessions we call TEAS WITH TEACHERS where they meet with educational support staff and Community Based speakers of their native language to discuss issues and learn appropriate behaviors and proper social interactions. Extended day classes will be offered during P.M. and Saturday school to help these students accrue the credits that they are missing. Advanced Placement and College Now will be offered as part of our Excellence and Equity initiate. After school programs will be implemented to help students feel invested in the school culture. We will continue with existing and initiate new co- and extracurricular clubs and activities including, movie nights, multicultural events, STEM programming/coding classes, and college tours. We will meet frequently with our student advisories, peer mediators, student government, senior All students September 2018– June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Teacher, Deans. COSA, Senior Advisor, Coaches. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 23  council and yearbook staff. We will increase the number of students hired as student aides and summer youth employees. Cross tutorial program with neighboring elementary school with 11th and 12th grade students tutoring elementary students after their regular school day. Implement an incentive program for students who meet the standard set forth for positive behavior and improved attendance. Students will be hired by the school-to-work as student aides to teachers and school staff. Interested students must demonstrate resiliency, self-motivation and provide evidence of on or almost on track scholarship. External partners, consultants, NYPD Community Field Support and DOE personnel from the Brooklyn Borough Field Support Center will facilitate programs for students parents and faculty. Possible topics include assemblies sexual harassment, cyberbullying, anger management, and citizenship.. Respect for All lessons will be a regular part of every students experience. All students September 2018– June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Teacher, Deans Peer mediation groups have been started. The students will work together to address issues within the school and solve problems without suspensions. All students September 2018– June 2019 Deans, Assistant Principals, Teachers, Students. At least once a month teachers will meet in horizontal grade teams to case conference about students. They will discuss academic and behavioral issues. Anecdotal reports entered into the Skedula will be analyzed to look for trends in student behavior and determine strategies to help. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Collaborative Teacher, Guidance Counselors How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents and guardians will learn about the school's varied academic and pupil personnel programs including community partnerships at our monthly Parent Teacher Association, PAC/Title I workshops and during scheduled cohort evening forums. During the 10 month meetings guest speakers will include Assistant Principals Administration 2018-19 SCEP-FF 24  and Supervision in addition to Lead Teachers, Peer Collaborative Teachers, Coaches, Health Career Practitioners and the Principal. College Career FAFSA evening is scheduled for October 2018. Ten PAC/Title I Parent Workshop will occur during 2018-2019 school year. Mandated Title I Parent Budgeting meeting and Principal's NYS Accountability meeting will take place on October 23, 2018. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Per session for after school activities Guidance, teachers, and deans to work after school with students Per session for school aides and safety FLAMBWAYANT Haitian community-based organisation Per session for teachers and paraprofessionals and other support personnel for tea parties Summer literacy program Per session for extended day classes Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant X 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019 a variety of social and emotional learning programs will result in a 2.5% decrease of superintendent, principal suspensions, and teacher removals as compared to February 2018 , as evidenced in the NYCDOE – Online Occurrence Reporting System (OORS). Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. NYCDOE – Online Occurrence Reporting System (OORS) Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 25  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. SOP(s) Addressed X X X 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. X 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to our 2017-2018 School Quality Snapshot, our average regents pass rates are as follows: Common Core English 70%, Common Core Algebra 1 57%, Living Environment 65%, Global History 57%, and US History 71%. Aligning teacher practices to the CCLS and conducting crosswalks to the Next Generation Learning Standards is an ongoing process. We continue to provide teachers with learning opportunities and encourage them to use new strategies towards addressing student needs, incorporating scaffolds for students with disabilities as well as English language learners and providing extension materials for students who have already mastered the Unit's Learning Standards and Performance Objectives. Revising our professional learning plan to provide differentiated assistance for teachers and to ensure curricular coherence is a high priority. Ongoing in class formative assessment is a top priority this year as we strive to refine the use of standards aligned rubrics and the design of collaborative assessments through teacher collaboration. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 26  By June 2019 teachers will effectively use Technology tools and Digital Platforms (I.O.) in the delivery of instruction and work collaboratively to implement targeted strategies based on data analysis, which will result in a 3-%% increase in the average Regents score for each subject. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 27  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Identify teachers who did not receive an effective rating in 3b, 3c and 3d. All teachers September 2018– June 2019 Lead Teachers, Peer Collaborative Teacher, Utilize the talent of Lead Teachers, Peer Collaborative Teacher, Development Coaches from Brooklyn South Field Support Center t conduct professional development workshops including literacy strategies, English Language Learner targeted instruction, and seminars in methods such as the Socratic method and use of I.O. and Interactive Promethean Boards to deliver effective instruction, infuse interactive technology, utilize I.O. for item analysis and tagging of learning standards. Computer Aide, Assistant Principals, IEP Teacher, Principal, Coaches Supervisors will give timely feedback with actionable suggestions to help teachers reach effective level of teaching pertaining to Questioning and Discussion and formative assessment strategies. All teachers September 2018– June 2019 Teachers, Principal, Assistant Principals Team meetings will consist of discussions of instructional strategies focused on student-to-student discussion, questioning, and assessment practices. Teachers will be sent to professional development during the school day to help them improve their skills as related to the Danielson Framework for Teaching. All teachers September 2018– June 2019 Teachers will collaborate district-wide through participation in study groups, lab-site visits, teacher-team meetings, common planning, inquiry based on student work, and the use of data to inform instructional practices. Professional development in the use of rubrics will be held to assist teachers in facilitating the use of rubrics to allow students to assess their own learning and design next instructional steps. Teachers, Principal, Assistant Principals, Mentors, Peer Collaborative Teacher, Lead Teacher, Coaches 2018-19 SCEP-FF 28  All teachers will be required to use Skedula, our online grade book. This will allow both students and their parents to access grades and teacher comments at any time. Parents and students will be in constant communication with other members of the school community. Teachers and students September 2018– June 2019 Teachers, Principal, Assistant Principals 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent teacher breakfasts and evening forums will be facilitated by Cohort: Health Career, Gateway, NLA, and Instructional Support. Curriculum, Assessment, Tutoring, Progress Monitoring and Professional Learning for Parents and Guardians will be discussed. Regents review and SAT books will be purchased for parents to use with their children.. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Consultants for professional development Per session for Teachers and Assistant Principals for after school professional development Per diem for professional development during the school day Purchase of Skedula online gradebook Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant X 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019 we will have a 1.5% increase in our average regents scores. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Mock Regent's Examinations administered in December 2018 and January 2019 Regents Examinations.. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 29  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). X X X X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. As a school community, we continue maintaining our focus on creating literacy-rich leaning environment in all classes and activities. We design and provide academic literacy support for all students and academic literacy-focused professional learning opportunities for administrators, teachers, guidance counsellors, and paraprofessionals every month. Our attention to collaborative participatory action planning allows engaging different constituencies of our school community in the cyclical process of whole school performance improvement based on the Universal Design for Leaning principles. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART– Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all teachers will improve their competencies in Danielson Framework for Effective Schools in Domains 3B, 3C, and 3D though targeted professional development, resulting in an increase in credit accumulation of 5% for Cohort U and V compared to June 2018. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 30  2018-19 SCEP-FF 31  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). There will be a literacy course required for all special education students. Counselors, Assistant Principals, Data specialist and others will work together to target specific students in the special education population and help them to stay on track and get all any supports they need to pass their classes and be able to pass regents exams. Extended day classes for all students who need to recover credits they did not acquire in the past. Special education students September 2018– June 2019 Students behind in credits September 2018– June 2019 We will also use an online learning program to help with credit recovery and classes for students in need of credits. After school regents tutoring to assist students in gaining the knowledge necessary to pass the regents exam for their subject. Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Teachers, Assistant Principals, Paraprofessionals, Principal, Data specialist, and Counselors Teachers, Assistant Principals, Principal, Data specialist, and Counselors Teachers will receive timely feedback from administrators based on cycles of observation and provide targeted professional development based on the observation trends. Teaching Staff September 2018– June 2019 Teachers, Assistant Principals, Principal, After school support classes for ELLs consisting of a subject area and an ENL teacher to increase academic vocabulary, reading comprehension and academic writing skills. ELL students September 2018– June 2019 Teachers, Assistant Principals 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will be offered PAC/Title I workshops in the following topics: 1. Next Generation Learning Standards. 2. SAT Preparation 2018-19 SCEP-FF 32  3. Academic writing ; academic research, plagiarism and copyright laws 4. Working with different textual sources, academic writing styles, quoting and referencing 5. The New Global History Assessment 6. Curriculum Nights held in September 2018 and January 2019. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Extra classes during the day Apex learning online program Per session for Extended day classes Per session for school aides and paraprofessionals Per session for Regents tutoring Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant X 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will be an increase of credit accumulation by 2.5% for students enrolled in Cohort U and V compared to February 2018. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. STARS reports for credit accumulation and School Quality Guide Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 33  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. X X X X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. We maintain a happy, healthy, productive and tolerant atmosphere so that all constituents feel safe and valued in order to be able to function at an optimum level. Parents are always welcome in the building and we offer multiple professional and supportive opportunities for them to be in the building. We have a self-motivated and dynamic parent coordinator who possesses strength to engage parents. This is an ongoing process and we continually seek increased participation at conferences and parent meetings. Our priority is creating a true partnership between home, school and the community. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, Clara Barton staff members will facilitate parent/guardian learning opportunities which will provide the creation and sustaining of a welcoming environment for families in addition to furthering active reciprocal communication solidifying the parent, school and community partnership which will result in a 10% increase of parent participation at school meetings and events. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 34  2018-19 SCEP-FF 35  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Redesign and routine maintenance of the school website for current information pertaining to school events. Students and parents Seeking enhanced parent and teacher participation in utilizing Pupil Path communication system to receive up to date pupil progress information and to receive ongoing conversations between parent and teacher. Train teachers in full use of IO Digital Platform system with teacher grade book and a parent log in for constant up to date information on how their children are doing and ongoing conversations between parent and teacher. September 2018– June 2019 Teachers, Computer specialist, parent coordinator, Principal, and Assistant Principals Curriculum night inviting parent to the school to meet their child’s teachers and discuss department goals, assessments and evaluative measures held in September 2018 and February 2019. Students and parents September 2018– June 2019 Teachers, Parent Coordinator, Principal, and Assistant Principals Students and parents September 2018– June 2019 Teachers, Parent Coordinator, Principal, and Assistant Principals Health fair where all the students in health career majors have stations where they inform parents of what they are learning in their major. A series of parent workshops on topics such as: utilizing Pupil Path, ELA Common Core and Next Generation Learning Standards workshop, coat drive, (P)SAT workshop, Medicaid Service Coordination, FAFSA, Sexual Harassment, Cyberbullying, Introduction to Health Careers, New global History Passport Curriculum and Assessment, Standards and Behavioral Challenges. District workshops will be offered to parents at various locations throughout the district to meet the needs of parents/guardians. IEPs will be written in active collaboration with the IEP students and their parents to address their child needs, and assure that the IEP goals align with expectations of parents, their children, and educators. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 36  Documentation will be translated and workshops for the parents of English language learners will be held. A parent survey is given to find out more topics they are interested in so we can provide workshops that address their needs. Parent, student, teacher, administrator forums, where all attend a workshop or event with community building activities to address the needs of all and give information and feedback on school activities. Documents will be translated and workshops will include a Haitain-Creole fluent staff member. Provide parents with materials: handouts, books, brochures on various topics throughout the year. Materials will be available in several languages. Parents 3b – Parent and Family Engagement September 2018– June 2019 Teachers, Parent Coordinator, Principal, and Assistant Principals If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Liberty Partnership through Medgar Evers College Medgar Evers College-Cradle to College Pipeline Gear-up through Long Island University Kingsborough Community College-College Now After School Health Career Student and Parent Forums held four times a year-Informational and Interactive PM Advanced Placement Forums held twice a year PAC/Title I Family Workshops held throughout the year. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. School website Parent coordinator to contact parents and promote event Per session for after school activities such as workshops and parent forums I.O.(Skedula and pupil path) Books, paper, stamps for information and mailings After school and Saturday workshops 2018-19 SCEP-FF 37  Metro Cards to attend workshops Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant X 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In February 2019, we will review the attendance rosters for parent workshops to see that there has been an increase of 2.5% of our parents attending. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Parent meeting and workshop attendance records Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 38  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Students who are in the class and struggling, have failed the class before, are English language learners, are special education. Also if they have failed the regents, or are recommended by a teacher. Students who are in the class and struggling, have failed the class before, are English language learners, are special education. Also if they have failed the regents, or are recommended by a teacher. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Annotative Reading; Rereading; Close Reading; Guided Reading; Guided Writing; Modeled Writing; Point of View Writing; Reading and Writing to Question the Author and or the Text; Building Academic and Content Area Vocabulary; and Using PSAT/SAT Vocabulary to produce effective writing. Basic, intermediate and advanced mathematics skills are taught to narrow the achievement gaps among the low performing students to help them with problem solving and conceptual understanding. Strategies include using calculators, Promethean Active Boards, Think-PairShare, looking for patterns, logical reasoning, drawing pictures, using a formula and Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Whole Group Instruction; Small Group Instruction; Paired Student Activity; One-to-one tutoring; Lecture; and Peer tutoring When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Services are provided during the regular school day, after school and on Saturdays. Services are provided during the regular school day, after school and on Saturdays. One-to-one tutoring: All mathematics teachers offer individualized attention to the students for one to two hours twice a week during the after school tutoring. Purposeful students groups within the classrooms are determined based on the comprehensive item Analysis of the Uniform Regents Based Interim Unit Assessments are given to assess the strengths and 2018-19 SCEP-FF 39 weaknesses of students in various content areas. Whole group instruction, small group and one-to-one tutoring, and peer tutoring is available. Services are provided during the regular school day, after school and on Saturdays. Whole group instruction, small group and one-to-one tutoring, and peer tutoring is available. Services are provided during the regular school day, after school and on Saturdays. Science Students who are in the class and struggling, have failed the class before, are English language learners, are special education. Also if they have failed the regents, or are recommended by a teacher, or need labs for eligibility. Social Studies Students who are in the class and struggling, have failed the class before, are English language learners, are special education. Also if they have failed the regents, or are recommended by a teacher. eliminating possibilities. Exam item analysis and review of student work will be used to identify specific areas of deficiency in science-related skills and conceptual understandings. Graph, diagram and data-table interpretation, review and reinforcement of science process and reasoning skills, critique of experimental procedures and validity of conclusions, test taking skills, science literacy and reading comprehension strategies for non fiction texts Exam item analysis and review of student work will be used to identify specific areas of deficiency in social studies-related conceptual understandings. Graph, diagram and data-table interpretation, review and reinforcement of reasoning skills, critique of DBQ questioning and validity of conclusions, testtaking skills, social studies literacy and reading 2018-19 SCEP-FF 40 At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Teacher recommendations, security or deans recommendations. Anyone in a fight or who appears to have anger management issues, pregnant girls, and students failing multiple classes. comprehension strategies for nonfiction texts. Guidance Counseling, Psychologist, Social Worker and other Health-related services (physical therapy, occupational therapy, vision and hearing services, speech and language therapy, life skills training and transitional services for physically handicapped students). Travel training. Services are provided during the regular school day, after school and on Saturdays. Guidance Counselor provides individual and/or small group sessions one or more times a week pull-out services. School Psychologist provides individual session one or more times a week pull-out services. Social Worker provides individual and/or small group sessions one or more times a week pull-out services. Health related services provide individual and/or small group sessions one or more times a week pull-out services. We provide: physical therapy, occupational therapy, vision and hearing services, speech and language therapy, life skills training and transitional services for physically handicapped students. We also provide travel training for those who need it, and health paraprofessionals for those who need them as per their IEP. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 41  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 80 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. We buy care packages for all students including school supplies, book bags, hygiene products. We also have jackets and clothes as necessary for these students. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). NA 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 42  NA 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. NA 2018-19 SCEP-FF 43  Section 8: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. 1. Ongoing throughout the 2018-2019 year, as positions for certified teachers become available, postings and interviews will consider only candidates who are highly qualified in the area specific to the vacancy (monitored by APO and Principal). Attendance of Principal and Assistant Principals Supervision at New York City Hiring Fairs. 2. By October 2018, current staff not meeting highly qualified standards will be targeted for intensified training to meet highly qualified status (monitored by APO and Principal). Teachers are invited to enroll in CUNY courses to meet New York City/State Subject licensure requirements. Provision of online professional development programs for teachers. 3. Targeted teaching staff will be required to attend training in order to meet HQT status by a targeted date determined by the Principal. Teachers in this program will be required to submit documentation of completion of required training to APO (monitored by APO and Principal). Teachers receive information pertaining to HOUSSE certification. 4. By June 2019, teaching staff not meeting HQT status will be subject to review and potential removal based on established targets (monitored by Principal). 5. Professional Development is offered by Assistant Principals Supervision and Brooklyn South Field Support for teachers currently teaching o6ne or two classes out of license while collegiate certification process is ongoing. 6. Recruitment of Health Care Professionals by Principal and Assistant Principal Health Careers through NYC DOE CTE meetings, conferences and outreach to hospital and community health career facilities centers. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). 2018-19 SCEP-FF 44  1. The NYCDOE central office is offering professional development ongoing throughout year and in all major subjects. Teachers will attend these workshops to improve their knowledge and practice with the Common Core State Standards. 2. The NYCDOE also offers in house professional development for teachers on different aspects of the common core which will be held throughout the year. 3. Principals and Assistant Principals attended various workshops over the summer and continually throughout the year which they use to turnkey further information to their staff. 4. Assistant Principals work with paraprofessionals and staff to convey the importance of the Common Core State Standards and how they can attribute to the success of students. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. We are not a Targeted Assistant School 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). Not applicable Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). Not applicable 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers participate in inquiry teams and common planning time once a week where they determine the assessments and benchmarks that will be used for students in regards to individual subjects and content areas. The measures of student learning baseline assessments were used to get a diagnostic on students and teachers per subject area are creating periodic assessments to assess progress throughout the year. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible 2018-19 SCEP-FF 45  for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (SCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Title I Part A (Basic) Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 889,811 323,878 0 12,878 0 8,266,880 X X X X Column B Section Reference(s) 11,14,17,19,22 11,14,17,19,22 11,14,17,19,22 11,14,17,19,22 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 46   A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/SCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 47  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent Involvement Policy (PIP) Parent and Family Engagement Policy Title I Parent Involvement Policy and Parent-School Compact for Clara Barton High School for Health Professions (K600)1 Section I: Title I Parent Involvement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Clara Barton High School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Clara Barton High School for Health Professions will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students 1. providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level (e.g., literacy, math and use of technology); 2. providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; 2018-19 SCEP-FF 48  3. Fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively 1 This template was designed by the Office of School Improvement in collaboration with the New York State Education Department, Office of School Improvement and Community Services (NYC) and the Office for Family Engagement and Advocacy. This template is aligned to fully comply with the parent involvement requirements as outlined in Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA). 4. providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 5. sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; and 6. providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of our school community; Clara Barton High School for Health Professions’ Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. `Our school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of our school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Clara Barton High School for Health Professions Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Teacher Association, as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. Parental Involvement and School Quality To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, Clara Barton High School for Health Professions will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to schools to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in our Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● Support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Teacher Association and Title I Parent Advisory Council. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● Maintain a 2dedicated staff person to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent dedicated staff person will provide information based on the assessed needs of the parents of children 2 Please note that only New York City Public schools that have attained a student population of two-hundred (200) or more will receive funding to hire a Parent Coordinator. 39 who attend our school and will work to ensure that our school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The dedicated staff will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the Central Office for Family Engagement and Advocacy (OFEA); ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system (e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report); ● host the required Title I Parent Annual Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings (e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; and ● Conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event 2018-19 SCEP-FF 49  where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help. Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement Clara Barton High School for Health Professions will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Open School Week and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Teacher Association and Title I Parent Advisory Council; 40 ● supporting or hosting OFEA District Family Day events; ● Establishing a Parent Resource Center or lending library; instructional materials for parents. ● Hosting events to support, men asserting leadership in education for their children. parents/guardians, grandparents and foster parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand; and ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages School-Parent Compact (SPC) Clara Barton High School for Health Professions, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA). Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; 2018-19 SCEP-FF 50  ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; 2018-19 SCEP-FF 51  ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; Parent/Guardian Responsibilities: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; III. Student Responsibilities 2018-19 SCEP-FF 52  ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 53  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 SCEP-FF 54  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: The work of our Inquiry Team revealed that ELLs have serious gaps in academic language, which affects their achievement in English and other content area classes. In order to ensure that all ELLs meet the standards, besides the regular classroom instruction, we will implement a supplementary Title III academic language development program within a 25-week extended day program. There will be a two times/week, 2 hours of ENL and/or literacy instruction, for two groups of two different proficiency levels: entering and advanced students on Mondays, Tuesdays, Wednesdays, and Thursdays from 3:30 to 5:30 pm. The use of technology, specifically, Brain POP! on-line learning program, will be included in order to improve reading, writing, literary understanding and to boost the general knowledge of the students. We will use this program to improve their academic language development. They will learn how to conduct Internet research in order to develop their general knowledge. The use of computers will help improving their literacy skills and enabling students and their families to communicate safely on line via the controlled environment of DOE - approved software. We plan to provide supplementary ENL instruction for a total of 165 students for both proficiency levels. Title III services will be delivered five days a week, Tuesday–Friday, from 3: 30 p.m. to 5: 30 p.m.; and on Saturdays from 8: 30 a.m. to 1:00 p.m. There will be six appropriately certified teachers: 3 ENL, and 3 Special Education teachers of ELA, Science, and Mathematics. We will provide the following services: 1. Inter-generational field experience in the local nursing homes for ELLs: on Mondays, from 2 to 5:30 and Saturdays, from 8:30 to 12:30. Taught by 2 teacher, 1 ENL, and 1 ELA for the SWDs teacher 2. Academic language development in STEM - on Tuesdays and Thursdays, from 3:30 to 5:30, taught by 2 teachers (one ENL and one Science for SWDs teacher) will teach in the ICT class for ELLs, including ELLs who are SWDs; 3. Literacy and Life Skills class for ELLs who are NYSAA SWDs - Tuesdays, Wednesdays, Thursdays, Fridays - 3:30 to 5:30; and Saturdays from 8:30 to 12: 45 - 1 teacher in a 15: 1 setting. Enhanced with the BRAIN POP on-line solution. Taught by 2 teachers, one ENL, and one Mathematics teacher for the SWDs. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered 2018-19 SCEP-FF 55  Part C: Professional Development Begin description here: All teachers working with ELLs will function as an inquiry team which will be engaged in participatory action research project. They will conduct weekly study groups analyzing student data and designing differentiated instructional solutions. The team will take part in the following learning initiatives: QTEL training for all teachers serving ELLs who did not have the opportunity to participate in it yet provided by the NYC DOE OELL • Literacy strategies for beginning ELLs • Using educational assessment strategies and data to inform and differentiate instruction • Using technology to enhance language learning • Training of Bilingual content area teachers in ENL strategies • PD for all monolingual teachers who educate ELLs, in ENL strategies • Portfolio Assessment and practical uses of it • Classroom management strategies for differentiated instructional practices • Applying Multiple Intelligences Theory to instructional practices Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: In the past, the parents were very reluctant to come to come to school on weekday evenings and/or weekends. We conducted a parent survey and discovered that most immigrant parents work late at night and/or on Saturdays. The parents of non- immigrant students, however, are much more active. According to the school Language Allocation Policy, we provide interpreters for all PTA meetings and parent-focused activities. We have very active PTA president who scheduled most parental meetings on Saturdays. We are planning to run all our parental activities at that time and involve both parent coordinator and PTA president in planning and running of parental sessions. Parents of ELLs, include ELLs who are SWDs, will be engaged in a minimum of 20 hours of meaningful activities related to the academic learning and social/ emotional growth of their children during school year 2016-2017. Parents will receive four hours of academic and parenting skills instruction each week at the Saturday Title I PAC Academy. Title III funds will provide push - in services for these sessions. The cooperating Title III staff member will assist Title I Academy in helping parents of ELLs and parents of those children who interact with ELLs dealing with issues of adjustment to the new school and new country. Every fourth Saturday of the month, parents will participate in workshops exclusively devoted to the needs of immigrants. The Parent Coordinator and PTA President will also conduct workshops about such issues as graduation requirements, college preparation, etc. FLAMBAYANT Haitian CBO representatives will participate in these meetings 2018-19 SCEP-FF 56 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 2018-19 SCEP-FF 57  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 17 School Name Clara Barton High School Borough Brooklyn School Number 600 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Dr. Richard Forman Coach type here ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Mr. Habib Cherif Teacher/Subject Area Ms.mariya Krakovskaya, ENL tea Teacher/Subject Area Ms. Mushailova, Sp. Ed. Related-Service Provider Ms. Donna Ramirez, Social Work Superintendent Michael Prayor Assistant Principal Dr. Vera Leykina Coach type here School Counselor Ms. Marsha Boncy Parent Wilvonne Henry Parent Coordinator Ms. Shaundell Lawson Field Support Center Staff Member Dr. Sourrette Fougere Other (Name and Title) Ms. Marie Joseph, bilingual pa C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 1 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 1 2 3 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 1 D. Student Demographics 2018-19 SCEP-FF 58  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 1250 Total number of ELLs 107 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 8.56% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): Haitian Creole If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 4 K 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 9 24 0 24 10 21 0 21 11 10 0 10 12 6 0 6 Tot # 61 0 0 0 0 0 61 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? during We are using DOE- developed Oral Interview Questionnaire and Literacy Evaluation for Newcomer SIFE (LENS) to assess the skills of incoming new ELLs. In addition, teachers of ELLs and teachers of SWDs who are ELLs designed initial assessment instruments they use to establish the baseline for their lesson planning In analyzing the assessment data the following patterns were revealed. Our ELLs progressed much quicker in listening and speaking than reading and writing. This is consistent with numerous studies suggesting that reading and writing, as parts of academic level of second language development, take much longer, up to 7 years, than listening and speaking, which takes up to 3 years. According to the NYSESLAT data, the majority of our ELLs are in the High Intermediate and Advanced stages of English language learning. They tend to spend more than one year in this stage. Generally, all our beginners are newcomers 2018-19 SCEP-FF 59  and SWDs on alternative assessment track. NYSITELL results put our newcomers into reading and writing deficits category. Reading and writing skill development is addressed through the use of differentiated instruction based assignment design by ENL teachers who are devoted to the ELLs. The analysis of patterns across NYSESLAT modalities revealed that most ELLs have higher listening/speaking score than reading/writing score. This is consistent with our inquiry team findings and reflects the need to deepen academic language development. To address this need we modified curricula in every content area and ENL class to include vocabulary-reinforcing activities and assessment tools. This year, we are expanding our work in addressing the evolving NYS Common Core Standards, particularly Standard 1 in Reading and Writing for grades 9-12. Every teacher working with ELLs receives a copy of the NYSESLAT modalities report and uses it as a guide in designing differentiated lessons and curriculum maps. For the standardized assessment, our ELLs and former ELLs are offered to take Math, Science, and Social Studies tests in their native languages if available. They are provided with two versions of the test, one in English, and another is in language of their choice. In addition, they use glossaries and take advantage of the extended time accommodation. Most students prefer to submit their tests in English. This year we will have many more ELLs and former ELLs eligible for Regents examinations. A large number of them will take these examinations for the first time. We intend to focus on Regents preparation and test taking tutorials in our during and after school tutorial sessions. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Our ELL program evaluation is based on multiple instruments. We look at the students achievement in second language acquisition through the NYSESLAT and at content area and NLA progress through the final grades analysis, Regents results, teacher – conducted portfolio evaluations, results of formal and informal observations, and self-reflective survey of teachers. All these pieces of data allows us to determine the success of our program. School administration and teachers meet every Monday for the Inquiry Hour. They conduct formal action research and collaboratively develop a set of steps to address the gaps revealed. During these sessions, the results of Periodic Assessment for ELLs are being accessed on-line. The gaps in specific sub skills for each child are being linked to the appropriate Achieve 3000 assignment, and the ENL teachers collaboratively plan how to use these suggested assignments in class. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] n/a 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. In analyzing NYSITELL and NYSESLAT assessment data, the following patterns were revealed. 1. ELLs progressed much quicker in listening and speaking than in reading and writing. This is consistent with numerous studies suggesting that reading and writing, as parts of academic level of second language development, take much longer, up to 7 years in comparison to listening and speaking, which takes up to 3 years. 2. According to the NYSESLAT data, the majority of our ELLs are in expanding stage of English language learning. They tend to 2018-19 SCEP-FF 60  spend more than one year in this stage. 3. NYSITELL results put our newcomers into reading and writing deficits category. Reading and writing skill development is addressed through the use of differentiated instruction based assignment design by ENL teachers who are devoted to the ELLs. Analysis of the data pattern revealed that we need to focus on reading and academic writing skills in English and Haitian Creole. Our SIFE students need to work on expanson of their general academic vocabulary, i.e. words they would be able to actively use in all content area classes, and on the structure of sentences and paragraphs in both English and their native language 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? The findings are discussed with the faculty in September; with each individual teacher during the initial planning conferences, with the parental community during the PTA meetings and workshops; with the school leadership team (SBLT) . In addition, individual ELLs receive a letter about their NYSESLAT score and sub scores as soon as they become available . Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. We program our ELLs and former ELLs strictly based on the CR Part 164.2 guidelines. Beginners receive 1 period of free standing ENL and 2 periods of integrated ENL/ELA instruction each day. Low intermediate students receive 1 period of free standing and one period of integrated ENL/ELA instruction each day. High intermediate ELLs receive 2 periods of integrated ENL/ELA instruction a day. Advanced students receive 1 period of integrated ENL/ELA instruction a day and one period of ELA instruction with native speakers of English . Those who scored out within the last 2 years receive at least 90 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA instruction week b. TBE program. If applicable. 79 percent of our ELLs participate in the TBE program. All ELLs receive the number of ENL classes based on their latest NYSESLAT/ NYSITELL results. Entering students have 3 periods of ENL instruction, one of these periods is integrated into the ELA instruction. Emerging students receive 2 period of ENL instruction, one of these periods is in integrated setting. Transitioning students receive 2 periods of ENL instruction, both of them in the integrated setting. Expanding students receive 1 period on integrated ENL instruction every day. Commanding level students who scored out in the last two years receive 90 minutes of integrated ENL instruction a week. Those ELLs who are also SWDs are receiving services according to the NYSESLAT/NYSITELL level and their IEPs. i Besides appropriate number of ENL classes, our bilingual program participants receive 360 minutes of Haitian Creole Native Language Arts every week. We have 4 yearly cycles of Haitian Native Language Arts available. At the end of the 3rd yearly cycle the students take LOTE examination. If they pass it, and we have had a 100% passing rate for the last 3 years, they receive a Foreign Language Regents credit. The curriculum and approaches in this class mirror those of the ELA classes and prepare Haitian students to transfer their skills into English when they eventually take ELA regents examination. Those students who do not achieve a passing score on the NYSESLAT but pass Haitian LOTE examination participate in the fourth NLA cycle, Haitian Creole Theater Arts, developed a creative writing and public speaking course in Haitian. Besides NLA classes, bilingual students also participate in Math, Science, and Social Studies instruction in both languages. These classes are taught by certified teachers whose native language is Haitian Creole. In these classes, 2018-19 SCEP-FF 61  the amount of native language instruction is determined by the teacher based on the individual needs of students. When necessary, Haitian bilingual paraprofessional and/or peer tutors assist the students in the classroom. c. DL program. If applicable. n/a 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? ENL instruction is delivered according to the CR Part 154 to all ELLs, including ELLs who are SWDs requiring 15:1 classes according to their IEPs. Entering students have 3 periods of ENL instruction, one of these periods is integrated into the ELA instruction. Emerging students receive 2 period of ENL instruction, one of these periods is in integrated setting. Transitioning students receive 2 periods of ENL instruction, both of them in the integrated setting. Expanding students receive 1 period on integrated ENL instruction every day. Commanding level students who scored out in the last two years receive 90 minutes of integrated ENL instruction a weeky. All these classes are taught by NYS Certified ESL teachers. ELA classes are taught by the NYS Certified ELA teachers. All bilingual students receive 360 minutes of NLA instruction a week. Students in the free standing ENL program receive instruction in content area classes only in English. Students in transitional bilingual program receive content area instruction in a combination of English and Haitian Creole based on their learning needs. Entering students have at least 25% of their content area instruction taught in English, and 75% in Haitian Creole. Emerging e students have 50% of their content area instruction taught in English and 50% taught in Haitian Creole. Expanding and Transitioning students have at least 75% of their content area instruction delivered in English and 25% of their content area instruction delivered in Haitian Creole. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. All content area classes in a transitional bilingual program are taught by a NYS Certified content area Haitian Creole bilingual teachers. Student participating in the ENL program receive all their content area instruction only in English, delivered by the NYS Certified content area teachers. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Because no Haitian Creole NYS or NYC standardized assessment is available, our Haitian Creole bilingual teachers in cooperation with the Haitian Native Language Arts teacher developed a series of formative assessment tools geared to assess the learning needs of ELLs in every content area. These tools are utilized by the teachers at least 3 times each semester. Data gathered with these tools is analyzed by the teachers during the action research and used to develop targeted instructional interventions in all content area classes where ELLs learn. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Newly arrived ELLs with very low English literacy skills participate in the after- school RIGOR-based small–size sessions. These sessions run twice a week from 3:30 to 5: 30 p.m. on Tuesdays and Thursdays. Math tutorial sessions specifically designed for 2018-19 SCEP-FF 62  the beginners are run for two days a week at the same time on Wednesdays and Fridays. These sessions utilize Destination Math on-line solution and Castle Learning on-line solution and allow the teacher to individualize intervention services. Our Emerging, Transitioning, and Expanding ELLs work on bridging similar gaps in the after school sessions running 4 time a week at the same time. All these sessions are funded by the Title III money. 85 percent of our ELLs are SIFE and former SIFE. We also have a significant number of long – term ELLs. We address their needs through the SIFE grant after school and on Saturdays. The participants take part in Science, Social Studies, and ELA Regents – preparation sessions. ENL teachers provide push-in services during these sessions. During the school day, all ELLs receive content-based ENL instruction in their ENL classes and in their NLA class. Haitian Creole NLA lessons class mirrors ELA lessons, but utilize Haitian reading and writing to prepare the students for the ELA Regents examination. In their ENL classes, the students learn English through the content of various subject areas, mostly History and Science. For the participants in the Haitian Bilingual program, these ENL lessons reinforce their learning in bilingual science and History classes. Bilingual content area teachers conduct their lessons in different combinations of Haitian Creole and English, depending on the linguistic needs of the students. To accelerate English language development, a certified teacher of ELA is being pushed into the ENL class for advanced learners. Our after school and Saturday sessions are enriched by the use of History Alive! , Castle Learning, and Achieve 3000 solutions. All instruction for ELLs is tailored to address their individual needs. The teachers maintain portfolios of each ELL and systematically analyze the progress each students makes during the after – school weekly common planning time sessions each Monday from 2:10 TO 2: 50 PM. 30 ELLs, 10 of them are NYS Regents-Diploma bound SWDs, participate in the Nursing Home Internship program. Under the supervision of one teacher and 3 paraprofessionals, they work in the local nursing home primarily with the Haitian-speaking patients on Mondays from 1:30 to 5: 30 p.m, and on Saturdays from 8:30 a.m. to 1:30 p.m. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? .Our hold – over students requires assistance in academic language development; study skills development; and Regents test preparation. They receive specifically designed assignments developed by our certified teachers of ENL in collaboration with certified bilingual content area teachers and certified NLA teacher. Our ESL and bilingual teachers collaborate in writing new ENL curriculum devoted to teaching academic English through Humanities and Sciences content. The team meets every Monday from 1:20 to 3:30 to work on this project during our Inquiry and Common Planning time. We also provide supplemental Academic and Social English Language Development Services after school and on Saturday. We attack deficits in listening skills from two different perspectives: as an essential part in social skills development and as an essential part in academic language development. As a social skill, we incorporate listening activities into ENL instruction devoted to effective communication with adults and peers. Such instruction is being delivered during two types of lessons: lessons in social behavior, and lessons in effective group work. Both types of lessons are designed by the ENL/Bilingual team of certified teachers and qualified paraprofessionals and delivered during ENL, NLA, and bilingual content area classes, and during the supplementary after school and Saturday services. Additionally, we use recording features in our laptops recorders and computers with speakers to conduct a variety of listening comprehension activities in all during the day and after school classes. When working on individualized ACHIEVE 2018-19 SCEP-FF 63  3000 sessions, the students also have access to the listening feature of the software and use headphones. In the beginning of the school year, all ELLs who continue struggling with reading and/or writing are assessed with two standardized instruments: Achieve 3000 LEVEL SET assessment tool and Periodic assessment for ELLs. This assessment approach allows us to define specific reading subskills we need to attack for each individual ELL. Obtained individual assessment results, as well as, reading work samples from the students’ portfolio collected during the previous school year, and the most recent NYSESLAT scores are used by ESL, bilingual, and NLA teachers to target specific reading difficulties and group learners by common reading sub skills deficits within their classes. This permits teachers to differentiate ENL, Content Area, and NLA lessons based on specific reading difficulties experienced by individual students. In ENL and NLA classes, we supplement reading instruction, with the Brain Pop! literacy solution for the Advanced and Intermediate ELLs, and RIGOR solution for the Beginning ELLs. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? At Clara Barton High School, our ENL, bilingual, and Special Education teachers meet every Monday from 1:20 to 3:30 to examine gathered student data collected during the previous week, to develop instructional interventions, and to analyze and improve teaching practices for ELLs who are SWDs. They are joined by the related service providers and guidance counselors who work with ELLs and SWDs. All ELLs who are SWDs receive appropriate number of ENL classes in accordance to their latest NYSESLAT score. These classes are taught by ta NYS certified ENL teacher. The setting in these classes corresponds to the IEP recommendations of the students. For all 15 ELLs who are NYS AA SWDs, three 15:1 classes are being taught by this teacher. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Newly arrived ELLs with very low English literacy skills participate in the after-school RIGOR small–size sessions. These sessions run twice a week from 3:30 to 5: 30 p.m. on Tuesdays and Thursdays. Math tutorial sessions specifically designed for the beginners are run for two days a week at the same time on Wednesdays and Fridays. These sessions utilize Destination Math and Castle Learning on-line solution and allow the teacher to individualize intervention services. Our intermediate and advanced ENL learners work on bridging similar gaps in the Achieve 3000 afterschool sessions running 4 time a week at the same time. All these sessions are funded by the Title III money. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We will expand our Field experience in the nursing homes for the ELLs. Prior to this year, our ELLs received only ENL instruction during this program. Now, these students will receive also bilingual instruction. Based on our needs assessment, we discovered that over 90% of our Haitian Creole Transitional Bilingual students are trilingual, and were educated in French in Haiti. As a result, we started providing additional LOTE class in French for these children every day. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? None of the programs or services will be discontinue 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs participate in all programs and extracurricular activities offered to the English proficient students. Besides, they are invited to participate in the after-school and Saturday credit bearing and non-credit bearing sessions in Academic English; in Health Career-related English; in Life Skills; in Native Language Literacy and Leadership; in Computer Literacy; and in the Nursing Home Field Experience. The parents of ELLs are invited for Family Nights combining informational sessions and social learning at least 6 times a year. These sessions are conducted in English and in the languages of the families. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 64  Intensive Achieve 3000-assisted tutorial instructional sessions are also delivered on Tuesdays, Wednesdays, Thursdays, Fridays, and Saturdays. Weekly Teas with Teachers group counseling sessions are conducted with the ELLs, do address their social and emotional needs. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. We Use Achieve 3000, RIGOR, Destination Math, Castle Learning, and History Alive! . We also collaborate with educational departments of Brooklyn Museum and Brooklyn Botanical Garden, Morgan Library, Brooklyn Public Library, and use their materials in our classrooms. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? All transitional bilingual students are native speakers of French, Haitian Creole. They take Haitian Creole NLA classes and French LOTE classes. All other ELLs are taking either French or Spanish three-year sequences of courses commencing in Regents Examination. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All supports and services are designed based on the initial assessments, so the are individually tailored to address the needs of each ELL. We are using the Universal Design for Learning principles to make our services accessible for children of all ages and abilities. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? We Use Achieve 3000, RIGOR, Destination Math, Castle Learning, and History Alive! . We also collaborate with educational departments of Brooklyn Museum and Brooklyn Botanical Garden, Morgan Library, Brooklyn Public Library, and use their materials in our classrooms. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Before the beginning of the school year we conduct an orientation meeting for all newcomers. The interpreters in all main school languages are available during these meetings. We also have a trained staff member available to assist the newcomers during the intake process, administer HLIS, an discuss educational placement options available in this school and transfer options to other schools in NYC. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Besides Haitian Creole and French, we offer Spanish and Russian. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? a. Both languages are used all day for instruction. b. None of the subjects are taught separately, every class is integrated. c. Language is separated by the themes. Mostly, Haitian is used when the students are in school. English is used when the students are in the Hospital, doing their internship. d. Both languages are taught simultaneously. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 65  Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? All teachers working with ELLs are identified through the analysis of their class lists. We use SKEDULA, SESIS, and ATS to identify these teachers. Our ENL and bilingual teachers collaborate in designing a professional development plan based on the student data analysis in September. This plan allows us to work with all school personnel involved with ELLs at a minimum of one Monday a month for 3 hours. At least four Saturday workshops for teachers, each workshop is 5-hour long; are planned for the staff working with ELLs. All staff members working with ELLs and former ELLs meet as a team every Monday. They plan together and discuss the progress of their students. In addition, they participate in numerous DOE run professional initiatives, i. e., QTEL institutes, NYS TESOL and SABE conferences, HABETAC and other BETAC sponsored workshops and lecture series devoted to the issues of first and second language acquisition, academic and cultural literacy, and teaching English through content area. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. n/a All faculty is participating in two full-day professional development initiatives, one in November and one in June, devoted to the needs of ELLs, SWDs and native speakers of English who experience literacy acquisition difficulties. Representatives from RIGOR and/or Achieve 3000 work on these days for several hours with a target group of teachers on approaches of utilizing these curricula in their classes to best suit the needs of the students.: Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Parents are very active part of our school community. Parents of ELLs participate in all whole school parental functions. They are present at the PTA meetings and parent teacher conferences and actively participate in all of them. We provide translated versions of all documents created for and by the parents in Haitian Creole, French and Spanish. We also provide qualified interpreters for every parent who requests such service while communicating with individual staff members or participating in any group activities. For the parents of ELLs we provide additional services. Inter generational Computer, Math and English Literacy classes , as well as SAT preparation classes for parents and their children are part of our Saturday Academy. We also conduct at least 3 meetings with the parents of ELLs devoted to the issues of academic and cultural adjustment of their children to new school and new country. At least twice a year we have an ELL FAMILY MOVIE NIGHT, where the families of our ELLs get together in the evening to watch and discuss a film relevant to their lives. It could be a film about their native country, or about the lives and struggles of immigrants in the United States 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Parents are very active part of our school community. Parents of ELLs participate in all whole school parental functions. They are present at the PTA meetings and parent teacher conferences and actively participate in all of them. We provide translated versions of all documents created for and by the parents in Haitian Creole, French and Spanish. We also provide qualified 2018-19 SCEP-FF 66  interpreters for every parent who requests such service while communicating with individual staff members or participating in any group activities. For the parents of ELLs we provide additional services. Intergenerational Computer, Math and English Literacy classes , as well as SAT preparation classes for parents and their children are part of our Saturday Academy. We also conduct at least 3 meetings with the parents of ELLs devoted to the issues of academic and cultural adjustment of their children to new school and new country. At least twice a year we have an ELL FAMILY MOVIE NIGHT, where the families of our ELLs get together in the evening to watch and discuss a film relevant to their lives. It could be a film about their native country, or about the lives and struggles of immigrants in the United States Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. . Our hold – over students requires assistance in academic language development; study skills development; and Regents test preparation. They receive specifically designed assignments developed by our certified teachers of ENL in collaboration with certified bilingual content area teachers and certified NLA teacher. Our ESL and bilingual teachers collaborate in writing new ENL curriculum devoted to teaching academic English through Humanities and Sciences content. The team meets every Monday from 1:20 to 3:30 to work on this project during our Inquiry and Common Planning time. We also provide supplemental Academic and Social English Language Development Services after school and on Saturday. We use Achieve 3000 and RIGOR literacy solutions, as well as assistance of community based organizations to provide these services. 3. We attack deficits in listening skills from two different perspectives: as an essential part in social skills development and as an essential part in academic language development. As a social skill, we incorporate listening activities into ENL instruction devoted to effective communication with adults and peers. Such instruction is being delivered during two types of lessons: lessons in social behavior, and lessons in effective group work. Both types of lessons are designed by the ENL/Bilingual team of certified teachers and qualified paraprofessionals and delivered during ENL, NLA, and bilingual content area classes, and during the supplementary after school and Saturday services. Additionally, we use recording features in our laptops recorders and computers with speakers to conduct a variety of listening comprehension activities in all during the day and after school classes. When working on individualized ACHIEVE 3000 sessions, the students also have access to the listening feature of the software and use headphones. In the beginning of the school year, all ELLs who continue struggling with reading and/or writing are assessed with two standardized instruments: Achieve 3000 LEVEL SET assessment tool and Periodic assessment for ELLs. This assessment approach allows us to define specific reading sub skills we need to attack for each individual ELL. Obtained individual assessment results, as well as, reading work samples from the students’ portfolio collected during the previous school year, and the most recent NYSESLAT scores are used by ENL, bilingual, and NLA teachers to target specific reading difficulties and group learners by common reading sub skills deficits within their classes. This permits teachers to differentiate ENL, Content Area, and NLA lessons based on specific reading difficulties experienced by individual students. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 67  In ENL and NLA classes, we supplement reading instruction, with the Brain Pop! literacy solution for the Advanced and Intermediate ELLs, and RIGOR solution for the Beginning ELLs. We also use Castle Learning solution to supplement content area instruction. re: 2018-19 SCEP-FF 68 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Richard A. Forman, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 69  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Clara Barton High School School DBN: 17K600 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Richard Forman Title Principal Vera Leykina Assistant Principal Shaundell Lawson Parent Coordinator Habib Cherif ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 SCEP-FF 70  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 17K600 School Name: Clara Barton Superintendent: Mi The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. Dr. Vera Leykina Assistant Principal * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. We use RAPL report from the ATS to identify language needs of the parents and guardians. In addition, we compile this data from the HLISS of incoming students, from the Student Emergency Contact Cards filled out by all parents in the beginning of the school year and at a time of admission of new students during the year; from the oral interviews with the parents conducted by the parent coordinator and by the Language Access Coordinator 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral English Haitian Creole French Spanish 925 199 29 67 100 100 100 100 925 199 29 67 100 100 100 100 2018-19 SCEP-FF 71  Chinese ( Mandarin) Afrikaans Bengali Fulani Twi Nanuate Oneida Polish Georgian Russian 2 1 7 5 1 3 1 1 1 3 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 2 1 7 5 1 3 1 1 1 3 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. n/a Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Course contacts September and February . Annual student handbooks September and January Newsletters Monthly Parent-teacher Conference announcements Twice a year, 3 weeks before the scheduled dates After-school program information Monthly Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. In- house translated; distributed to the students in every class and signed by the parents; kept in student binders In - house translated ; distributed to the students in attendance period classes; used by the students all year In- house translated; distributed to the students in per 3 classes In-house translated; distributed to each student in per 3 classes. In addition, a phone message is sent home , both i English and translated version In-house translated; In-house translated; distributed to each student in per 3 classes. In addition, a phone message is sent home , both 2018-19 SCEP-FF 72  New York State Testing calendars As soon as they are available from the NYS DOE In -house translated distributed to each student in per 3 classes. i English and translated version. In addition, a phone message is sent home , both i English and translated version Overview of class curricula September and January Letters from individual teachers As needed Letters from school administration As needed Invitations fro special events As needed In- house translated; distributed to the students in every class and signed by the parents; kept in student binders In- house translated; mailed to the family, copy is kept in every teacher's binder In- house translated; mailed to the family, copy is kept in every teacher's binder In- house translated; mailed to the family, copy is kept in every teacher's binder 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Whole - school Parent-teacher conferences October and March Curriculum Nights November and February Family nights for SWDs December and April Family nights for parents of ELLs September and May IEP conferences All year based on the IEP schedule Informal individual conferences As needed - all year PTA meetings Monthly interpretation service(s)? In- house interpreters: Language Access Team In- house interpreters: Language Access Team In- house interpreters: Language Access Team In- house interpreters: Language Access Team In- house interpreters: Language Access Team In- house interpreters: Language Access Team In- house interpreters: Language Access Team 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 73  The families will be reached via phone master in all needed languages; via the PTA executive board-maintained database; via the email and via the regular mail. All messages are translated by the Language Access Team Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. In September, November, and June , during the Chancellor's full - day PD day, all faculty will be trained in - house about the Chancellor's Regulations A-663 and about all resources available to them to be in compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Translated signs in all languages are prominently displayed in the front lobby; next to the Parent Coordinator's office, next to the Guidance Counselors office suit; next to the School based Support Team office suite; and next to the Language Access Coordinator, Dr. Vera Leykina, office.Brochures, letters, and fryers are all translated by the members of the Language Access Team and distributed as needed. PTA meetings, School Leadership Team meetings; family nights all have languages access issues in their agendas Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? By the end of November and the end of March, directly after the Parent- Teacher conferences, we will email and mail surveys to all 320 families requiring translation and interpretation services. Data from these surveys will be analyzed by the Language Access team, and all necessary adjustments in the translation / interpretation services will be made as soon as possible 2018-19 SCEP-FF 74 
