 19K615 School Name: TRANSIT TECH CAREER AND TECHNICAL EDUCATION HIGH SCHOOL Principal: MARLON BYNUM 2018-19 SCEP-FL 1  School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Section 4: SCEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Transit Tech CTE High School 19K615 331900011615 9-12 School Number (DBN): One Wells Street Brooklyn NY 11208 (718) 647-5204 (718) 647-4458 Phone Number: Marlon Bynum Fax: Mbynum@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 19 Email Address: Marlon Bynum Renard Ramsey Erica Perez RenardRamsey Veronica Campbell JohannaGuity TrevonPersaud Heather Burack District Information Janice Ross Superintendent: Office of the Superintendent, Brooklyn High Schools Superintendent’s Office Address: 1396 Broadway Brooklyn, NY 11221 Jross@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-455-4635 Phone Number: 718-455-4684 Fax: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 3  Brooklyn North FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Field Support Center (FSC) Itoka Comfort Executive Director: 131 Livingston St., Room 504 Brooklyn, NY 11201 CItoka2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-935-5782 Phone Number: 718-935-4456 Fax: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the SCEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Marlon Bynum Renard Ramsey Erica Perez Shannon Rodriguez-Cola Veronica Campbell Johanna Guity TrevonPersaud Heather Burack OlindaGrant Neverson Wayne Williams *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/Parent Member/Parent 2018-19 SCEP-FL 5 Signature (Blue Ink) Name Frances Levine ToriannaMurray Karen Troublefield Moses KerwynJack MarvaRichards Position and Constituent Group Represented Member/Teacher UFT Member/Assistant Principal CSA Member/Parent Member/ Parent Member/Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 SCEP-FL 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) is a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. The process of developing and implementing the SCEP is aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding SCEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and SCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 7  In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement 2018-19 SCEP-FL 8  NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the SCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the SCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for SCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 9   Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 5: Build consensus around activities, strategies and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 6: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 7: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 10  Section 4: SCEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? The vision that guides Transit Tech Career and Technical Education High School strikes a balance between educational and social development, technical and academic knowledge, short-term employment opportunities and access to long-term college and career opportunities. Transit Tech’s success is based on an educational vision focused on Career and Technical Education, middle school articulation, attendance outreach, standards based instruction, guidance and support services, safety, professional development and collaborative partnerships. This vision is transformed into a school mission that focuses on individual growth, enabling students to develop the academic background required for college, as well as the career and technical skills necessary to secure meaningful employment. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Transit Tech Career and Technical Education is a high school with 691 students from grades 9-12. The school's population comprises 59% Black, 30% Hispanic, 3% White, and 7% Asian. The student body includes 8% English language learners and 25% students with disabilities. Boys account for 85% of the students enrolled and girls account for 15%. The average attendance rate for the school year 2017-2018 was 84%. The graduate rate increased from 73% to 77%. Student eligible to receive free lunch was 70%. Transit Tech's instruction program consists of a rigorous STEM based college preparatory program that includes seven Advanced Placement college courses and a comprehensive Career and Technical Education course sequence including: Computer Engineering involves learning about computer applications and operating systems. Students develop and apply software to solve problems concerning art, business communications, database, graphics mathematics, wired and wireless networks, physics, programming, and desktop publishing. Students receive different levels of hardware and software troubleshooting skills. Students use up-to-date industry standard equipment and tools while participating in labs and assignments. Students also have an opportunity to participate in Transit’s IT Helpdesk team, which allows students to troubleshoot and fix computer-related problems around the school building. Senior internships afford students out-of-school work experiences in organizations such as MTA New York City Transit. We are adding Computer Science and Cyber Security/Computer Forensics the current school year. Computer Networking provides in-depth education about wired and wireless networks. Students work with many types of networks, including fiber-optic and coaxial technology; Category 1 through 6 cables; routers; switches; hubs; servers, and nodes. Students’ training includes troubleshooting, repairing, and dismantling residential and industrial networks. Transit Electronics Technology develops knowledge of computer circuitry; micro-technology; analogue and digital electronics, basic electronics, and circuit boards. Students learn about basic electricity, voltage and current. Transit Industrial Electrician focuses on the science of “troubleshooting.” The program prepares students to install and repair industrial, commercial, and residential circuitry, and includes training in programmable logic controls. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 11  Transit Technician Technology offers an education encompassing electrical and mechanical systems related to transportation, and industrial and commercial wiring systems. Hydraulics, pneumatics, and small engine repair are integral components of the sequence. In addition, we are in partnership with MTA, DIIT, Scholars At Work, Amtrak and the SVA program. Our focus is to prepare our students for College and Career Readiness by offering our students internships, career exploration workshops and various job shadowing programs. Another new initiative that Transit is proud to move forward with starting this school year is our new STEM based programs. One of our new STEM based program is Project Lead The Way’s Introduction to Engineering and Design (IED). We offer PLTW’s IED to all freshmen in order to build a strong platform and prepare them for our CTE programs. This exploratory course exposes students to various engineering majors. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. There are 57 ELLs currently served at our school, 44 eligible for taking the NYSESLAT  and 13 formal ELLs .  From the 44 ELLs, 45%, are Long Term ELLs with 7 to 12 years of ENL service.  40% of the Long Term ELLs are freshmen many with an IEP and long term absenteeism.  80% of the ELLs serviced are speaking Spanish as a Home Language, 33 out of 44, but not enough to grant opening a bilingual program at this time.  Other Home Languages represented by our ELL population are, Arabic, (5), French/Haitian, (2), and Bengali (2).   All 57 ELLs,  are placed and served according to their NYSITELL/ NYSESLAT scores as per Chancellor’s Regulations. An overview of the ELL population suggests that the needs of the ELL subgroups in our school go beyond their language and academic needs .  The ELLs with IEPs need to have timely updating of their IEP with the recommendations reflected  in classroom instruction.  LTAs need further assessment for the reasons of their chronic absences and conferencing with parents in order to make action plans suitable to each case.  Since most of the Long Term ELLs are 9th graders, they need to work in a classroom setting that allows for filling in the gaps they came with from their  junior high schools.  Although we do not  have a  bilingual program, the students need support in their first language within their English speaking classes. The needs of the ELLs are evaluated and addressed on an ongoing basis by the teaching team, counselors and parents working together with the students. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. We improved in Collaborative Teaching, Effective School Leadership and Trust. We will focus on Student Achievement, Rigorous Instruction and Strong Family Ties. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 12  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 19K615 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 713 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 105 89 6 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 56 51 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 76.0% % Attendance Rate 73.2% % Reduced Lunch 5.0% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 2.0% 30.9% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 2.4% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 5.06 0% 6% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 83% 69% 63.8% 1.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No No Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups ED Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A YES N/A YSH YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient N/A YES N/A YES No N/A 187 172 17 86.5% 2.1% 22.0% 60.9% 3.1% 2.8% 8 40% 8.5 N/A N/A 73% 72% 76.5% 8% N/A No Yes N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 13  Economically Disadvantaged YES ALL STUDENTS YES 2018-19 SCEP-FL 14  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed X X X X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. ● We will need to significantly improve the 25% passing rate on the Common Core Algebra Regents ● Literacy is a strength as evident by our above the NYC average English Regent's Score of 71% ● We will focus on improving the 42% of students successfully completing approved college preparatory courses and assessments ● We improved the graduation rate from 73% to 77% ● We must increase the 33.8% of students who graduated 4-year college readiness. ● We must improve on the 41% of students graduated from high school and enrolled in a college or other post-secondary program within 6 months Source: Embargoed School Quality Guide data 2017-2018; School Quality Guide 2017-2018 2018-19 SCEP-FL 15  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June of 2019, we will improve teacher practice by having 75% of the teachers rated ineffective or developing in 3B (effective questioning) and 3C (classroom engagement) for the 2018-2019 school-year will improve their Measures of Teacher Performance rating as evidence by Advance. Therefore, improving the student's performance on the Algebra regents from 25% to 65%. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 16 Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Principal, AP Supervision, coordinators, teachers and lead teachers Principal, AP Supervision, coordinators, teachers and lead teachers Principal, AP Supervision, coordinators, teachers and lead teachers Principal, AP Supervision, coordinators, teachers and lead teachers Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Across classrooms teachers are using strategies and question prompts to ensure students are using evidence in arguments in discussing daily; teachers are incorporating DOK in their questioning and scaffolding to reach all learners All students Sept 18'-June 19' All students Sept 18'-June 19' All students Sept 18'-June 19' All students Sept 18'-June 19' Teachers are using informational text to generate rich discussions and argumentative writing tasks. Teachers will routinely implement AAA (Annotate, Analyze and Articulate) text in their teaching practice. Activities will be differentiated to address the needs of all learners including students with disabilities and English language learners. Teachers are using school-wide rubrics and common assessments in subject areas and are consistently eliciting evidence of student learning through cohort meetings and town-hall gathering. We will conduct learning walks, inter-visitations and inquiry cycles based on regular common assessment. Teachers will have multiple opportunities to attend various Professional Development sessions with the Superintendent and Brooklyn North Field Support Center and other entities designed to show-case best practices, effective way to implement restorative practice in a classroom and effectively analyze student data. The professional development activities will be reinforced during departmental and school-wide meetings and will be facilitated by staff and service providers. We also brought on a Master and Peer Collaborative Teacher to coordinate with teachers to improve pedagogy and teaching strategies. The Master teacher will manage our official UFT Teacher Center and the Peer Collaborative Teacher will manage our professional development room. Both spaces will afford teachers the ability to co-plan, model and share best practices. Our professional development topics will address rigorous instruction, technology implementation, collaborative and team teaching, online curricula development, culturally relevant pedagogy and media interactive lessons. We will purchase interactive white boards and training to support the aforementioned practices utilizing Title I Priority Focus SWP funds. 20 smart boards/interactive boards with sound system will be purchased and stationed in 20 2018-19 SCEP-FL 17  classrooms on the third floor in order to integrate technology in the classroom with software and professional development sessions for teachers to better help them to enhance their pedagogical skills which will eventually lead to higher student achievements. 1 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 1. Teachers and administrators will Skedula to provide 24 hours access to key assessment information and Rubicon Atlas will provide online curricula resources including maps, unit plans and lesson plans. 2. The Parent Coordinator and administration will regularly inform parents and students of learning standards and curricula initiatives at PTA and SLT meetings from September to June 3. Teachers and students will use our monthly town halls from September to June to inform students of rigorous instruction and the Common Core, which they can share with their parents at home. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. Citywide Inst Exp funds will be utilized to provide per session for teachers and workshop facilitators for the professional development to take place one to two times a week after school 2. Fair Student funding will be allocated as per session for teachers to train parents on Skedula after school and on Saturday. The Title III set aside for parent involvement will also be utilized for our parents needing translation services. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding X X C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Data collected during Learning Walks Data collected during informal and formal observations Data from Inter-visitations 2018-19 SCEP-FL 18  Notes shared and student work examined from observations Lesson Plans Display and Bulletin Boards Scholarship Report Advance MOTP reports Scholarship Reports, which are directly aligned to formative assessment for the Algebra regents will be above 75% passing by January 31, 2019 Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Statistical information from Advance and Scholarship Reports Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 19  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. X X X X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Rigorous Instruction 1. Strengths ● Literacy is a strength as evident by our above the NYC average English Regent's Score of 71% ● We will focus on improving the 42% of students successfully completing approved college preparatory courses and assessments ● We improved the graduation rate from 73% to 77% ● We increased 27% to 34% of students who graduated 4-year college readiness. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 20  2. Priority/Needs ● Our average Math Regents score dropped from 60% to 58% ● Refine curricula and tasks to fully integrate the instructional shifts and provide access to learning opportunities in order to meet the needs of diverse learners. ● Increase afterschool activities, clubs, competition and internship offering and bolster the selection criteria in order to challenge and motivate students in order to increase academic performance. ● Revise and implement coherent curricula in all subject area to ensure it’s accessible for a variety of learners and aligned to Common Core Learning Standards. ● Students are aware of their overall progress and performance in each subject area and gaps are identified in advance to ensure each student is on track for graduation. ● Promote teachers to conduct self-assessment and collaboratively review with administrators in order to share best practices and improve pedagogy and supervision. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools –Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, our supportive cohort teacher team planning structure will increase Freshmen Cohort students earning 10 credits or more from 84% to 90% 2018-19 SCEP-FL 21  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Use of formative assessments and student conferencing to target instruction 9 th Graders Sept 2018-June 2019 [Offer more after school activities, competitions, clubs and internships to our students. [All students Sept 2018-June 2019 Assess existing curricula in all subject area and student progress report and provide professional development workshops to all staff designed around curriculum development. Schedule inter-visitation with other schools and identify key teachers and administrators to compare and research curriculum materials. All students Sept 2018-June 2019 Gather academic and relevant personal information and organize a system to goal plan with each student throughout the school - year All students Sept 2018-June 2019 Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Principal, AP Supervision, coordinators, teachers and lead teachers Principal, AP Supervision, coordinators, teachers and lead teachers Principal, AP Supervision, coordinators, teachers and lead teachers Principal, AP Supervision, coordinators, teachers and lead teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. 1. Our Parent Coordinator in collaboration with our PTA will facilitate a series of workshops throughout the school year to engage families in increasing their understanding and providing access to activities that would lead to a very supportive environment. 2. We have a parent center that is managed by the Parent Coordinator and welcomes parents to connect with the school daily. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 2018-19 SCEP-FL 22  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. Citywide Inst Exp funds will be utilized to provide per session for teachers and workshop facilitators for the professional development to take place one to two times a week after school 2. Fair Student funding will be allocated as per session for teachers to train parents on Skedula after school and on Saturday. The Title III set aside for parent involvement will also be utilized for our parents needing translation services. 3. We will purchase interactive white boards and the necessary training to have teachers effectively using technology in instruction utilizing the Title I Priority Focus SWP Funds. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Data collected during Learning Walks Data collected during informal and formal observations Notes shared and student work examined during walkthroughs Lesson Plans Display and Bulletin Boards Scholarship Report Advance MOTP reports By January 2019, 90% of the Freshmen students will earn 5 credits or more Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Statistical information from STARS Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 23  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by SOP(s) Addressed X X X X using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. ● Passing rate on the Common Core Algebra Regents is 25% ● Passing rate on the Common Core ELA Regents is 68% ● 32% of students successfully completed approved college preparatory courses and assessments ● 4-year graduation rate is 78%. ● 9% of students graduated 4-year college readiness. ● 38% of students graduated from high school and enrolled in a college or other post-secondary program within 6 months ● 80% of our teachers will be able to extract student data from our data repository and analyze and utilize the data to improve teacher practice. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 24  ● Strengthen the use of teaching strategies to embed multiple entry points so academic tasks challenge and learners resulting in work products reflecting high levels of engagement ● Expand the work of teachers in using assessment tools to monitor student progress in order to provide actionable feedback and adjust instructional practices so that all students’ learning needs are effectively addressed Source: Quality Review Report 2017-2018; School Quality Guide 2017-2018 Data may change once Regent scores are released. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June of 2019, all students will complete 2 literacy based projects in order to increase our English Language Arts Regents scores from 71% to 80%. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 25  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Use of formative assessments and student conferencing to target instruction All students Sept 2018-June 2019 Use the inquiry process to guide and promote best instructional practices All students Sept 2018-June 2019 Share information on student progress and track student progress systematically All students Sept 2018-June 2019 Interdisciplinary common planning will be conducted throughout the year targeted to the completion of problem-based projects.. All students Sept 2018-June 2019 1 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Principal, AP Supervision, coordinators, teachers and lead teachers Principal, AP Supervision, coordinators, teachers and lead teachers Principal, AP Supervision, coordinators, teachers and lead teachers Principal, AP Supervision, coordinators, teachers and lead teachers How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 1. Our Website Coordinator will regularly update the website to inform parents and the community about teacher collaborations and our partnerships promoting collaborative adult learning. 2. The Parent Coordinator will conduct outreach throughout the year informing parents and the community about our partnerships promoting teacher-parent collaborations Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 2018-19 SCEP-FL 26  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. Citywide Inst Exp funds will be utilized to provide per session for teachers and workshop facilitators for the professional development to take place one to two times a week after school 2. Fair Student funding will be allocated as per session for teachers to train parents on Skedula after school and on Saturday. The Title III set aside for parent involvement will also be utilized for our parents needing translation services. 3. We will purchase interactive white boards and the necessary training to have teachers effectively using technology in instruction utilizing the Title I Priority Focus SWP Funds. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding X X C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Project Presentations Student Work Bulletin Boards Formative Assessments Summative Assessments By January 2019, Scholarship Reports, which are aligned to the ELA Regents, will be 80% or more for students sitting for the June 2019 ELA regents Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Statistical information on report cards and transcripts reported in STARS Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 27  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). X X X X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Need Areas Rigorous Instruction Strong Family-Community Ties Student Achievement Strength Areas 2018-19 SCEP-FL 28  Supportive Enviornment (91% of students say that this school provides them with information about the college enrollment process) Effective School Leadership (94% of percent feel that the principal works to create a sense of community in the school) Collaborative Teachers (78% of teachers say that they have opportunities to work productively with colleagues in their school) Trust (90% of parents say that school staff work hard to build trusting relationships with them) Source: Framework for Great Schools Report 2017 Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART– Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, our programming and teacher team structures will increase the Collaborative Teacher Performance Score from 2.75 to 3.0 as reported on the 2018 Framework for Great Schools Report 2018-19 SCEP-FL 29  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Gather academic and relevant personal information and organize a system to goal plan with each student throughout the school - year All students Sept-June High expectations for learning is the norm for all classrooms and intellectually challenging and rigorous performance tasks are assigned and completed All students Sept-June Rubrics are used to inform students of assessment criteria and teachers are consistently checking for understanding and monitoring student learning, especially for high need sub-groups including SWDs and ELLs All students Sept-June Frequent sharing of student information via Skedula, the school web site, mailings, texting and phone calls. Staff parent volunteers to man the parental center at least 3 days a week. All parents Sept-June 1 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Principal, AP Supervision, coordinators, teachers and lead teachers Principal, AP Supervision, coordinators, teachers and lead teachers Principal, AP Supervision, coordinators, teachers and lead teachers Principal, AP Supervision, coordinators, teachers and lead teachers How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 1. The Principal and administrators will facilititate Q&A sessions and activities throughout the school year during PTA and SLT meetings to provide information promoting effective school leadership through strong collaboration between school staff, parents and students. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 30  1. Citywide Inst Exp funds will be utilized to provide per session for teachers and workshop facilitators for the professional development to take place one to two times a week after school 2. Fair Student funding will be allocated as per session for teachers to train parents on Skedula after school and on Saturday. The Title III set aside for parent involvement will also be utilized for our parents needing translation services. 3. We will purchase interactive white boards and the necessary training to have teachers effectively using technology in instruction utilizing the Title I Priority Focus SWP Funds. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding X X C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Monitoring Skedula, and STARS to track student academic progress By January 2019, we will have 5 more cohort planning activities than January 2018, such as student breakfast, town halls and parental events Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Skedula data reports, STARS Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 31  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. X X X X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Need Areas Rigorous Instruction Strong Family-Community Ties Student Achievement Strength Areas 2018-19 SCEP-FL 32  Supportive Environment (91% of students say that this school provides them with information about the college enrollment process) Effective School Leadership (94% of percent feel that the principal works to create a sense of community in the school) Collaborative Teachers (78% of teachers say that they have opportunities to work productively with colleagues in their school) Trust (90% of parents say that school staff work hard to build trusting relationships with them) Source: Framework for Great Schools Report 2017 Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will directly involve school base teams to improve the Strong Family-Community Ties performance score from 2.93 to 3.2 as measured on the Framework for Great Schools Report 2018 2018-19 SCEP-FL 33  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Reinforce pedagogical practice with strategies used from out AVID, PLTW and College Summit programs.. All students Sept-June Regularly hold advisory council meetings, community town halls and student performance events Set a designated time and location for students to utilize the computer labs to complete assignments, process college applications and identify career opportunities. Sept-June Community Partners, Parents, Students All students Sept-June Schedule information session for parents and students in order to update all parents, students and staff about various programs, activities, workshops and services held inside and outside of our school building. Sept-June All students, parents and staff Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Principal, AP Supervision, coordinators, teachers and lead teachers Principal, AP Supervision, coordinators, teachers and lead teachers Principal, AP Supervision, coordinators, teachers and lead teachers Parents, Principal, AP Supervision, coordinators, teachers and lead teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Global Kids Cypress Hills Local Development Corporation Good Sheppard RIMM 2018-19 SCEP-FL 34  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. Citywide Inst Exp funds will be utilized to provide per session for teachers and workshop facilitators for the professional development to take place one to two times a week after school 2. Fair Student funding will be allocated as per session for teachers to train parents on Skedula after school and on Saturday. The Title III set aside for parent involvement will also be utilized for our parents needing translation services. 3. We will purchase interactive white boards and the necessary training to have teachers effectively using technology in instruction utilizing the Title I Priority Focus SWP Funds. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding X X C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Data collected during Learning Walks Data collected during informal and formal observations Notes shared and student work examined during walkthroughs Lesson Plans Display and Bulletin Boards Scholarship Report Advance MOTP reports By January 2019, we will have 10 more parental events at the school than we had by January 2018 , January 31 st , 2019 Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 35  Advance, Stars, Skedula and School Website Reports Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 36  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Students failing marking period, poor Regents score, teacher referral Mathematics Science Social Studies Students failing marking period, poor Regents score, teacher referral Students failing marking period, poor Regents score, teacher referral Students failing marking period, poor Regents score, teacher referral Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Computer assisted programs such as APEX, MYoN, Eduware, Regents preparation materials, targeted research strategies Computer assisted programs suchas ALEKS, Mathletic, Khan Academy and APEX, Regents preparation materials, targeted research strategies Computer assisted programs such as ALEKS, Khan Academy and APEX, Regents preparation materials, targeted research strategies Computer assisted programs such as Eduware, APEX, Khan Academy, and MYoN, Regents preparation Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Small group activities, one on one, peer interaction, small / whole group instruction, accommodations/modifications for Students with Disabilities and English Language Learners, blended learning, project-based learning and group tutoring Small group activities, one on one, peer interaction, small / whole group instruction, accommodations/modifications for Students with Disabilities and English Language Learners, blended learning, project-based learning and group tutoring Small group activities, one on one, peer interaction, small / whole group instruction, accommodations/modifications for Students with Disabilities and English Language Learners, blended learning, project-based learning and group tutoring Small group activities, one on one, peer interaction, small / whole group instruction, accommodations/modifications for Students with Disabilities and English Language Learners, blended learning, project-When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During the school day, before and after school During the school day, before and after school During the school day, before and after school During the school day, before and after school 2018-19 SCEP-FL 37 At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Students failing marking period, poor Regents score, teacher referral materials, targeted research strategies based learning and group tutoring Restorative practices such as Good Shepard, Global Kids, and mandated counseling Small group activities, one on one, peer interaction, small / whole group instruction, accommodations/modifications for Students with Disabilities and English Language Learners, blended learning, project-based learning and group tutoring During the school day, before and after school 2018-19 SCEP-FL 38  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 54 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Counseling and Academic Intervention and support services Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 39  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 40  Section 8: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. In order to recruit, retain and support HQT’s it is imperative that we first have a pool of qualified teachers who have completed highly qualified Teacher programs. In retaining teachers, Transit will provide quality Professional Development through support and shared leadership. Data shows that teacher attrition happens more in new teachers than those who have been teaching for over 5 years. At Transit, we will provide additional support for tenured teachers by ensuring that funds and resources are dedicated in aiding them in current successful pedagogical practices. This will be demonstrated by hosting Professional Development workshops, along with Teacher Support Groups led by the UFT Teacher Center. Additionally, teachers who are not HQT will be provided with resources to assist them in completing the necessary requirements to become a HQT. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). At Transit all full time teachers are recognized as HQT and we will continue to provide the support to continue this school-wide practice. Some of the proposed workshops are: ● Embedding Common Core Learning Standards ● Teacher Effectiveness – Danielson Competencies ● Managing Stress ● Navigating NEA (National Education Association) ● Effective Lesson Planning Shared Leadership Symposium Part 3: TA Schools Only 2018-19 SCEP-FL 41  3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers are an integral part of the leadership team that make decisions on assessments and targeted professional development to meet their needs. Teachers have 24 hour access to vital resources to support effective instruction on the school-based Google Drive. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (SCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B 2018-19 SCEP-FL 42  Title I Part A (Basic) Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 0 16979 158660 0 0 12366 5011211 Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) 0 X X 0 0 X X 0 1,2,3,4,5,6 1,2,3,4,5,6 0 0 1,2,3,4,5,6 1,2,3,4,5,6 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH). 2018-19 SCEP-FL 43   Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/SCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 44  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent Involvement Policy (PIP) Template Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Transit Tech CTE High School , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students 2018-19 SCEP-FL 45  Transit Tech CTE High School will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 46  ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) Transit Tech CTE High School , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 2018-19 SCEP-FL 47  improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff 2018-19 SCEP-FL 48  Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 49  ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; III. Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 50  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): K 6 1 7 2 8 3 9 4 10 5 11 12 2018-19 SCEP-FL 51  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: The direct instruction supplemental program for ELLs at Transit Tech High School is designed to target ELLs’ deficiencies as evidenced by their work in the content area classes and at the same time prepare them for the Regents exams. The purpose of the program is to expose ELLs to key vocabulary and content from their other classes, leading to an increase of engagement in those classes as well as scaffold preparation for the Regents exams. Students’ specific academic weaknesses are addressed during small group interventions . The program is staffed with one certified ENL teacher, a Social Studies teacher, a Science teacher, and an ELA teacher who participate in common planning sessions during the week, at no cost to the Title III funds, to identify areas of weakness to address. Participation in the program is open to all 57 ELLs at Transit Tech, serving grades 9-12. Although the program is open to all students, greater focus is on incoming freshmen, in order to prepare them for the academic and linguistic rigor of high school. Special attention is given to Long Term ELLs, and students with an IEP. Transit Tech’s supplemental program for ELLs runs in conjunction with the school’s Saturday Academy. It meets every Saturday from September 22nd until June 22nd for a total of 36 sessions. Classes are from 8-10 AM and/or from 10-1 p.m. English is the language of instruction since Transit Tech currently only offers a stand-alone English as a New Language program. In this program, students will focus on intensive reading and writing based on the work done in the core classes during the week and on Regents practice based on previous exams. Students are programmed for 1 or 2 periods, depending on each student's overall program for Saturday classes. As designed, students would be grouped into two separate sections of about 35 students in each. One section will focus on remedial help in content areas, as previously assessed and monitored on an ongoing basis. Another section will focus on preparing students for upcoming Regents: Social Studies and Science in the fall term and Social Studies and ELA in the spring. The materials used for the supplemental program are based on, but distinct from, the materials used in the content area classes – primary documents, grade-appropriate texts, and rigorous critical thinking materials. The materials are created as a collaboration among the ENL teacher and the content area teachers. Record-keeping in the supplemental program is maintained by following standard procedures: ATS bubble sheets are used for attendance; parental notification is sent home in the parents’ preferred language, as stated in ATS. The Saturday classes are printed on students' programs. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 52 Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: To best serve the ELL population at 19k615, the licensed ENL teacher and select teachers from the main subject areas are invited to participate in PDs that will develop their teaching practice and provide them with different techniques and strategies to meet the linguistic and academic needs of the ELLs. We believe that all teachers are ENL teachers and should be exposed to methodologies suitable to the needs of ELL students. The PD schedule announced in the Principal's Weekly and any other relevant PDs given through various partner agencies are used as a resource for 19k615 to program PDs for our staff. The PDs are being offered to all teaching staff. A record of these meetings is kept by each participant. The professional development will be at no cost to the program. Tentative Schedule of Professional Developments PD 1 Topic: Analyzing Data to Plan Instruction Date: September 26, 2018 Provider: Torianna Murray Audience: All Teachers PD 2 Topic: Strengthening Language in the Content Areas Date: October 3, 2018 Provider: Brooklyn North Field Support Center Audience: Torianna Murray (turn-key) PDs 3-4 Topic: Teacher participating in PDs offered by the DOE and city agencies Date: November 6 and 7, 2018 Provider: Turn-key by participants Audience: All Teachers PD 5 Title: Scaffolding for the Argumentative Essay Date: December 12, 2018 Audience: Humanities Teachers Provider: Hyacinthe 2018-19 SCEP-FL 53  Part C: Professional Development PD 6 Title: Regents review strategies based on the Regents Item Analysis Report Date: January 9, 2018 Audience: All Teachers Provider: Joseph PD 7 Topic: Differentiating Instruction Based on Student Profiles Date: February 6, 2018 Audience: All Teachers Providers: Cudjoe and Hyacinthe PD 8 Topic: Integrating Advanced Literacy and Informational Text Date: March 6, 2018 Audience: Humanities Providers: McDonald and Royal-Coleman PD 9 Topic: NYSESLAT Item Analysis and Prep Strategies Date: April 10, 2018 Audience: Hyacinthe Provider: Hyacinthe and ELA teams PD 10 Topic: Regents Review Strategies Date: May 15, 2018 Audience: All Teachers Provider: Joseph PD 11 Topic: Self-Evaluation Looking at Students' Outcomes Date: June 6, 2018 Audience: Humanities Provider: Torianna Murray 2018-19 SCEP-FL 54  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Our Parental engagement activities are tailored to the needs of all of students, ELLs included, and take into consideration the needs and interests of specific minority groups, as well as the needs of the student population as a whole. The parental engagement activities are diverse and change as the parents express their different concerns and we attempt to meet their needs as they become more transparent over the year. Many activities are organized in collaboration with our partner agencies; Global Kids, Good Shepherd, and NY Cares. Aside the school wide activities offered to all parents, during PTA meetings specific workshops are organized by the ENL teacher and the parent coordinator around issues specific to our ELL population such as ELL program specific services, graduation requirements, immigration referrals and workshops around college funding for undocumented students (through the college office , college advisor, and Good Shepherd).. 19k615 offers a Meet and Greet at the beginning of the academic year where ELL parents are invited to not only meet their student's ENL teacher but also the rest of the school staff who are here to support them. Aside from this session. Parents of the ELLs are notified of different parent specific events at 19k615 through notices given to the students and sent in the mail, in the home languages of the parents as well as in English. These meetings would not incur any cost to the program. Records of these events are maintained with the files from the parent coordinator. Tentative Schedule: Topic 1: Meet and Greet Rationale: ELL parents are invited to not only meet their student's ENL teacher but also the rest of the school staff who are here to support them Date: September 26, 2018 Time: 5:00pm-7:00 pm Provider: ENL Teacher, AP Humanities, Parent Coordinator Topic 2. : College Kick Off Rationale: Parents of the ELLs will be informed about the college opportunities and application procedures. Date: October 11th, 2018 Time: 5:00 pm-8:00pm/1:00pm-3:00pm Name of Provider: Ms.Stelle, Global Kids, NY Cares, Good Shepherd Audience: Parents of ELLs Topic 3: Understanding the Graduation Requirements for a NYS HS student and how our ELLs can meet them 2018-19 SCEP-FL 55  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Rationale: Parents of ELLs come from another country with different requirements for earning what equals to a HS diploma. The parents of ELLs must be made aware of what’s required of their children and how the certified ENL teacher and the rest of the school will support their children’s learning and HS graduation. Date: November 3rd,2018 Time: 9:00am -1:00pm Name of Provider: Bilingual Guidance Counselor; Good Shepherd Audience: Parents of ELLs Topic 4. : Title III Information Session for Parents of ELLs Rationale: Parents will be informed about the goals, structure and purpose of the Title III program for their ELLs. Invitations are sent out in native language of ELL population and a working agenda for the spring meeting will be developed. Date: November 29th &30, 2018 Time: 5:00 pm-8:00pm/1:00pm-3:00pm Name of Provider: ENL teacher, Parent Coordinator Audience: Parents of ELLs Topic 5: NYSESLAT Information Session for Parents of ELLs Rationale: Parents will develop an understanding of the different components and demands of the NYSESLAT. They will be informed of the progress their children are making towards meeting their different proficiency levels in the 4 modalities of the exam Date: March 7th/ 8th Time: 2:00pm-3:00pm/6:00-7:00pm Name of Provider: ENL teacher ; AP Humanities Audience: Parents of ELLs Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) n/a  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials n/a n/a Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. n/a n/a n/a 2018-19 SCEP-FL 56  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title.  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 2018-19 SCEP-FL 57  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 19 School Name Transit Tech HS Borough Brooklyn School Number 615 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Marlon Bynum Coach type here ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Haydn Hayacinthe/ENL Teacher/Subject Area Soraya Sanchez / ISS Teacher/Subject Area Rosa Dobles / ENL Related-Service Provider Pamela Savage Superintendent Karen Watts Assistant Principal Toriana Murray Coach type here School Counselor Michael Perazzo Parent type here Parent Coordinator Janet Jones Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 3 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] D. Student Demographics 2018-19 SCEP-FL 58  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 694 Total number of ELLs 57 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 8.21% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 2 3 4 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Instructional planning for the English Language Learners ( ELLs) at Transit Tech HS is guided by the evaluation of data gathered from formal and informal assessments administered during the intake of new students through NYSITELL , Spanish LAB, SIFE screening , in house writing samples in English and native language, analysis of the previous spring’ s NYSESLAT results, the 8th grade ELA and MATH scores for 9th grade list notice students, and content specific diagnostic assessments created or selected by classroom teachers. The NYSITELL assessment is used during the initial intake to determine the English proficiency of newly admitted ELLs in order to place them in one of the 5 appropriate levels of proficiency, as regulated by CR Part 154. The scores on the SP LAB, 2018-19 SCEP-FL 59  the answers to the SIFE Questionnaire , and the writing and math samples flag potential gaps or strengths of the newly admitted students and suggest areas of needed differentiation in instruction. Item analysis of the NYSESLAT based on EDAT, RLAT, and RNMR reports highlights modalities in need of improvement and guides teachers in grouping students based on their specific needs , as well as selecting instructional focus. In conjunction with in-class writing assessments, the answers to the SIFE screening and the native language writing sample ( Sp and Ha only ) become part of the student's literacy assessment. A review of the students' writing show that most ELLs have a basic writing ability, but lack grade appropriate vocabulary and syntax . The formative assessments used on a regular basis in the classroom provide continuous feedback to teachers and students, serving as baseline for identifying gray areas of comprehension, setting instructional goals, and monitoring progress Data provided from the resources mentioned above reveals that out of the 39 active ELLs currently served, 3 are identified as SIFE, two being of Arabic Home Language and one of Hispanic background. They need special intervention on all four modalities but specifically in writing where they scored 0 (LAT 2017) . 16 out of the 39 ELLs are Long Term serviced, between 7 and 12 years, most of them coming from middle schools already as LTEs. 18 of the LTEs scored Expanding on the last NYSESLAT , and achieved high scores in the Speaking modality. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? The relatively reduced number of ELLs in our school allows for a strong collaboration between the teachers and other support team members serving this population . The Intake Team, the ELL Coordinator, and the AP in charge, disseminate the results from the intake assessments and the NYSESLAT scores in timely fashion at the beginning of each year or right after programming over the counter new admits, so every teacher is aware of the general academic profile of his/her students. The ENL teachers work also closely with content area teachers to reinforce concepts taught in the content areas and help with text complexity issues, while the content area teachers collaborate with the ENL teachers in order to design discipline appropriate literacy tasks meant to boost students deficient skills. All our classes are ICT, which facilitates articulation between the ENL , ELA, ISS, and Content area teachers on a daily basis through common planning. Twice a month during Cohort Analysis meetings teachers share information, discuss, and plan intervention measures specific to flagged students. Once a month teachers meet with each student to discuss their progress, academic areas of need, set short and long term goals, and monitor student success. Students identified as lagging behind are programmed for the Saturday Academy to help them catch up. In addition, the Parent Coordinator and Guidance counselors in conjunction with the teachers conference with the student and family members in order to raise awareness about the intervention plan and each part’s role in the process. Diagnostic assessment based on Regents samples is administered uniformly across grades as a baseline at the beginning of each term. The results are used in conjunction with the Common Core ELA standards for instructional focus and curriculum and unit planning. The same exact assessment is used as a uniform midterm in order to monitor progress and guide further differentiated instruction. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Uniformly administered midterm and final examinations, based on the skills tested in the Regents along with the item analysis of Regents results, are used as benchmarks for monitoring progress towards graduation , programming, and identifying areas of needed reinforcement in the classroom. Evaluation of the ELL program includes looking at growth in the following areas: NYSESLAT and credit accumulation. This is being done in a two part plan, one in which the NYSESLAT participation was increased, leading to movement of ELLs, and the second part focusing on credit accumulation, leading to ELLs earning credits and getting closer to graduation.   There are still too many ELLs who are under-credited and they are a big concern for our staff. Data from the Progress to Graduation report and EDAT show that 18 out of the current 39 ELLs are Long Term ELLs, with 7 out of the 18 being in the 9th grade. Another concern is the graduation rate of the ELLs, lower than desired, due in part to the fact that the Regents requirements 2018-19 SCEP-FL 60  based on student’s grade level, in many cases don’t match the language proficiency of the ELL at the time . For example, analysis of the REDS reports suggests that while students are scheduled to take the Global Regents by the end of the Sophomore year, students recently arrived to the country have a hard time mastering the subject due to their still low English proficiency. One more identified red flag revealed by the low scores on the 8th grade ELA and MATH tests of some of the 9th grade ELLs, suggests that these students start high school with gaps that will hinder their progress and success in high school and need early intervention measures to help them reach grade expected skills in Math and English. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Ten days prior to every marking period, during the Academic Check Day, teachers conference with students who lag behind and set short and long term SMART goals for remediation. Students who need extra help or have failed Regents exams are scheduled for the Saturday School’s test preparation classes. Parents of at risk students are notified through IO Classroom for Parents, home letters, or phone calls, and invited to become an active part in their child’s intervention plan. Classroom teachers plan and implement differentiation strategies and activities like flexible grouping and scaffolding on a daily basis. When feasible, peer tutoring in the native language is encouraged. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] N/A 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Data coming from the most recent NYSESLAT, (RLAT, EDAT) for the continuing ELLs, and from the NYSITELL for the newly admitted students is used as the basis for programming the students in integrated or self standing ENL classes. Parents of ELLs are informed within the time sensitive window recommended by CR Part 154 about their children’s placement in the program through the notification letters available in the parent’s preferred language At Transit Tech High School, most ELLs are coming from local middle schools, and the majority score in the Transitioning and Expanding proficiency levels. This allows the ENL and ELA teachers to focus on developing grade appropriate literacy skills and academic vocabulary,, not just basic language skills. Results on the 8th Grade Math and ELA tests shed light on placing and/or grouping students based on their remedial needs. The Regents’ scores are evaluated so students who have failed may be scheduled in the Saturday program for test preparation classes 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? The ELL Coordinator and the AP Humanities analyze data from the EDAT and identify subgroups of ELLs that may need program adjustments such as freshmen who scored low on Math and ELA tests in 8th grade, ELLs who failed Regents, or under-credited students. Periodical tally of parental program choice is monitored by the ELL Coordinator in order to assess the need of creating a TBE program in addition to the Freestanding ENL program. Cross curricular meetings allow content area ENL teachers to discuss means of differentiation in the classroom to address the needs of particular ELL subgroups Part IV: ELL Programming 2018-19 SCEP-FL 61  Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Following the CR Part 154.2 implementation guidelines, at Transit Tech HS, students are grouped by mixed language proficiency and grade with no more than two contiguous grades placed in the same class section. For each grade, there is one section of ELA that is designated as an integrated ENL class, in which either a dual licensed teacher or an ELA and an ENL licensed teacher service the students. In these integrated ENL classes, there are both ELLs and non-ELLs. Entering and Emerging students who are eligible for additional minutes of English instruction are also programmed according to the mandated minutes for one or two extra classes with the ENL teacher, who provides further language and literacy instruction. b. TBE program. If applicable. n/a c. DL program. If applicable. n/a 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? For the moment Transit Tech doesn’t have the necessary number of parental requests for a TBE or DL program. Within the ENL program we exceed the minimum number of mandated minutes of instruction for every proficiency level. EN proficient ELLs are programmed for three periods a day, one period Integrated ELA/ENL and two periods Stand - alone ENL, for a total of 621’ a week; EM ELLs receive two periods a day, one Integrated ELA/ENL and one Stand- alone, for a total of 414’ a week , while the TR, EX, and CM ELLs get at least one period a day of Integrated ELA/ENL for 207’ a week, with some of the students even programmed for an additional Stand-alone class. . 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Since we don’t have an official TBE program at this time, all content area classes are delivered in English only. However, many content area teachers speak the languages of our ELLs and give first language support in the classroom. In addition all our staff is being trained on an ongoing basis in ENL methodology, differentiation, and scaffolding. Students are often paired by first language and support one another in comprehending the material. Also, bilingual glossaries are available in most languages needed in our school. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Except for the Spanish LAB, administered to Hispanic students at the time of enrollment, and the Regents exams in other languages from past years, we don’t have other formal evaluation of the home language for our students at this time. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? 2018-19 SCEP-FL 62  SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Due to the relatively small number of ELLs in our school some ELL subgroups need to be served together. The main way of addressing their special needs is through differentiation. Teachers are monitoring the specific needs of the students and fine tune their skill deficiencies trough subject specific assessments and conferencing with the students. SIFE students need to fill their gaps due to past interrupted education so they benefit from scaffolding, repeated reviews and formative assessments. Newcomers have to adjust to a new school culture, immersion in a new language, and new social dynamics. Flexible grouping, peer support in their native language whenever feasible, and use of visuals may ease newcomers into the high school demands in a new country and language. Developing students need to move up the bar towards higher academic demands, and need support in dealing with higher tier academic vocabulary, and making text comprehensible. They can benefit from a wide array of available strategies like activating prior knowledge, close reading exercises, pre- and post - reading activities , graphic organizers, or Cornell note taking. Former ELLs need to make a smooth transition to the mainstream classes and focus on graduation requirements. Teachers may use scaffolding activities to help ELLs grasp more abstract concepts, challenge them with higher order thinking questions, and help them blend with their native born peers through heterogeneous grouping activities. Long Term ELLs come with additional issues, like poor attendance and lack of interest or low self esteem. Activities based on surveys of the interests and strengths of this particular group may give these students a positive incentive for recapturing their involvement and participation in class. Regardless of the different nuances, all these groups share the need to accelerate their language acquisition. This goal may be achieved by creating a positive learning environment, using activities relevant to the students’ interests, making use of the student resources in the classroom through flexible grouping suitable to each activity, using multimedia materials helping different learning styles, and by creating an individual instructional plan for each student . In addition to the classroom intervention for these subgroups of ELLs , students have the opportunity to review and deepen their understanding of class material during tutoring hours and Saturday classes offered in our school. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? ELL-SWDs are accommodated in all of their classes, as per their IEPs, which depending on the disability can take the form of a teacher assistant (language or accessibility). Special accommodations allow for extra time to complete assignments and tests. The teacher assistant works with the ENL and ISS teachers to make the work accessible and scaffold the work so that the ELL-SWD can participate in grade appropriate work. Within our ICT classes, the ENL teacher works with the ISS teacher and assigned teacher assistants to break the text complexity of the grade-level Gen. ed. textbooks by teaching ELL-SWDs reading strategies that may facilitate comprehension of difficult academic concepts. Previewing vocabulary and using bilingual glossaries is a common procedure in all content classes. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? ELL-SWDs are placed in the least restrictive environment for learning, which generally takes the form of an inclusion class with provisions made for them through their I.E.P.s. IEP students are programmed first, so that the mandates of their IEPs are met. The ENL and ISS teachers further support the ELL-SWD by helping him or her develop the academic/social language to participate and advocate for themselves. ELL-SWDs are accommodated in all of their classes, as per their IEPs, which depending on the disability can take the form of a teacher assistant (language or accessibility). Extra time is given and the teacher assistant works with the ENL teacher to make the work accessible and scaffold the work so that the ELL-SWD can participate in grade appropriate work. ELL-SWD are placed in inclusion classes with other students, as per the requirements of their IEP, to maximize time spent with non-disabled students and ELLs in the least restrictive learning environment. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 63  8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. To support the ELLs academically, the ENL teacher works in conjunction with the content area teachers to help the ELLs acquire the academic language that they need to successfully participate in their classes. Tutoring is offered in all of the content areas during the 33 minutes of the AIS period and the ELLs also have their ENL classes that support their learning and language acquisition by reinforcing what they are learning in their content class by the use of various ENL strategies that support them in reaching linguistic proficiency. The ELLs are also programmed for Saturday school and use this extra time to meet with their subject area teachers around their needs. The academic language needed to fully participate in the classroom is developed with the ELLs in their ENL class to support their learning. Specific CCLS ENL lessons are developed to support the ELLs understanding and participation in their content area classes, based on the feedback and collaboration that is provided by the content area teachers. During lunch periods students can also come in for extra help that they might need. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? For the upcoming year, the ELA/ENL department at our school needs to invest in more technology and the purchasing of more up to date textbooks and glossaries in more diverse languages to meet the needs of the potential students that will be coming to our school. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? n/a 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Besides their ENL classes, the ELL population at our school are not segregated from the general school population. All school activities are announced and letters that outline the schedule of events that happen after school and on the weekends are sent home in the native language of the ELLs. Tutoring, Saturday school and cultural events are all made available to the ELLs at our school. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. The ENL teacher uses a variety of material to support the ELLs both academically and linguistically. The support materials include, but are not limited to native language glossaries, The Visions A/B/C textbooks, content specific workbooks that pair native vocabulary and activity with the English equivalent, multimedia labs that provide laptops and content specific software. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Native language support comes from the native language teacher assistants who assist the ENL teacher in class and through the help of advanced and proficient ELLs who serve as ‘buddies’ for the beginner and intermediate ELLs in and outside of the classroom. Bilingual dictionaries and glossaries are available in all languages represented by our ELL population. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All support services in the school are age and grade specific to all of the students. ELLs are programmed to their classes and are also assigned a guidance counselor who, with the assistance of the ENL teacher, assures that the ELLs like every student get the required support. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Our school doesn't share location. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 64  16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Newly enrolled ELLs are invited to attend the school's Bridge Program in the summer before starting school to familiarize themselves with the school building and to start preparing for the upcoming semester. ELLs who enroll throughout the school year are afforded the opportunity to learn about the school through the one on one orientation session at the time of enrollment, followed by news about events, programs and meetings that the ENL teacher and Parent Coordinator organize for the ELLs and their parents around the school's general PTA assemblies. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? The only language elective offered at our school is Spanish. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Professional Development at Transit Tech is an ongoing event scheduled once per week every Wednesday from 1:40 to 3:00 and organized under the supervision of the UFT Teacher Center Liaison for the academic year (two semesters for the academic year) Throughout the week teachers meet to plan units, develop lesson plans with co-teachers, discuss student progress, subgroups and uniform assessment and/or projects. A few of our PD sessions are conducted by members of the faculty, guest speakers or we participate in webinars followed by discussion. Often, staff members participate in workshops offered by the DOE or DELLSS and then turn key to the other staff members. Periodically the ENL teacher and Humanities administrator attend PDs that are announced through the office of DELLSS that address various topics concerning support and instructional strategies to assist English Language Learners. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. The ENL coordinator/teacher turnkeys the information from the PDs and ENL strategies with the teachers in the building to help support them in their efforts to provide English Language Learners with a content-language rich environment. ELL students have an added benefit, in that they participate in the same school-wide protocols that are used to acclimate all incoming freshmen to the different procedures they will transition from JHS to HS. There are native language announcements . The professional development plan at Transit Tech keeps in consideration the CR Part 80 requirement for 15% of the pd hours offered to the staff and 50% pd hours of the bilingual and ENL teachers to be allocated to topics related to ELL instructional 2018-19 SCEP-FL 65  needs, and best practices for language acquisition. To date, the Pupil Accounting Secretary will be attending the ELL Specific Topics PD March 7th. The ENL teacher and the Humanities Administrator attended several PDs such as The Socratic Approach to ELL Instruction, Nuts and Bolts ELL Compliance, iZone / iLearn NYC: Innovation Institute for ELL Instruction, ELL Data Analysis for programming, monthly ELA/ AP Lead Teacher Meetings and Sole ENL Provider Meetings, and the Professional Learning Communities at Work in Phoenix, Arizona. Another focus topic in the Professional Development plan is developing strategies for co-teaching and integrating language and content instruction for English language learners. Every month one PD day is dedicated to ELL related topics addressed to the whole staff. In addition, the ENL and Bilingual teachers meet twice a month on Mondays, for in depth professional development directed to develop best practices in the ENL class and co-teaching strategies. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Once a semester, the ENL coordinator organizes a meeting with the ELLs and their parents to discuss the progress that their children are making in terms of language acquisition and the support at home that will help the students stay on track and develop. This meeting serves two purposes; during this meeting the ENL coordinator, with the assistance of bilingual school staff, explains to the parents the need for ENL academic support to ensure their children's success in their respective classes and content areas and explains the exam schedule for upcoming state assessments as well as the NYSESLAT (exam dates and structure). This meeting is used to discuss the child's progress and what needs to be done to maintain good standing.The parent coordinator also works with the ENL teacher to organize ELL specific Parent meetings that address the specific needs of their students. As much as possible, we try to provide material in the native language of the parents and have native language paraprofessionals on hand to translate the information, as well as Translation services can be found by contacting the DOE translation unit. Parents are encouraged to use the school as a resource for their needs and as different issues come to light that might affect the family, as a whole, or the ELL individually, we seek to program around those needs as they arise. The parent coordinator is essential in her role, as liaison between the parent and the school. Newcomer ELLs and their parents are invited to meet with the ENL teacher and their counselors to better understand how the school will service their children and program them into their classes. Information from the parent coordinator is used to define the needs of the parents to the ENL teacher, as well as the school at large. The information from the parent coordinator, in addition to ENL teacher's outreach to the parents, gives the school feedback to develop workshops or other activities to meet the needs of the family. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. All parents of the students at our school are invited to monthly PTA meetings that address a variety of student and parent issues within the community around our school and in general. These same meetings, at times, overlap in terms of the issues that they address the needs of all students. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. No additional info 2018-19 SCEP-FL 66  2018-19 SCEP-FL 67 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Marlon Bynum, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 68  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Transit Tech School DBN: 19k615 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Marlon Bynum Title Principal Torianna Murray Assistant Principal Janet Jones Parent Coordinator Haydn Hyacinthe ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Rosa Dobles Teacher/Subject Area Soraya Sanchez Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Michael Perazzo School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 69  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 19K615 School Name: Transit Tech High School Superintendent: Karen Watts The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. At Transit Tech High School, the identification and assessment of Limited-English-Proficient parents is done by the Language Access Coordinator at the beginning of each school year. This information is primarily taken from Student Emergency cards and school-based surveys. ATS reports are cross-referenced as well, to ensure consistency of information. The HLIS will be used in the event of a new arrival who enrolls in Transit Tech. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 70  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language The preferred languages for written and oral communication, in order of demand, are: Spanish, Creole, French and Arabic. 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. The following documents are sent home, either by mail or via backpack, throughout the year with translations: letters to parents from school leadership, opt-out letters, information about testing, calendars of school events, PTA announcements, and orientation packets. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 71  Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Formal face-to-face meetings at Transit Tech H.S. include Meet the Teachers night in October, Open School night in November and in March , monthly PTA meetings, ELL Parent meeting in the fall semester, and Freshman Orientation at the start of the school year. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) The notification requirements checked above are posted for parents to see as required. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? In order to monitor the quality and availability of services, Transit Tech H.S. will do a BOY parent survey and an EOY parent survey to compare results of parents' knowledge of these services. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 72 
