 19K660 School Name: W. H. MAXWELL CAREER AND TECHNICAL EDUCATION HIGH SCHOOL Principal: JOCELYN BADETTE 2018-19 SCEP-FL 1  School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Section 4: SCEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information William H. Maxwell CTE High School 19 K 660 19 K 660 9-12 School Number (DBN): 145 Pennsylvania Avenue Brooklyn, New York 11207 718-345-9100 718-345-9100 ext 2391 Phone Number: Ms. Audrey Jackson Fax: Email Address: AJackson2@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: Mr. Jocelyn Badette Mr. Edmund Ludde Mr. Ghani Ms. Audrey Jackson SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Mr. Vishen Ghani Chelsea Panthier NA Geographical District: 19 Superintendent’s Office Address: District Information Janice Ross Superintendent: 1386 Broadway St, Brooklyn, New York 11221 JRoss11@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-455-4635 Phone Number: 718-935-4314 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 3  FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Ms. Bernadette Fitzgerald Executive Director: 131 Livingstone Street – Room 501 NA Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-225-5119 Phone Number: 718-935-4314 Fax: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the SCEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Jocelyn Badette Edmund Ludde Vishen Ghani Vishen Ghani Chelsea Panthier IbrahimaDiallo NA Estelle Lilly BerthangeRene *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/Teacher Member/Teacher 2018-19 SCEP-FL 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Kendall Overton Member/Teacher Audrey Jackson Oredolapo Roberts Yolanda Browne FlordalizaEspinal Renita Younge Rhonda Joseph Member/ Chairperson Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 SCEP-FL 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) is a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. The process of developing and implementing the SCEP is aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding SCEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and SCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 7  In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement 2018-19 SCEP-FL 8  NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the SCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the SCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for SCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 9   Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 5: Build consensus around activities, strategies and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 6: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 7: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 10  Section 4: SCEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? The Mission of William H. Maxwell CT..E High School is to ensure that all students are college and career ready to become productive citizens in a competitive global economy. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. William H. Maxwell Career and Technical Education (CTE) High School is located in the East New York section of Brooklyn; it is a predominantly African American (51.4%) and Latino community (36.7%). Fifty percent of the East New York population has had some high school and or college education (26.2% and 24.5% respectively). Our total student body numbers 448 and our racial composition of 69% African American and 28% Latino mirrors that of the community. Within our population of 448, 147 or 31 % of our students require Instructional Support Services (ISS) and 30 or 12% are English Language Learners (ELL). In taking a critical look at our student population, we have identified 41% are lowest third citywide. Maxwell, formerly an all girls’ high school, has a population which continues to reflect that legacy with 308 female students and 140 males. Maxwell’s mission is to ensure that all students are college and career ready, to become productive citizens in a competitive global economy. This is to be done by promoting equity, excellence and high expectations not only for our students but for all stake holders in the building and the community. One of the contributing factors to our heavily female populated environment is that we offer CTE majors which are traditionally female saturated. Our majors are Apparel Design, Cosmetology, Health Careers and Communications Media. Our apparel design major has gained a reputation in the City’s fashion industry. In addition to our juniors and seniors attending College Now classes for a year at FIT, our students participate twice per year in Brooklyn’s Fashion Week. They also work as back stage dressers at various fashion shows around the City. Our Cosmetology major offers students the opportunity to participate in SkillsUSA. SkillsUSA is a partnership of students, teachers and industry working together to ensure America has a skilled workforce. SkillsUSA helps all students excel in their training and future technical, skilled and service careers, including health occupations. Nationally, SkillsUSA serves more than 310 high schools, college/post secondary and middle-school students and their chapter advisors who are professional members. The other professional organization in our school is HOSA. HOSA is a national organization that allows our students in the medical field the opportunity to develop leadership and technical skills. HOSA members focus on the development of character, the promotion of physical, mental, and social health while building self confidence and pride in our work. Over the years, we have had our students elected to statewide positions within the organization. We have been able to strengthen our learning environment by building trust through the Principal's clear communication of vision and mission which the student body and staff are exposed to daily through morning announcements. By reflecting on our practice, we have been able to identify a distributive leadership process which strengthens and creates teacher leaders in the building. Every employee in the building sits on one of two committees, allowing teachers to take the lead in planning our schools professional learning, coherent instructional practices and assessments as well as giving non-pedagogical employees an opportunity to contribute in school wide decision making. Data maintained and displayed in the Principal's office allows staff to see the results of various initiatives to create students with mastery of academic content propelling them to graduation. The previous year's 2018-19 SCEP-FL 11  High School Quality Snap Shot, Quality Review Report, individual student transcripts, scholarship, students with disabilities and English language learners results, were reviewed to arrive at each year's goals. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. 31% students with disabilities and 11% English language learners 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Maintaining high expectations, we have implemented action plans which focus on improving the graduation rate, increasing the attendance rate to 79% and increasing the scholarship percentages so that more students will earn 17+ credits each school year. These goals are emphasized and shared throughout the school community as the acronym GAS with the G representing the 4-year Graduation rate, the A, the yearly Attendance rate and the S representing the Scholarship rate. The Principal tracks progress toward the goals after every marking period and after each Regents exam administration. This information is used to make adjustments to the action plans as necessary. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 12  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 19K660 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 407 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 139 143 6 4 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 52 67 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 88.0% % Attendance Rate 87.2% % Reduced Lunch 9.1% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.5% 28.0% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 1.2% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 10.04 0% 3% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 64% 70% 62.5% 4.4% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No No Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A YSH N/A N/A NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YSH N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient N/A NO N/A YES No N/A 69 68 51 76.4% 1.5% 31.2% 66.8% 2.5% 1.5% 6 35% 7.7 N/A N/A 74% 72% 69.3% 6% N/A Yes No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 13  Economically Disadvantaged YES ALL STUDENTS YES 2018-19 SCEP-FL 14  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed x x Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. Sixty two percent (62%) of our incoming class score below grade level in math and English citywide.  We use Performance Series and Content Area Diagnostics to promote coherent and rigorous instruction; teachers assess individual student's needs and use the data to drive instruction.  Each individual student's need is addressed in every classroom by reading lexile leveled literature to support content area. Immediate feedback is given to students using authentic rubric statements.   When surveyed, informally, at the beginning of the school year, most students do not have a mechanism for taking good notes and or system for holding on to those notes which they have taken previously  They have poor retention, reading, organizational and study skills  Each school year, 9th and 11th grade students will have their entry skills assessed through Performance Series and all students will participate in Content Area Diagnostics.  Classes are scheduled to include 90 minute blocks in ELA, Math and Global History to allow students more time to explore and discover the needed skills. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 15   Common planning is utilized to conduct inquiry   2. The priority need that will be addressed in the goal, is to increase the graduation rate by 5% through focusing on the skill sets of writing, inquiry, collaboration, organization and reading (WICOR). The challenge we face in meeting our goal is low reading and writing skills. This is confirmed from 8th grade scores gathered from assessments in each respective content area as well as from the English regents. They also have insufficient knowledge of vocabulary words to understand grade level texts and exhibit poor performance in ELA and subject content diagnostics and performance series. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all teachers will implement AVID strategies in their classrooms with the focus on Writing, Inquiry, Collaboration, Organization and Reading (WICOR) as well as implementing test taking strategies and skills across all grade levels and content areas to increase graduation by 5%. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 16  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Professional learning on the Cornell way using AVID strategies for collaboration Align performance series student profile with the item analysis of the CCELA regents to evaluate student achievement and generate classroom goals Intentional strengthening of inquiry in student work by requiring students to create open ended questions in their note-taking process. Teachers 9/13/18 and on going for refinement Students 9/18 and ongoing Students 9/18 - and on going Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) AVID Site Coordinator and Content trained AVID teachers, School Wide Instructional Committee Teachers on School Wide Initiative Committee (SWIC), Administration Teachers on School Wide Instructional Committee (SWIC), Administration Student handbooks will be distributed to all students; teachers will require students to enter all classroom assignments in their handbook to support organizational skills building and strengthening. Students 10/30/18 Teachers, SWIC, Administrators, Parents, PA and SLT 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 17  Case conferences will be conducted by grades coordinated by members of the school wide initiative committee. Parents will be required to attend two case conferences, one of which will support the parent in providing academic and emotional support for their student. Our parent coordinator will play a significant role in our outreach to parents as we send notices of invitation and information. We will conduct parent walk throughs in which we will share the scope and sequence, curriculum and unit plans. Teachers will distribute syllabi at the beginning of the school year and monthly content area meetings will be conducted with the support of the school wide initiative committee. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Instructional Tools (books, technology, labs, library, etc.), Teachers, Administrators and Parents, Superintendent Field Office Support and Community Based Organizations. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title I TA Title III X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Progress will be monitored each marking period by looking at students' formative assessments from September 2018 through June 2019 to ensure effective mastery of skills. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Student work, formative, summative assessments and project based assignments. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 18  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. X X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? 1. Our strength in this area is that we have a guidance team within which each grade is assigned to an individual counselor. This allows for the counselors to schedule more productive interactions with the students in groups and individually. We also have scheduled weekly professional learning sessions for teachers and assistant teachers. We have identified our English Language Learners (ELLs) and Students With Disabilities so that we can address their needs accordingly. 2. The priority need which this goal addresses is increasing the attendance rate of our chronically absent students as well as addressing the social emotional challenges with which they present. Data shows that student attendance is high during September and February, but drops off during the other months as well as, students who swipe in after 9:00am are quantified as "late" in CASS although they may not be due to school until 9:25 as per their program. Data shows that 15-20% of students have developed chronic absence habits from elementary through middle school because they are not motivated to attend. The social emotional development of our population requires attention because at least 35% - 45% of our population have social emotional and mental health challenges with 20% of our Students With Disabilities are diagnosed emotionally disturbed and 5% of our general population suffers from depression. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 19  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools –Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 90% of the teachers will be trained to re-frame behavior and generate social emotional goals for our red zone students, (students with 55-75% absence), by grade level, to increase their attendance by 10%. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 20  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Case Conferencing – grade level conferences will reflect teachers and guidance working together and a culture of continuous improvement utilizing the data gathered from CASS regarding attendance during time slated for Parental Engagement. Parents will be required to attend two meetings, the first for the general debrief of the child's challenges, the second to get assistance in how to work with the student at home Social Emotional Development - School Mental Health Consultant will meet with Guidance Counselor to collaborate on needs encountered in the school's community and to identify quality vetted resources that could meet these needs. Community Linkage - School mental health consultant will link parent coordinator to New York Psychotherapy and Counseling Center and Institute for Community Living. Behavior Management - Social skills training or behavior management for at risk children will be conducted 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Students 10/18 - 6/19 School Wide Parents Initiative Committees Guidance Team 9/18 - 6/19 Administrators and Guidance Team Parent on going Coord. Teachers on going Administration, Guidance Team Administration, Guidance, School Wide Initiative Committees, Community Based Organization How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Our parent coordinator will play a significant role in our outreach to parents as we send notices of invitation and information. We will conduct parent walk through in which we will share our new systems for supporting our students social-emotional development and mental health. This will be done within the first two months of the school year coordinated by guidance and members of the school wide initiative committee. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 21  Instructional Tools (books, technology, labs, library, etc.), Teachers, Administrators and Parents, Superintendent Field Office Support and Community Based Organizations. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP X Title I TA Title III X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School X Achievement X Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Effective October 2018 and continuing to June 2019, teachers will meet in their School Wide Initiative Committees during Professional Work to design process and monitor progress. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Data collected from the daily attendance (Skedula), monthly attendance (CASS) and anecdotes from home visits, will be collected, graphed and annotated. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 22  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. x SOP(s) Addressed 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. x 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. We have had a full academic year of working through our School Wide Initiative Committee. Every stake holder in the building is on a school wide initiative committee, thereby participating in planning for the school year. Scheduling is created such that teachers have common planning by grade level. 2. The priority need which will be addressed in the goal and action plan is scholarship. We have assessed that of our ELA population, 62% are the lowest third City Wide in math and English, and withinour total school population, 32% are ISS and 8% are ELLs. Of our ELL population, 4% are SIFE. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 23  Starting in September 2018 through June 2019, teachers will work collaboratively through, inter-visitation, to increase scholarship by 10% by creating student goals generated from entry level competencies of math and reading as well as content diagnostics. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 24  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Content Area Assessment - Each content area will design an assessment to evaluate student knowledge within the units to be taught for the semester. School Wide Diagnostic - Using Scantron's Performance Series, the incoming 9th grade students will be tested for entry level reading and math skills during the Fall semester. The juniors will be tested during the Spring semester. Students All mandated testing requirements will be provided. Goal Setting - Teachers will be given professional development on how to use the Scantron Performance Series student profile, the Content Diagnostic results and Common Core Standards to design student goals. Students Teachers Students 9/7/18 1/19/19 9/12/18 1/15/19 10/18 - 12/18 Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Administrators and Teachers Administrators, Teachers, Guidance Counselors Administrators, Teachers, Guidance Counselors Parent/Teacher Planning - Teachers will use data gathered from assessments to identify how parents can work with their children. This will also facilitate teachers and parents communication about required tools s they meet to address student needs. All students 10/18- 6/18 Administrators, Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Through our School Wide Initiative Committee teachers are assigned areas of responsibility. This team is charged with making sure that all teachers are able to use Skedula effectively so that parents are able to have daily access to their students performance as well as a means of communicating with teachers daily. Another team is responsible for training staff in the proper use of the Scantron Performance Series which allows parents to see one of the many documents teachers use to generate educational plans for students. This is an ongoing process which is monitored by the team responsible for professional learning activities for the academic year. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 25  A total of four teachers are needed to support the action plan. Each teacher will be working three hours a day for a total of 90 days. The Instructional Tools are: (books, technology, labs, library, etc.), each day will be supervised by an supervisor. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP X Title I TA Title III PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By October 2018 teachers will identify six to eight students covering general education, English Language Learners, Instructional Support Service and Self Contained classifications to conduct weekly inquiry which will inform teacher classroom practices. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Each students' progress will be assessed through the use of a rubric designed specifically to assess change in the area of challenge. Each shift will be gathered and charted in an Excel spreadsheet for inquiry group and department analysis. . Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 26  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). x x x x SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. Over the past seven years, leadership has implemented various systems to facilitate personal and professional growth of staff and students; constantly adjusting to internal surveys and anecdotal data gathered from lead teachers, IEP Coordinators, ELL Coordinators, student government through meetings, weekly common prep time for all teachers, monthly school leadership team meeting, and town halls for the students. 2. The priority need that will be addressed in the goal is stake holders. We are encouraging Ninety percent of teachers to participate in school activities at the end of their scheduled day. Through formal and informal observations, teachers are asking for a greater stake in the day to day design and operation of the building, and the way education is delivered. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the 2018-19 SCEP-FL 27  identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART– Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 60% of stake holders, who do not normally attend School Leadership Team meetings (School Safety, School Foods, Maintenance), will be invited to participate in the decision making process by attending a minimum of three of ten meetings for the school year. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 28  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). All stake holders in the building will be a member in one of two School Wide Initiative Committee (SWIC). SWIC will be responsible for defining the four of the practices of Frame Work for Great Schools based upon the needs of our building. Department/Faculty Meeting Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Teachers, Administrators, Parents, Students, Safety, Building Maintenance Cafeteria Staff 9/18 - 6/19 Core group of School Wide Initiative Committee Principal Asst. Principal of Departments Student Government meetings will be a part of a school wide decision making process to establish a culture of high expectations through frequent small group meetings during the school year. Grade Meeting/Inquiry Team Inquiry Team 9/18 - 6/19 Asst. Principal/Lead Teacher Safety Team Meeting School Leadership Team Meetings Department Meetings Guidance Counselor Parents, UFT/CSA, teachers, students 9/18 - 6/19 Principal, Chairperson, UFT Representative, PA President Parents’ Association and Principal’s Quarterly meeting with PA Executive Board Parents 9/18 - 6/19 Principal and Parent Coordinator 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 29  The parent coordinator along with members of the school wide initiative committee invite parents for quarterly visits in which they get to visit their child's classroom, tour the building and have lunch with the Principal. During this time he shares school wide as well as grade specific activities. Our school has a Parent Association which meets monthly and is supported by the parent coordinator. Parents are invited to obtain significant roles on the school leadership team as well as the parent advisory council which meets quarterly with the Principal. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Fair Student Funding, Instructional Tools (books, technology, labs, library, etc.), Teachers, Administrators and Parents, Superintendent Field Office Support and Community Based Organizations. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP X Title I TA Title III PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Progress will be monitored halfway of each marking period (November 15, 2017 and April 17, 2018) to ensure that 95 % of the staff are participating in decision making, professional developments, school events, inter-visitations and case conferencing,. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. attendance logs for each group meeting and school activities Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 30  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. x x x x SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. Historically our Parent teacher conferences and school events are fairly low in attendance, relative to the number of students enrolled. For school year 2015-2016, approximately 80 parents attended school activities and during 2016-2017, we had 100 parents. We want to increase the number of parental involvement by 60% which is approximately 250. Our priority is to increase community involvement through parent engagement. There is an established system in place to communicate to parents, staff and students, the goal of high expectation for student academic achievement. The school has a strong liaison with community based organizations, hospitals, colleges, businesses and families. There is a routine practice of sharing NYC school survey, students' survey and school quality snapshot in order to address students' and parents' concerns. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the 2018-19 SCEP-FL 31  identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 70% of the student populations’ parents will be participating in multiple school activities such as parent association (PA), parent teacher conference (PTC), grade meetings, school events, case conferencing, school visits, conferences and guidance related services. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 32  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) ● Survey to gather data on parent population Parents & Community 9/18 - 6/19 Parent Coordinator and Guidance Department ● Design school events based upon data gathered in survey ● Title I Conference ● Acknowledging students of the month and their parents Students and Parents 9/18 - 6/19 PA President, Parent Coordinator and Guidance ● Switching to Skedula for more immediate parent contact ● Increased usage of Social Media through linking a parent FaceBook page to the school's website Parents ● Ten parents identified to visit the classrooms with teacher escorts 9/18 - 6/19 Principal, Guidance, Parent Coordinator, Lead Teacher ● Family Night ● Monthly Themed School Wide Events (CSI Science Event, School Wide Thanksgiving Luncheon, Holiday Assembly) Student body and staff 10/18 – 6/19 School Leadership Team and, adhoc Committees ● Spring Concert (Sing), CTE centered event 2018-19 SCEP-FL 33  3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. NA Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Fair Student Funding, Instructional Tools (books, technology, labs, library, etc.), Teachers, Administrators and Parents, Superintendent Field Office Support and Community Based Organizations. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I SWP X Title I TA Title I 1003(a) X Title III PTA Funded X P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By October 2018 the School Leadership Team and the School Wide Instructional Committee will use data gathered from parent survey to plan the first school wide activity for December 2018 Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Sign in sheets with pertinent parent information for each school activity. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 34  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) 160 students participate in PM School and Saturday School Monday through Saturday to make up past failures from 9 th -12 th grade.Students are selected based onlow scores in regentsand coursework. Students are reading belowgrade level arealso provided with a double period in literacy. 60 students participate in PM School and Saturday School Monday through Saturday to make up past failures from 9 th -12 th grade .Students who failedany math classare provided with the opportunities to makeup the class the following semester. 42: Weekly PM School to make up past failures from 9 th -12 th grade. All Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) All students are involved the instructional focus across the school and across curriculum. Students do close reading of documents, make a claim and write critically to support their point of view by citing evidence from the text, All students are involved in the instructional focus across the school and across curriculum. Students do close reading of word problems to identify key vocabulary which will indicate the strategy necessary for solving the problem , All students are involved in the instructional focus across the school and Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small Groups During school and after school Small Group During school and after school Small Group , During school and after school 2018-19 SCEP-FL 35  Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) students who failed a science class are programmed to . Complete past failures in living environments, chemistry and physics the following semester. 155: PM School and Saturday School Monday through Saturday to make up past failures from 9 th -12 th grade All students are involved the instructional focus across the school and across curriculum. Students do close reading of primary and secondary source historical documents, make a claim, write critically to support their point of view by citing evidence from the text to write a comprehensive DBQ and thematic essay Our psychologist and social worker both have case loads where students are mandated to receive service . across curriculum. Students do close reading of informational texts, make claims, and write critically to support their point of view by citing evidence from the text. Using a combination of blended learning, online modules and topic specific projects; students are able to All students are involved in the instructional focus across the school and across curriculum. Students do close reading of word problems to identify key vocabulary which will indicate the strategy necessary for solving the problem, Guidance counselors meet with students and parents regularly to review academic data to keep parents informed. This data is also used to assist teachers in addressing the social and emotional needs of the students as Small Group During school and after school During school and after school Small Group; individual when needed; parent workshops and leadership teams 2018-19 SCEP-FL 36  circumstances require. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 37  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 24 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. We provide academic intervention services, social and emotional services, uniform assistance and outreach. attendance outreach and home visit. students will be provided with note books, pens, pencils, and book bags. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). NA 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 38  NA 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. NA 2018-19 SCEP-FL 39  Section 8: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Currently, 70% of our teachers are highly qualified teachers. As a career and technical education institution there is a percentage of our teachers who in lieu of a master’s degree, have industry experience, thus signifying them as highly qualified teachers. Historically, Maxwell does not have a high rate of faculty turnover; when we do acquire new faculty members, they are usually mentored by their content area colleagues and are professionally developed through the following: ● Inter-classroom visitation is encouraged ● A.P. Supervision oversees the pedagogical growth through informal snap-shots and formal observations to identify and hone new teacher’s skills ● The A.P. also formulates the Individual Professional Development plan for New Pedagogues. UFT Representative makes sure that all “new-comers” are assured of their rights as well as the benefits that they are entitled to. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Principal, and A.P. Supervision provides Individual Professional Development plans for their teachers as well as setting and reviewing Goals and Benchmarks, while aligning them with The School Wide Goals for each teacher. This process has opened the lines of communication between teachers and administration on a professional level. Professional Development has been given on the Common Core Learning Standards and their implementation in the classroom, as well as CCR standards, focusing on the 12 th graders. Other PDs included, “Looking at Student Work Collaboratively.” This helps staff to focus on developing an individual strategy or scaffold needed for a particular learner to improve. A series of Smart Board workshops that ended in Smart Board Certification was given over a 2 month period. Many teachers became Smart Board certified and can turnkey this training to their colleagues. The proper infusion of Smart Board strategies in the classroom can lead to positive involvement and excitement about learning. Breakthrough Education Strategies.com is an Educational company that has educated the teachers of the 9 th and 10 th grade 2018-19 SCEP-FL 40  Academy in designing and using on-line subject specific modules in the classroom. The infusion of technology as well as the implementation of the daily Teacher Team Debrief has enabled the teachers to review their student’s work in a variety of subjects and come up with an individual strategy for each student. This has helped us to look at our bottom third learners, ELL and ISS inclusion students to insure their success along with the main stream. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. NA 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). NA Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). NA 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Parental involvement activities such as health fairs, Title I Seminars, PTA facilitated small group activities -Academic Intervention Services such PM/Saturday School and tutoring -Individual and group counseling by social workers and guidance counselors -Mandated related services guidance counselors, social workers and psychologist -Attendance outreach by attendance liaison and staff -Violence prevention programs in assemblies and guest speakers -Home visitation by designated staff and CBOs 2018-19 SCEP-FL 41  4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (SCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Title I Part A (Basic) Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 406,460.00 NA NA 0 0 0 3,218,515.00 X NA NA NA NA NA X Column B Section Reference(s) X X 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D NA NA X X X 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 42  Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/SCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 43  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. William H. Maxwell CTE High School , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students William H. Maxwell CTE High School will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 44  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. Tittle I conference will take place on October 8, 2016. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 45  ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 46  ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) William H. Maxwell CTE High School , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 47  ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); 2018-19 SCEP-FL 48  ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 49  ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 50  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): K 6 1 7 2 8 3 9 4 10 5 11 12 2018-19 SCEP-FL 51  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: The program for this year will focus on providing academic enrichment and literacy during our after school, and Saturday program. Criteria for selection: all ELL 9-12 grade current students are eligible to participate. We currently are available to serve a total of thirty-four students. These students are in different language progressions: Entering: 2 students, Emergent: 3 students, Transitional: 12 students, Expanding: 17 students, and Commanding: 11 students. The after school program offers support to our ELLs in ELA and literacy. This focus was based on their regents scores and NYSESLAT scores. Because our students need the most support in literacy and informational texts in different content areas, we have decided to use the reading comprehension program called CommonLit (www.commonlit.org-it was not purchased with Title III monies- it is a free program) as part of our instructional support classes for after school as well as other resources like New York Times Upfront Magazine (the subscription was not paid with Title III monies). The CommonLit program offers non-fictional and fictional materials in the content areas that our student are struggling with as well as it offers opportunities to practice citing and argumentation which is part of the Common Core shift. Our enrichment program's curriculum will focus on social issues like human rights, social inequality, violence, bullying, climate change, discrimination, and other topics. The program will offer small group instruction. This program will start on October 1st, 2018 and end on June 12, 2019 from 3:00 P.M. to 5:00 P.M on Mondays and Tuesdays. From all those students who were invited, twenty committed to participate. The duration of the program is about 63 sessions. The ELL teacher will be paid with Title III funds. In addition, starting January 5th, we will meet on Saturdays from 9:00 am to 12:00 pm to June 1st, 2019 for a total of eight Saturdays. Title III funding will pay for journals needed to ensure our Title III ELL participants can develop their writing skills as they develop their oral language skills. Materials used for but not paid by Title III funds include online computer programs available through Quizlet, Lingro, Brainpop, Edmodo, News ELA and CommonLit, The New York Times UpFront Magazine, Discovery Education, and Breakthrough Education Strategies. Because the Common Core Standards has a World Literature component, it is important to expose the students to a variety of experiences. Furthermore, we have many exciting plans for this school year. We will attend several trips (To be determined later date). Students will explore, reflect, and make connections to our current state of our nation. Performance will serve to reinforce the material studied in our after school enrichment program. This trip will provide students with unique life-changing experiences and the opportunity to better understand the history of this nation as well as the social issues present in the past and now. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 52  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: ELLs teachers will meet during Common Prep and attend conferences during school hours. Title III monies will be not used for these PDs. PDs will help promote professional discourse among the teachers, through offsite conferences, study groups, curriculum review, seminars, and pedagogical courses. Topic 1: Best Practices for Building Reading Fluency with Jan Hasbrouck, Grades 3 -12 (Conference) Rationale: Some of our ELLs are at the border line transitional and commanding levels. This PD will foster strategies to help these students move up levels as well as improve their reading NYSESLAT scores. Date: 11/13/18 Time: 8:00 m to 3 PM Name of Provider: - NYC The Department of Literacy and AIS; Office of Curriculum, Instruction, and Professional Learning; Division of Teaching and Learning; New York City Department of Education- Audience: ELL teachers Topic 2: Oral Language Development (Book Study group: Scaffolding Language Scaffolding Learning) Rationale: This PD will foster strategies to help the entering level students in the content area classroom. Date: 12/07/18 Time: 6th Period Name of Provider: Book's author- Jim Cummins Audience: ELL teachers Topic 3: Using Fiction & Nonfiction Signposts in Secondary Grades presented by Kylene Beers & Bob Probst PLUS Meet the Author, Kwame Alexander Grades 6-12 (Conference) Rationale: A lot of our ELLs did not do well in the NYSESLAT reading sessions 2018-19 SCEP-FL 53  Part C: Professional Development Date: 12/13/18 Time: 9:30 am to 2:30 PM Name of Provider: - NYC The Department of Literacy and AIS; Office of Curriculum, Instruction, and Professional Learning; Division of Teaching and Learning; New York City Department of Education Audience: ELL teachers Topic 4: Writing strategies for ELLs (Book study group: Helping English Learners to Write) Rationale: Some of our ELLs are struggling in developing and supporting their ideas while writing text analysis based questions. Date: 12/20/18 Time: 6th Period Name of Provider: Book's Author: Carol Booth Olsen/Robin C. Scarcella/Tina Matuchniak Audience: ELL teachers In total we have now 4 scheduled PDs but more sessions will scheduled as needed. PD sessions will be done throughout the school year starting on September 13th, 2018 (during school hours) and ending in June 2019. In addition, ELLs teachers will participate in the UFT Center, NYC The Department of Literacy and AIS; Office of Curriculum, Instruction, and Professional Learning; Division of Teaching and Learning, and Brooklyn North sponsored ELLs PDs which take place throughout the school year. Staff in this program will also participate in William H. Maxwell’s once a month PDs which will not be funded by Title III, (it started already on September 13th and will continue every third week of the month) that will concentrate on the Citywide Instructional Focus as well as William H. Maxwell’s instructional focus, which is literacy across the curriculum to develop the skill of citing evidence to support arguments in discussion. This PD will help staff in this program to be in compliance with the Common Core Standards and Citywide initiatives. In turn helping students improve their regents scores and language or content goals. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered 2018-19 SCEP-FL 54  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Begin description here: Parents are invited to participate as chaperons for our field trips and be active participants in all activities listed above. Parents are invited to join the Parent Teacher Association, School Leadership Team, and school wide celebrations. Parents are also invited to workshops, which will be funded by the Title III: Topic 1: What can I do to help my ELL child succeed? Rationale: This workshop will offer tips and information on how to get help with homework, how to get a library card, how to improve English skills, websites to practice grammar exercises, and our new reading program-News ELA Date: 10/19/18 (other sessions are done as needed.) Time: 7th period and additional times per parent’s schedule Name of Provider: ELL teacher/Coordinator Audience: 9th to 12th grade ELL parents Topic 2: ELLs Academic progress Rationale: Parents will be invited to meet guidance and teachers to ask questions about their children’s academic progress. This will also serve as an intervention sessions for some students. Date: 9/28/18 and other sessions are done as needed. Time: various times per parent’s schedule Name of Provider: ELL teacher/Coordinator Audience: 9th to 12th grade ELL parents Topic 3: Path to High School -graduation requirements for ELLs Rationale: Parents will get information about the different majors and the requirements for graduation. Date: 12/07/18 /other sessions are done as needed. Time: various times per parent’s schedule Name of Provider: ELL teacher/Coordinator Audience: 9th to 12th grade ELL parents Topic 4: Common Core for ELLs Rationale: Parents will get information about what the Common Core Standards are and what each grade level will be expected to do this school year. They will receive websites and resources with support for the new Common Core Regents. Date: 09/12/18 other sessions are done as needed. Time: various times per parent’s schedule Name of Provider: ELL teacher/Coordinator Audience: 9th to 12th grade ELL parents Topic 5: Path to College for ELLs Rationale: Parents will get information on the different types of colleges available to students as well as the deadlines and the requirements. Date: 1/12/19 /other sessions are done as needed. Time: various times per parent’s schedule Name of Provider: ELL teacher/Coordinator and college adviser Audience: 11th and 12th grade ELL parents 2018-19 SCEP-FL 55 Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Additionally, monies will be used to provide light refreshments. Parent Coordinator reaches out to parents through bulletin mailed home and backpack notices in their native language. The ELL coordinator also gives letters and reminders about meetings and important information in the native language to students and parents. Meetings are conducted in English and Spanish by the ELL Coordinator; in house translation is available for the Haitian Creole, and for the other speakers of Bengali, and Arabic the Translation and Interpretation Unit will be contacted. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 56  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information Borough Brooklyn District 19 School Name William H. Maxwell CTE High School School Number 660 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Jocelyn Badette Coach type here ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Meldryn Ortiz Teacher/Subject Area Julisa Cunalata/ELA Teacher/Subject Area Sandi Schwartz/ELA Related-Service Provider type here Superintendent Karen Watts Assistant Principal Antoinette Martin Coach type here School Counselor Gayle Crowell Parent type here Parent Coordinator Karen Scott Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 2 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 1 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] D. Student Demographics 2018-19 SCEP-FL 57  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 410 Total number of ELLs 37 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 9.02% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 2 4 3 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? W. H. Maxwell High School has participated in the Periodic Assessment for ELLs from Pearson for eight years now. The quick results provide teachers with an overview of their students’ abilities. The scores on the Periodic Assessment combined with the modality scores on the NYSESLAT guide instruction, facilitate grouping, and guide instruction. Patterns usually arise upon examination of the data. For instance, if students make the same errors on the exam, the teacher knows that a skill needs to be retaught. A major benefit of using Pearson’s Periodic Assessment is the access to teaching materials that address specific questions on the exams, materials that can be used to reteach certain concepts.We also use diagnostic tests every marking 2018-19 SCEP-FL 58  period which help us guide curriculum and interventions. Moreover, the last two years we have been using Performance Series as an additional tool to analyze and track students' reading levels. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Assessments are done twice a year with the exception of the NYSESLAT. For instance, the ELL Periodic Assessment is administered at the beginning of the Fall Semester and in the Spring. Performance series assessment is also administered the same way. Then, scores are analyzed and share with students and ELA staff. Then, ELA Curriculum is adjusted based on the tests' results. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The success of our program is evaluated through the ELL Periodic Assessment results, ELA Regents, report card grades, portfolios, NYSESLAT scores (growth-including the point increases within modalities), teacher self-evaluation, student evaluations, and diagnostics given at the beginning and end of each term. Even though the the NYSESLAT scores do not show big gains, students have shown some gains. Our main areas of needs per NYSESLAT scores are still reading and writing. Most students improved in several of the modalities. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Once all the data is analyzed, adjusments to the curriculum is taken. Some of the summative tasks are added to the curriculum as formative tasks. For instance, last year we added several Short Constructed-Response writing questions as well as Extended Constructed-Response questions to address the NYSESLAT writing part. We also added several reading comprehension passages from the ELA Regents. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] NA 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The data patterns on the NYSITELL and NYSESLAT reveal that our students need a concentrated focus to be placed on their writing and reading abilities as in previous years. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? At the beginning of each school year we do item analysis of the ELA Regents as well as the NYSESLAT. Once we identify the short comings and strength of our students, curriculum is adjusted. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. 1a. ELL students at Maxwell benefit from three types of instruction: a self-contained setting, a Push-in model, and a Pull-out model. The ELL Coordinator has an abbreviated schedule and is able to use non-teaching periods to work 2018-19 SCEP-FL 59  alongside the students in the content area classroom, if necessary. If a student needs individual help there is also a Pull-Out model. For example, if a student needs oral translation of an exam or clarification of a topic being covered in class, the student can arrange to meet with ELL coordinator in the designated ELL classroom. Content Area and CTE teachers are also asked to refer students to the ELL Coordinator, if he/she deems a student is in need of support. Classes are separated into three levels: 9th to 12th grade Entering, Emerging, Transitioning, Expanding, and Commanding. Our classes are setup this because we have a small population of ELLs (37 students) and there are not enough students to have classes per grade level. b. TBE program. If applicable. NA c. DL program. If applicable. NA 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? At Maxwell High School, the ELL students are a priority. The ELL coordinator/ teacher ensures that the instructional minutes for all levels are met. Currently, we are in excess of the mandated minutes and use the additional time to focus on the content areas. The Entering classes, ESS61-01, ESS62-01, ESS63-01 meet for three forty-two minute periods daily for a total of 630 minutes. The classes, Emergening and Transitioning classes, ESS64-01 AND ESS65-01 meet for two forty-two minute periods daily for a total of 420 minutes. The Expanding class, ESS66-01 meets for a single forty-two minute class daily for a total of 210 minutes. All Expanding and Commanding students also have a regular ELA class, as per the mandate.. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. ENL Teacher works closely with content area teachers to align curriculum and complete cross-curricular units. Since the majority of our students speak Spanish, Spanish is utilized across all levels, as needed. Currently, we have several newcomers in the beginning level, thus, necessitating instruction in both Spanish and English. Content is made comprehensible through the use content rich fiction and nonfiction with the use of graphic organizers and scaffolding as well as students’ learning styles, differentiated instruction, and cooperative learning. Students are allowed to use different software or websites to help them with content such as Lingro.com which provides vocabulary support. We also have Brain Pop which provides educational support in all content areas. Students also use new software called Study Sync which provides content support for both fiction and nonfiction. Because the classes are in excess of the mandated minutes, the ELL teacher can dedicate an entire class or block to the content areas on a weekly basis. During this time, the ELL teachers are able to reinforce topics studied in the content areas with educational videos, related reading passages, and one-to-one conferences. There is an emphasis on the Sheltered Instruction Observation Protocol in the hopes that both the content and language objectives of each student are met. The SIOP model uses scaffolding through the use of supplementary materials, linkages to past learning, an emphasis on key vocabulary, modified speech, opportunities for students to use various learning strategies, different grouping configurations, manipulatives and realia. Multi entry point activities and strategies are also included in the curriculum. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Presently, there are only two students who need to be evaluated in their native language. All our newcomers are Spanish-speaking which facilitates summative and formative assessments. ENL teacher is fluent in Spanish and translates exams as necessary. Moreover, colleagues are also asked to submit exams or handouts for translation. The ELL Coordinator is also available to assist students in Spanish, both during non-teaching periods and afterschool.. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? a. SIFE 2018-19 SCEP-FL 60  b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status 5a. Differentiated instruction is utilized throughout all levels. All the classes are small with no more than 20 students, which is especially helpful when addressing the needs of SIFE students. Computers are available in the classroom to facilitate the writing workshop portion of the class. In addition, one of the SIFE has a paraprofessional at all times. b. Newcomers receive intensive support in all areas. Key components of reading like phonemic awareness, phonics, fluency, vocabulary, and text comprehension are emphasized in addition to the writing process, listening and speaking skills. Due to the NCLB requisite for testing, students are also introduced to standardized testing strategies. Regents examinations serve as diagnostics throughout the year. Maxell’s Scope and Sequence includes a Regents component for all levels. Students also practice using glossaries and translated versions of the exams in order to be better prepared to take their exams. In addition, the ELL students have a vast in-class library available to them, as well as the school library. . c. For those students who have received service between 4 to 6 years, there is an emphasis on reading, writing, listening, and academic vocabulary. Having gained the interpersonal skills necessary to survive by this time, the focus must be on the academic language that will allow them to not only pass the Regents, but also excel in their content area classes. The texts utilized are outside of their comfort zone, with extensive scaffolding. There are also numerous writing activities that help them become familiar with the writing process: from rough draft to editing. d. For those students who are currently Long-Term ELLs, the emphasis continues to be on listening, reading, writing, and speaking because these are the areas tested on the NYSESLAT and the ELA Regents. These students continue to struggle with their writing, as seen on the NYSESLAT results year after year. The vast majority of the students test at the proficient level on the Listening and Speaking, but continue to fail the exam solely due to their writing. Because of this, the advanced levels have become writing classes that focus on development, language use, conventions, and organization. e. All former ELLs receive transitional support and are included in all tutoring sessions. Teachers throughout the school are made aware that although the students have tested out of ENL and are considered proficient they will still need extra help. Teachers reach out to the ELL coordinator to arrange additional support whenever needed. The ELL coordinator maintains contact with the Former ELLs’ current teachers in order to measure progress and/or provide support. Former ELLs receive extended time on all standardized exams for up to two years after they have tested out of ENL and get 90 minutes of language development support. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? For those students who are special needs students, we currently have two paraprofessionals, an attendance teacher, a counselor, a psychologist, and a dean working alongside the ELL teachers. Because many of our Long-Term ELLs are also special education students who have learning disabilities and emotional issues additional staff is needed to truly meet their needs. Parents play a crucial role in helping the teachers reach their children. In order to better reach these students teachers incorporate technology, music, visuals, tactile activities, and student-teacher conferences as part of everyday instruction. Adapted texts, modified assignments, and remedial measures are utilized with these students. Moreover, the ELL teachers work with the Special Education teachers to better serve these children in accordance to their IEPs. All of our students receive the same curricula as their peers. For instance, this school year we adopted ELA Houghton Mifflin Harcourt Collections that provide plenty of language support and is fully aligned to the Common Core Standards. It provides scaffolding for reading and writing for ELLs per grade level. We also have Read 180 and News ELA for extra enrichment for the entering, emergent, and transitional level students. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? 2018-19 SCEP-FL 61  ELL-SWDs are programmed for classes that follow their IEP recommendation while still being placed within least restrictive environment. One of our students have full time paraprofessional. The Spanish-speaking paraprofessional allows this student to succeed in his content classes, as well as their CTE classes. First, second, and third periods are blocked for ENL instruction. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Like last year, this year we will continue our built-in tutoring session for all content areas as part of the regular class periods. Students are also provided with bilingual dictionaries and glossaries to use in all content areas. Because all levels are currently in excess of the mandated minutes, we have decided to incorporate three tutoring sessions a week for the Entering level, two tutoring sessions a week for the Emerging and Transitioning levels, and one tutoring session a week for the Expanding and Commanding levels. Because both ELL teachers are Spanish-speaking, it will be a perfect opportunity for the students at all levels to get the extra help they need. Content area teachers will be asked to join our tutoring sessions, if the need arises. Once funding is made available, ENL enrichment will be scheduled every Tuesday and Thursday after school for all subjects by licensed teachers. Content teachers and ELL teachers also provide tutoring during lunch periods on a daily basis 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Our school last year obtained the program News ELA which focuses on non-fiction texts embedded with current events; it is fully aligned with the Common Core standards. Students are assigned to different reading assignments and the program automatically adjusts to the students’ lexile levels. In addition, our ELLs have access to Houghton Mifflin Harcourt Core Curriculum Collection online. They can preview or view the lessons that have been completed in class. This enables the students to revisit the day's lessons at home and complete enrichment activities. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? NA 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELL students are represented in all of our four majors at Maxwell and participate in all after school programs as well as College Now. All clubs and teams are open to the ELL students. ELLs are also part of our ENL Art program after school. We also offer after school enrichment program for the ELLs . 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Technology is made available to all ELL subgroups and ELL teachers. The ENL suite is equipped with one smart board, six stationary computers, thirty laptops, an overhead projector, a television, audio stations for literature circles, portable CD players for independent reading, electronic spellers for writing workshops, wireless internet, and interactive computer programs like, Storybook Weaver, Brain Pop, Common Core Lit program, and NEWS ELA pragram.We use different resources for content area support and instruction, such as McDougal Litell Bridges to Literature, CollegeBoard SpringBoard English Textual Power, The Interactive Reader Plus with additional support, informational texts from Engage NY.org, and others. . 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Native language support is evident in every aspect of instruction. The ELL teachers use both oral and written translations throughout the lesson, as needed. In addition there are bilingual dictionaries, bilingual content glossaries, picture dictionaries, visual content dictionaries, native language texts, native language independent reading books, and content- related non- fiction independent reading books have also been purchased. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 62  14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All materials purchased are age-appropriate and pertinent to an adolescent interests. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Technology is made available to all ELL subgroups and ELL teachers. The ENL suite is equipped with one smart board, six stationary computers, thirty laptops, an overhead projector, a television, audio stations for literature circles, portable CD players for independent reading, electronic spellers for writing workshops, wireless internet, and interactive computer programs like, Storybook Weaver, Brain Pop, and we acquired the program Study Sync. We use different resources for content area support and instruction, such as McDougal Litell Bridges to Literature, CollegeBoard SpringBoard English Textual Power, The Interactive Reader Plus with additional support, informational texts from Engage NY.org, and others. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Students attend a general orientation with all incoming freshman prior to the beginning of the year. New students are assigned an ELL buddy on the first day of school. The buddy is responsible for giving the student a tour of the school, which includes important people, offices, and other general information. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Unfortunately, the CTE courses at Maxwell make it difficult to program elective courses. The only language electives offered at Maxwell is Spanish as a foreign language. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Professional Development for the ELL personnel at the school is provided by workshops both inside and outside of Maxwell. The Department of ELL provides professional development every month. During the summer, both ENL teachers attended an array of workshops: Curriculum Mapping, SmartBoard Training, Brain Research for ELLs, QTEL for Native Speakers, Breakthrough Education Strategies computer module development, and Houghton Mifflin Harcourt Collections. All workshops attended by the ELL teacher. Teachers are then turn-keyed to the ENL personnel. Much of the professional development occurs as part of bi-weekly study groups incorporated into the Small Learning Community meetings as well as our professional development half days. All personnel attend these meetings and this is why they are utilized to address the ELLs needs. All personnel also attend once a month intensive PD for two hours and half. All personnel are required to attend once a month intensive PD for two hours and half on the Common Core Standards, CIE 2018-19 SCEP-FL 63  and Effective Teaching Strategies, Curriculum, Looking at Student Work, Designing Coherent Instruction - Learning Environment, Classroom Management, Task Writing, Managing Student Behavior, Instructional Focus - Literacy, Rigor and Questioning Techniques, Student Engagement,Differentiated Instruction, Technology SmartBoard - Google Apps, SESIS, multi entry points, English Language Development-Guidelines for Instruction, The Common Core Challenge for ELLs, and Misconceptions about teaching English-language learners . All these workshops are provided by the APs, lead teachers, and teachers. These sessions started in September and will end in June. In addition, teachers attend UFT workshops and then turn key what they learned from these workshops to the rest of the teachers. Also, Houghton Mifflin Harcourt Collections offers professional development workshops throughout the school year. Also, Brooklyn North Field Support Center provides ELL professional development and ELL teacher attends whenever possible. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Because many of our incoming students are level ones, our staff is prepared to help all students transition from junior high school to high school. Staff is aware that the ELL students will need extra help due to the language limitations. This extra support is provided by the ELL coordinator and includes translation of exams, translation of assignments, individual meetings with teachers and student, push-in methods, pull-out sessions, and calls home in order to facilitate communication with parents. ELL coordinator meets with guidance counselors to go over scores and schedule students' program. ELL coordinator helps interpret the data and explains what each ENL level entails. Furthermore, the guidance counselors and ELL coordinator/teacher make sure ELLs are programmed in the appropriate ENL classes as well as monitor their progress in all content areas. We also meet with parents and students during freshman orientation and throughout the school year. Our school has open communication with parents and teachers. Students received an advisory period in their freshman year to help them transition. The ELL training for staff will be incorporated into the Small Learning Community meetings starting this year. Incorporating the training into the SLC was considered the easiest way to facilitate staff development. Training topics for this year will include subtopics of the Sheltered Instruction Observation Protocol in the hopes that the students will be better served by the entire staff having common strategies and approaches to teaching. Topics to be covered include: multi entry points, a brief overview of the demographic changes, language functions, formulating key vocabulary, manipulatives in the content areas, examination of teacher scenarios, common word roots, scaffolded outlines for the content area, comprehensible input, content and language objectives, student engagement, Language Experience Approach, and ELLs with special needs. During SLC meetings, and professional development sessions attendance is taken and minutes are kept to track hours of training. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Our school has different parents' activities like PTA meetings, open school night, breakfast senior meeting, and workshops. Parental Involvement has always been a challenge in our school. The Parent Teachers Association has a difficult time maintaining its members, Parent Breakfasts and meetings are attended by a handful of parents, the School Leadership team often starts the school year off with strong parental involvement but as with everything else the numbers begin to dwindle. The ELL parents are slightly better, when we have our meetings we usually have between 15% and 20% of our parents/ 2018-19 SCEP-FL 64  guardians in attendance. Due to the fact that Maxwell isn’t a zone school, many of our parents do not live in the area, which complicates transportation and childcare issues for parents that may want to attend meetings. Parents are kept informed of school issues through written communication and calls home. The parents have the ELL coordinator’s and ELL teacher’s cell phone numbers in case they need help navigating the system or have questions about their child. Moreover, parents can contact the school which has an automated system with native language support, and translation services are also available. Even though we face these shortcomings with parent involvement, we still offer meetings and workshops throughtout the school year either as a group of parents or individual meetings. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Topic 1: Getting to Know Your Child's School Rationale: This workshop will encourage parent involvement and empower parents with important information about our school such as the different places to get help and the programs that we offer before and after school such as the LYFE Center, clubs, PM school, ENL enrichment and support, etc. as well as the different majors we have. Date: sessions are done as needed. Time: various times per parent’s schedule Name of Provider: ELL teacher/Coordinator Audience: 9th to 12th grade ELL parents- new admits and transfers Topic 2: What can I do to help my child succeed? Rationale: This workshop will offer tips and information on how to get help with homework, how to get a library card, how to improve English skills, websites to practice grammar exercises, and our new reading program-News ELA. Date: sessions are done as needed. Time: various times per parent’s schedule Name of Provider: ELL teacher/Coordinator Audience: 9th to 12th grade ELL parents Topic 3: Understanding Puplipath Rationale: During this workshop, parents will get help on how to sign up to the program so they can monitor student’s progress and communicate with teachers. Date: sessions are done as needed. Time: various times per parent’s schedule Name of Provider: ELL teacher/Coordinator Audience: 9th to 12th grade ELL parents Topic 4: Understanding NYC Schools account Rationale: Parents will get access to NYC School account so they can track student's progress and graduation requirements. Date: sessions are done as needed. Time: various times per parent’s schedule Name of Provider: ELL teacher/Coordinator Audience: 9th to 12th grade ELL parents Topic 5: Academic progress Rationale: Parents will be invited to meet guidance and teachers to ask questions about their children’s academic progress. This will also serve as intervention seessions for some students. Date: sessions are done as needed. Time: various times per parent’s schedule Name of Provider: ELL teacher/Coordinator Audience: 9th to 12th grade ELL parents Topic 5: Path to High School -graduation requirements 2018-19 SCEP-FL 65  Rationale: Parents will get information about the different majors and the requirements for graduation. Date: sessions are done as needed. Time: various times per parent’s schedule Name of Provider: ELL teacher/Coordinator Audience: 9th to 12th grade ELL parents Topic 6: Common Core Standards Rationale: Parents will get information about what the Common Core Standards are and what each grade level will be expected to do this school year. They will receive websites and resources with support for the new Common Core Regents. Date: sessions are done as needed. Time: various times per parent’s schedule Name of Provider: ELL teacher/Coordinator Audience: 9th to 12th grade ELL parents Topic 7: Path to College Rationale: Parents will get information on the different types of colleges available to students as well as the deadlines and the requirements. Date: sessions are done as needed. Time: various times per parent’s schedule Name of Provider: ELL teacher/Coordinator and college advisor Audience: 11th and 12th grade ELL parents Topic 8: College Financial Aid. Rationale: During this workshop parents will get information on how to complete the financial Aid forms and will get information on the process of applying for scholarships. Date: sessions are done as needed. Time: various times per parent’s schedule Name of Provider: ELL teacher/Coordinator and college advisor Audience: 11th to 12th grade ELL parents The dates may be altered, as needed by the parents. All sessions will be in the native language or preferred language by the parent. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 66 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Jocelyn Badette, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 67  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: School DBN: Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Jocelyn Badette Title Principal Antoinette Martin Assistant Principal Karen Scott Parent Coordinator Meldryn Ortiz ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Julisa Cunalata/ELA Teacher/Subject Area Sandi Schwartz/ELA Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Gayle Crowell School Counselor Karen Watts Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 10/31/17 10/31/17 10/31/17 10/31/17 1/1/01 10/31/17 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 10/31/17 10/31/17 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 SCEP-FL 68  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 19K660 School Name: William H. Maxwell High School Superintendent: Karen Watts The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. At the beginning of every school year, the home languages for our ELL students are confirmed on ATS. In addition, the parents are contacted to ascertain that communication in English is a viable option. After having reviewed the RPOB report currently, we have 33 English Language Learners and 3 home languages: two speakers of Haitian Creole, one Arabic speaker, and thirty speakers of Spanish. Translation services are provided for all parents regardless of students' ELL service status. The ELL coordinator is fluent in Spanish and thus facilitates both oral and written communication with the parents.Our staff has been made aware of the translation services available as well as that ELL coordinator's availability for translation. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 69  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language Based on the data from ATS we have parents' preferred languages as follows: English, French, Haitian Creole, Arabic, and Spanish. 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. The list of documents that our school disseminates: Lunch Forms, Bill of rights for parents, Welcome letter, After school program information, NY State Testing dates, Syllabi, Blue Health card, Jupiter Grade log in information, School calendar, Parent-Teacher Conference Calendar, Graduation Requirements, Regent Exams Calendar, Student handbook, NYC School Access Account, and flyers for school celebrations or events. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 70  Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? IEP meetings, Parent-teacher conferences, discipline hearings/meetings, intervention meetings, home visits, and ELL individual meetings as well as group meetings. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) During freshman orientation, parents will get a folder about translation and interpretation services along with Parent's Bill of Rights, and Parent' Guide to Language Access. Before our parent-teacher conferences, we will send reminders via Jupiter grades to parents about translation and interpretation services. We will also talk about it while conducting individual or group meetings. Language ID Guide will be displayed at security desk and main office. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? We will ask parents to rate their experiences via parent surveys or informal interviews. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 71 
