 16K681 School Name: MADIBA PREP MIDDLE SCHOOL Principal: ANNE MARIE MALCOLM 2018-19 SCEP-FL 1  School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Section 4: SCEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Madiba Prep Middle School 16K681 N/A 6-8 School Number (DBN): 1010 Lafayette Avenue, Brooklyn, NY 11221 718 5742804 718 5742805 Phone Number: Anne Marie Malcolm Fax: Email Address: AMalcol2@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): Anne Marie Malcolm Jeremy McNeal Josie Williams Yolanda Rice Brian Price Brandon Lawrence JaheimPond Good Shepherd and Leadership Program CBO Representative: District Information Geographical District: 16 Superintendent’s Office Address: RaheshaAmon Superintendent: 1010 Lafayette Avenue, Brooklyn NY 11221 ramon@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718 574 2829 Phone Number: 718 574 2831 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 3  North Brooklyn Team FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Magda Dekki Executive Director: 131 Livingston Street, Room 501,Brooklyn, NY 11201 mdekki@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718 935 3820 Phone Number: 718 935 2242 Fax: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the SCEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Anne-Marie Malcolm Jeremy McNeal Ms. Josie Williams Vacant Mr. BrianPrice Brandon Lawrence JahiemPond Lisa Donlan Jacquette Green Monae Warren Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) The Leadership Program Good ShepherdProgram (CBO) Member/ Parent/6th Grade Parent 2018-19 SCEP-FL 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Michael Brant Yajaida McNeil Taron Pollard Rosalyn Jarvis Autumn Scoggan Yolanda Rice n/a n/a Member/ Parent Member/Parent Teacher Teacher Teacher Teacher Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 SCEP-FL 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) is a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. The process of developing and implementing the SCEP is aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding SCEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and SCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 7  In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement 2018-19 SCEP-FL 8  NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the SCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the SCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for SCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 9   Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 5: Build consensus around activities, strategies and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 6: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 7: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 10  Section 4: SCEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? We are a learning community where scholars are steeped in the rigorous pursuit of critical thinking skills, communication and technological literacy, self-awareness, and social and character development. Parents and community stakeholders support the development of scholars who are productive, contributing citizens in the local and global contexts. Madiba scholars will acquire the necessary skills and competencies to meet the demands of both college and career readiness. Madiba Prep teachers will provide the skills to teach students how to become critical thinkers by integrating their cultural and linguistic experiences with challenging learning skills involving higher order thinking and critical inquiry. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Madiba Prep Middle School is a middle school serving scholars in grades 6-8 with a total of 183 students. Our school’s focus is Social Justice and Innovation. We serve scholars who either reside in District 16 or, attend school outside the district. Madiba focuses on academics and social emotional growth of scholars. We have a robust counseling team to support myriad counseling needs among our population which includes the following special populations: Asian 1 %/ Black : 75% Hispanic : 18 % White : 5 % ELL : 11 % SWD: 35 % Our attendance is currently at 94%; Students Chronically Absent 32% Teacher Attendance: 95 % Instructional rigor extends beyond intellectual difficulty and depth of knowledge. Scholars must be challenged to acquire academic content and critical thinking skills, to employ the use of technology, and apply information to real world experiences. Scholars must have regular and frequent opportunities to practice the needed skills of self-awareness, leadership, and teaming, as well as engage in meaningful college/career exploration early and often to ignite academic passion and stimulate goal setting beyond high school graduation. Integral to our design are our four learning goals: critical thinking skills, communication and technological literacy, social development, and character development. We believe that graduates must know how to think critically, reason, problem-solve, communicate through a variety of modalities, be active members of their community and possess self-awareness. Our learning projects will position scholars to take the information that they have learned and propose a solution to a real world problem within their local community and make connections to our global community. In a world where available information is growing exponentially, scholars need to know how to learn and a Madiba scholar will. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 11  Our special initiatives include partnerships with Good Shepherds Services and the Leadership Program who provides and eclectic mix of activities during after-school hours and is embedded in our school during the day; Fencers Club who provides a grant to offset costs associated with providing world class fencers to train students in Foil style fencing; Middle School Arts Matter grantee which support the provision of Visual Arts and Theater to students; and an iZone school which enables the provision of online blended learning classes in foreign language, MSQI-Middle School Quality Initiative, Mastery Connect, Metamorphosis , Urban Advantage, Envision Math, Generation Ready and Teachers College Reading and Writing Program . 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Madiba Prep currently serves students with IEPS' and English Language Learners. 40% special needs, 51 % boys, and a growing ELL population of students. We have 3% inclusion student population integrated in our special education program. Our ELL students have various instructional supports with push in and pull out support from ELL and content area teacher. Level 3 and 4 students are programmed for accelerated programming aligned to standards. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. We have had improvement in all six areas of the framework for great schools, but we have had the most growth in the areas of : Rigorous Instruction and Collaborative Teachers and Trust. Our teaching team grew significantly this year due to the addition of many new teachers and an additional grade team. As a result, trust had to be developed as staff became familiar with each other. Teachers grew in this area to become comfortable with asking for help from all members of our school community, teaming to create new innovative programming both across the grade team and across disciplines. Teachers receive significant professional development including our marvelous Monday PD, our peer led professional development, and PD from subject area coaches. This year we will continue to focus on growing teacher practice, teaming to maximize student outcomes and the provision of rigorous instruction. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 12  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 16K681 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 159 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 14 14 4 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 17 11 10 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 87.0% % Attendance Rate 87.4% % Reduced Lunch 8.8% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.0% 22.0% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 2.5% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 2.19 11% 39% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 27.7% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No No Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups - Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities N/A N/A N/A N/A YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 25 25 5 90.0% 4.4% 31.4% 73.0% 1.9% 0.6% 0 44% 1.2 5.6% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No Yes YES N/A N/A N/A YES NO N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 13  Economically Disadvantaged N/A ALL STUDENTS N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 14  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed x x x x Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. New York City has adopted the Common Core State Standards, thus it is essential that Madiba Prep’s curriculum is aligned with the demands and requirements of the city and state while improving instruction and deepening students’ learning. Additionally, new curricula and resources are available that are aligned to the standards, support implementation of the instructional shifts, citywide instructional expectations. Based feedback from our latest Quality Review and The Framework for Great Schools Report, the following trends were identified as growth opportunities:  Our students articulating to middle school have experienced minimal opportunities, in many cases, to engage rigorously with complex texts, think critically and deeply, apply their learning as evidence of mastery, and receive high leverage, high quality actionable feedback that will accelerate their growth.  Our school has a significant number of teachers with 1-3 year teaching experience, and overall citywide implementation of core curriculum is relatively new and need strategic and individualized professional learning opportunities in the area of planning and assessments. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 15   Align Common Core aligned curriculum the curricula is interdisciplinary in nature to ensure that students have multiple opportunities to work with complex information so that they have access and can develop college readiness skills including the ability to engage with complex texts. Areas of Strength  Ongoing training which includes professional development, coaching, peer inter-visitation, teaming, mentoring,  and work with more experienced buddy teachers. In the school wide data for State English Language Arts (ELA) and Math tests overall as well as within every subgroup, English Language Learners (ELLs), Special Education (SPED), and Boys of Color (BOC) we have experienced significant gains. Specifically, among the 32 disaggregated categories growth exceeded 44% in many cases.   We experienced 66% literacy gains in math among our ELL population and  55% literacy gains in 8th grade math.  A priority need for our school is to improve student outcomes as measured in student growth and proficiency.  of our school is our teaming practices. We use a combination of coaching, mentoring, weekly principal mentoring meetings, grade team and content team meetings, inter-visitation, peer feedback, observations and feedback, formal professional development, and modeling. Priority Need:  Our most recent data has revealed that our school wide focus on rigorous performance tasks, actionable feedback, and assessment for learning will result in a 3 % growth in Math and ELA. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Rigorous Instruction- By June 2019, there will be at least a 3 % increase in student proficiency in the NYS Math exam compared to the 2017-2018 scores as a result of teacher teams developing rigorous CCLS aligned tasks in all subject areas. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 16 Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Literacy and Math Coaches, Principal, Consultants , Assistant Principal Teachers, Literacy and Math Consultation, Special Education, Paraprofessionals Educators, Assistant Principal, Principal Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Teachers of Humanities, Math, Science will attend both internal and external professional development sessions aimed at understanding how to effectively utilize new CCLS aligned instructional materials. Teachers will also be partnered with the instructional coach who will turn key their learning); All Mathematics educators will attend the Algebra- For- All Workshops provided by STEM Department ,Envision workshop series provided by Pearson, Generation Ready Consultant will provide training through Algebra for All Initiatives throughout the year this will provide Math educators with strategies to assist in their instructional program. Weekly planning PD will be conducted by the Consultant , Assistant Principal and Instructional Coach so as to support to all teachers which will aide in the Mastery of the Common Core Aligned math skills. Performance Tasks, administered at the end of every unit utilized to assess student mastery. Fall and Spring Benchmarks will be administered to provide immediate feedback to students and teachers. Differentiated instruction will be utilized as an instructional tool in order to meet the needs of all scholars. The ENL program will provide support for ELL's in terms of Vocabulary Development ,Support of explanation of classroom instruction, support is also provided in terms of interpretation. Stand alone instruction is provided in after school. ELL's will also be supported using Iready Math program in after school math videos and differentiation activities eg. Smart board Interactive Simulation. Teachers Weekly Teachers August/September 2018 November 2018 December 2018 February 2018 April 2019 June 2019 Students will use evidence from texts for reading, writing, and discussions in each academic discipline; Students Daily 100% of student work for each unit of study will be assessed based on a rubric, developed for that particular performance task and include actionable feedback; Teachers and Students 6 week Cycles Teachers, Literacy and Math Coaches, Principal Teachers, Literacy and Math Coaches, Principal September 2018- 2018-19 SCEP-FL 17  Students will be able to reflect on their academic work and progress through student led conferences. Students Each month students experience interdisciplinary, Common Core-aligned curriculum and rigorous instruction across all content areas including the core academic subjects of Math, Science, English Language Arts, Humanities and Social Studies during the 2018-2019 academic school year. Saturday Academy and After-school offered for all students. November 2018 Teachers, Literacy and Math Coaches, Principal Students and Teachers January 2019 March 2019 May 2019 Teachers, AP, and Principal Regents Prep offered by Madiba Prep School for 8th graders students. Students and Teachers Living Environment Lab classes 3b – Parent and Family Engagement June 2019 How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. As a school community we have created multiple opportunities to increase parent engagement. Madiba Prep Parent Coordinator serves as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator will provide monthly parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents. All parents will be provided the opportunity to give input and suggestions of the school plan throughout the school year at Parent Associations meetings, Parent Breakfast and School Leadership Team meetings. All parents will be invited to Curriculum Night to ensure all scholars are successful. The school will utilize a variety of communication techniques to enhance parent participation (REMIND App, website, emails, newsletter, grade level newsletter, mail, phone calls, etc.). Bi-Monthly the school will provide parents with the opportunity to visit classes throughout the school year and engage in actual lessons with their child. (Lunch and Learn). The school will also host a Back-to-School Barbecue, Open House, Bed-Stuy Crawl, Movie Night, Trips, Career Day, College Tour, etc in order to engage the parents. Key personnel include pedagogical staff, principal, coaches, consultants, and grade team leads to provide hands on coaching, training, modeling and feedback. In addition, learning opportunities will be collaboratively viewed, discussed and normed as part of our professional development work. Administrators and staff will attend conferences and workshops and visit partner schools to hone their skills in the areas of lesson development, rigor, implementation of core curriculum, strategies to engage higher order thinking including discussion and questioning, and differentiation, and prospect based learning. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 2018-19 SCEP-FL 18  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Key personnel include pedagogical staff, principal, coaches, consultants, and grade team leads to provide hands on coaching, training, modeling and feedback. Teachers and Assistant Principal will be paid per session to assist in the implementation of these plans. In addition, learning opportunities will be collaboratively viewed, discussed and normed as part of our professional development work. Administrators and staff will attend conferences and workshops and visit partner schools to hone their skills in the areas of lesson development, rigor, implementation of core curriculum, strategies to engage higher order thinking including discussion and questioning, and differentiation, and project based learning. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant X 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Teachers will be assessed using the Danielson Rubric in the area of 4E that specifically address “seeking regular opportunities for continued professional development” and welcoming colleagues and supervisors into the classroom for the purpose of gaining insight from their feedback” through 3 Cycles of Teacher Observations and Reflection. These will take place in October, December, February and May. February will be the quantifiable mid-point benchmark where the 2nd observation cycle plus, feedback and resulting action from informal observations will track growth of this indicator/goal. In addition, minutes, agendas, goals, informal observations, cycles of reflection will all be evidence of the collaborative work and goals teachers are engaged in. On a weekly basis authentic student work products resulting from performance tasks will be reviewed in the academic disciplines as evidence of goal attainment; 1. Weekly classroom observations will be ongoing beginning in September 2018 and continuing through June 2019; 2. Lesson plans that integrate interdisciplinary study will be reviewed against unit plans, pacing calendars and pre/post assessments; and 3. Attendance sheets and/or training materials, and logs of assistance, will be collected and maintaining. 4. Midyear assessment data will be used to evaluate if at least 3% of students are demonstrating an increase in the targeted skills leading to proficiency. In Mid February, students will be assessed in Math using Envison Math Mid -Year Assessment in ELA students will be assessed using Mastery Connect and Teachers College on demand writing assessment. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Danielson Domain Rubric Student work 2018-19 SCEP-FL 19  Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 20  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. x x x x SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? As a school, we have established a culture where students feel safe, challenged to grow and supported to meet high expectations as noted as a strong area on the 2017 Framework for Great Schools Report. According to the report, 87 % of our students stated that they were able to identify at least one adult in the building that they could confide in. Our school culture is characterized by warmth and caring. We have consistently enjoyed favorable student survey responses in the areas of safety, academic rigor, and community. Although our survey results have consistently been favorable in this area as we have grown we have seen a positive incline in our survey results as evidenced by our parent survey results from 2017-2018 compared to 2016-2017. We expect an increase in this area this year. An area of focus for us is to maintain systematic impact with our students and families in maintaining a supportive environment as experienced by at least 85% of our parent and student populations surveyed. This has been an area of strength for the school. Specifically, scholars have experienced support from our student support team which is comprised of two guidance counselors, a dean and our CBO Good Shepherd. This team is robust and we are able to provide mandated counseling, crisis counseling and one to one/small group on demand counseling, peer mediation, and conflict resolution. We have 2018-19 SCEP-FL 21  leveraged this support through our partnership with our after school provider and a long term assignment from the Absent Reserve (ATR) pool of Guidance Counselor. Our students also experience specific nights of bonding like Paint and Inspire. This takes place with our staff, their parent or caregivers and peers where we discuss matters that resonate with them. In addition, our school year is loaded with cultural events, college exploration, family night celebrations, and a range of offerings that foster creative expression. These include art, theater, African drumming, dance, photography, digital music production, boat making and sailing, fencing and a variety of sports on demand, faculty versus student competitions, academic incentives, reward currency, and a school store. Our student government is very active and influences student life heavily. They host student led town hall meetings. Students actively create the feeling in the school by maintain fish tanks, caring for the plant life in the community and determining programming. It is common to see scholars come up to have lunch with their teachers and assist teachers in the community that may not currently teach them. Although our student population consists of a number of students who come to us with chronic absenteeism records we have been able to reverse that trend consistently through intensive intervention, counseling and daily calls home for lateness and absences. Where necessary we have also conducted family support meetings to reverse poor attendance habits. We are able to support peer mediation, conflict resolution, personal goal setting, provide staff mentoring, and advisers for each child. This helps keep suspensions down and provides us with tools to remediate unwanted behavior versus reacting with consequences solely. Priority Needs: Additional work must be done to increase parental involvement to make the home -school connection seamless. Policies and structures that are in place to support the whole child are: Saturday STEM Program  Afterschool and lunch time tutoring is provided both formally and informally.  Genuis B.A.R (Books.Arts.Relaxation) during lunch/Study Hall, Friday Small Groups   Peer mediation and Counseling Services     Global Scholars Program Friday Clubs Saturday Explorer Club Language - Spanish, Korean, French Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools –Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Supportive Environment- 2018-19 SCEP-FL 22  By June 2019, monthly communications on the child's performance which are subject/grade area specific will result in a 3% increase in positive parent response rates on the learning Environment Survey. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 23  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Home school connection for absenteeism and lateness on a daily basis. This includes daily phone calls and family support meetings where necessary. Students and Families Student academic tutoring and social emotional support. The use of progress trackers and student goal setting. Students Student activities and academic incentives to encourage achievement and goal attainment. Students Monthly Spirit Day Activities /ASIT Trips Weekly Monday and Friday Assemblies Conflict resolution, counseling, mentoring and advisory. Students Cafe Jam and additional school culture activities will be added and student government/representatives will take on a greater role in school. Monthly student government meetings with the principal. Students September 2018 through June 2019 September 2018 through June 2019 September 2018 through June 2019 September 2018 through June 2019 March 2018 to June 2019 Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Guidance counselors Teachers and Student support team Dean and Coordinator of student life/Guidance Counselors Student support team and staff Good Shepherds social workers, guidance counselors, Student government liaison 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 24  Many of our families are in poverty as evidenced by the percentage of families that qualify for free and reduced meals. They also experience a significant amount of fragmentation in the family due to poverty. Attendance is adversely impacted because of a combination of factors including poor health, competing priorities such as the need to care for a sick loved one at home and work, and general distress and hopelessness stemming from cyclical academic failure of their children and poor home school connections. Parents and caregivers sometimes lack healthy coping mechanisms necessary to adequately address all of these factors and as a result are sometimes overwhelmed. Some of our families also suffer from unemployment or underemployment making basic survival a challenge. Despite the myriad challenges our families face we see them as resources and partners in our scholar’s educational success. Therefore, we routinely hold family support conferences, parent workshops, gender based student and caregiver nights, parent information nights, cultural events and celebrations. We also host schools to come and speak to our families. Parent volunteers serve in our school contacting other parents, fund raising and planning. Parents have made presentations and we would like to see this kind of student involvement grow. We struggle with getting high numbers of parent involvement for routine PTA meetings and into the school more generally. Using the School messenger System to relay pertinent and timely information to all families. The use of Engrade to relay timely information regarding student assessment, homework,and behavior. Every six ( 6) weeks a Progress Report will go out to Parents. Using our weekly parent engagement time on a weekly basis to communicate with parents about students' progress and unit of study. PTA meets monthly to keep parents abreast about upcoming school and community events,curriculum updates,and information regarding state testing and Regents Exams. Our strength is the high percentage of favorable views about all aspects of our school among parents as evidenced on the school survey. Our priority need is to increase parent engagement by at least 25% during the 2018-2019 school year. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. All staff is involved in creating the culture and climate of the school community and student experiences. Advisory will be programmed for all students with each teacher leading an advisory group. This will be done during 1st period Homeroom. During 6th Period Lunch students will also meet with Guidance Counselor and Social Worker from Good Shepherd Services. Per Session will be provided for After-school Counseling Sessions. Chess and Taekwondo is provided for all students with a focus on SWD and ESL. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring 2018-19 SCEP-FL 25  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. * By February 2019 students will be assessed in ELA and Math using Mastery Connect for ELA and Envision Platform for Math with a minimum response of 70%. On track progress to meet our goal will be monitored through interim student survey results from a school created instrument, which mirrors the school wide survey, administered at the midpoint to assess student feelings regarding safety and support at our school. In addition, other data points will also be evaluated such as student feedback, year to date attendance comparisons, incident data, and student progress monitoring. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. School wide student surveys Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 26  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by SOP(s) Addressed x x x x using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to the data on the Framework for Great Schools Report, our school received a score of 3.16 on Collaborative teachers with a 90% positive on Cultural Awareness and Inclusive Classroom Instruction. Our school serves students in District 16, a high needs district. As a result, we have a population that is approximately a third special needs students, many of our scholars come to us with lagging skills and poor study and work habits. However, teachers are committed to the growth and development of our scholars. Our priority need is to leverage our resources by increasing the teamwork focused on rigorous instruction including Danielson Domains 3B, 3C and 3D by our teachers. Teachers participate in weekly professional development, peer inter-visitation, and reinforce our school norms and culture and values among students. Teacher voice is valued and we meet weekly to discuss our community and its needs. All teachers participate in a week of pre-service professional development as well. Teachers are an integral part of school life and create new opportunities within our school regularly. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 27  Many of our teaching staff is new. Their practice is growing and continues to grow. Now that our school is serving a full complement of grades we work both vertically and horizontally honing curriculum and instruction, and finding ways to increase rigor. Instructional practice continues to be an area that we focus on to improve student outcomes. Though our school and staff are young, we continue to administered the NYS Regents in Living Environment and Algebra and see success. Next year we plan to administer Living Environment and Algebra 1 Regents exams and increase the number of students participating in those high school level exams. Priority Needs: * Based on Frameworks for Great Schools Report Teacher influence received a 69 % percent positive response. This year we will work on increasing teacher influence by having teachers be involved in making decisions on curriculum materials, teachers be involved in collaborating on tasks so as to promote a more rigorous robust Math instruction. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Collaborative Teachers- By June 2019, there will be a 5 % increase in teaching staff collaboratively designing and engaging in weekly planning and inquiry meetings to review and revise lesson and unit plans that improved teacher practice as measured by Domain 1. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 28  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Weekly professional learning series for all teachers by department and grade bands specific to instructional focus: Questioning and Discussion, Assessment, Reflection and revision, and Engagement. Ongoing and comprehensive goal setting for targeted students based on analysis of data, including those in special populations to support instruction of SWD, ELL, Accelerated and Inclusion students. Teachers and Guidance Counselors Teacher led parent academy courses such as, "What you should know about middle school", "ELA Common Core and more, and "50 ways to accelerate your scholars growth. Teachers and Parents Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Teachers Weekly Principal and coaches Coaches, Teachers, and Guidance Counselor Parent Coordinator, Teachers August 2018 to June 2019 Series August 2018 to June 2019 Monthly Beginning October 28, 2018 to June 2019 Teacher collaboration and support through common planning and grade team meetings, coaching, peer mentoring, inter-visitations, and peer feedback. Teachers Weekly Principal and Coaches August 2018 to June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. During school year 2018-2019, our school will continue to reach out to families to support greater teacher-parent/family collaborations to support at home. This will be done through Open school night where students and teachers will discuss how the school can support them at home. Parents will be introduced to websites like Khan Academy, using Google classrooms, conducting parent workshops that centers around teacher-parent family collaborations. This will be done by Parent Coordinator, Classroom teachers, Assistant Principals, Instructional Coaches, Principal and students throughout school year and done weekly during Parental Involvement time on Tuesdays as mandated in the teacher contract. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 2018-19 SCEP-FL 29  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The schedule will include daily common planning time on the grade and within the content area on a weekly basis. Teachers will be supported and funding will be provided to work together after PD Mondays to discuss how professional development experiences will be integrated into their classroom practices. Teachers who have promising practices will be encouraged to lead professional development and open their classrooms to colleagues. Texts for book studies will be purchased and provided to teachers. Where necessary teachers will receive a coverage to enable them to view a colleagues practices. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant X 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Based on informal and/or formal observations, teacher progress in this indicator will be tracked throughout the year. The mid-point benchmark will be February 2019. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. In February 2019, feedback from lead teachers, observation of teacher teams by administration, evidence in classroom practice and student work as evidenced in the Danielson Domain/Rubric. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 30  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). x x x x SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to the 2017 Framework for Great School Report: * Strong Family- Community Ties received a 4.45 score with a 95 % on Learning Survey and Trust- relationships between administrators, educators, students, and families are based on trust and respect. * Despite the myriad challenges our families face we see them as resources and partners in our scholar’s educational success. Therefore, we routinely hold family support conferences, parent workshops, gender based student and caregiver nights, parent information nights, cultural events and celebrations. We also host schools to come and speak to our families. Parent volunteers serve in our school contacting other parents, fund raising and planning. * 94 % of parents say that our school staff regularly communicate with them about how parents can help their child learn. 98 % of parents say that they have communicated with their child's teacher about their child's performance. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 31  100% of teachers say that teachers at this school work closely with families to meet student needs. * The school leader communicates to the school community through messages posted on whiteboard located in the main office and through other verbal and written structures, examples, a weekly updates sent via emails to all staff. According to the School Quality Snapshot relationships between administrators, educators, students, and families are based on trust and respect. 96 % of parents say that the school staff work hard to build trusting relationships with them. Priority Needs: According to the 2017 Framework for Great Schools Report: Effective Leadership received 3.19 score te goal is to have a 5 % increase. 87% of teachers states taht the principal communicates a clear vision for the school the goal is to get over 90%. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART– Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Effective School Leadership By June 2019, there will be a 3% increase in teachers Advance ratings in 3B-Questioning and Discussion Technique and 3C-Engaging Students in Learning as compared to their 2017-2018 end of year rating as a result of school leadership and teacher leaders developing and implementing a professional development plan. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 32  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Teachers will receive ongoing professional development including work with consultants, attendance at conferences and workshops, pre-service PD, and onsite coaching. Teachers Assessments and the use of data will continue to be a school wide focus with increased activities, and teachers receiving peer reviewed publications and books for review and discussion to grow their knowledge. Teachers and coaches will be required to present their data within our learning community on a schedule. Teachers and Coaches A professional library and PD will be developed for staff as a resource. All Staff August, 2018 to June, 2019 August, 2018 to June, 2019 Principal, Consultants, Coaches Principal, Consultants, Coaches Principal, Coaches August, 2018 to June, 2019 A full time Instructional Coach will provide feedback, modelling and support. The observation and feedback loop for teaching practice will incorporate the use of skills acquired during professional development . Teachers and Coaches August, 2018 to June, 2019 Principal, Coaches 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. October - December 2018 the SLT created a sub-committee to further evaluate areas where parent perceptions scored lower on the Learning Environment Survey. Community and Parent Relations Committee established to research effective researched based strategies to increase parent participation . -Parent Coordinator -Parent sub-committee from SLT -Teacher committee on Family outreach -Per-Session or Meal to compensate teachers for planning and delivery of workshops to parents Funds to purchase Subscription to Survey Monkey -Funds for Phone Messenger -Funds for Website Hosting Services that provides, on-line access, texts, e-mails 2018-19 SCEP-FL 33  -Remind Me App Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Funds will be used to pay for professional development workshops and conferences, consultants, books and supplies. Funds will also be used to support overtime payments for all employees for work necessary to further this goal that falls outside of normal work hours. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant X 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2018 , students will be assessed using Mid-point benchmarks that is expected to reveal students achievement in each of four core academic areas, ELA, Social Studies, Math and Science with a mastery of at least 70% as measured against pre and post tests. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Mastery Connect Envision Math Assessment Teachers College Reading and Writing Assessments Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 34  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. x x x x SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Many of our families are in poverty as evidenced by the percentage of families that qualify for free and reduced meals. They also experience a significant amount of fragmentation in the family due to poverty. Attendance is adversely impacted because of a combination of factors including poor health, competing priorities such as the need to care for a sick loved one at home and work, and general distress and hopelessness stemming from cyclical academic failure of their children and poor home school connections. Parents and caregivers sometimes lack healthy coping mechanisms necessary to adequately address all of these factors and as a result are sometimes overwhelmed. Some of our families also suffer from unemployment or underemployment making basic survival a challenge. Despite the myriad challenges our families face we see them as resources and partners in our scholar’s educational success. Therefore, we routinely hold family support conferences, parent workshops, gender based student and caregiver nights, parent information nights, cultural events and celebrations. We also host schools to come and speak to our families. Parent volunteers serve in our school contacting other parents, fund raising and planning. Parents have made presentations and we would like to see this kind of student involvement grow. We struggle with getting high numbers of parent involvement for routine PTA meetings and into the school more generally. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 35  Our strength is the high percentage of favorable views about all aspects of our school among parents as evidenced on the school survey. Our priority need is to increase parent engagement by at least 25% during the 2018-2019 school year. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Strong Family-Community Ties- By June 2019, the school will send monthly communications on information around curriculum to parent pertaining to their child's expectations for all subject areas area .This will be evidence by at least a 3% increased completion of the school survey as compared to the 2018 Learning Environment Survey. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 36  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Parents buddy program will be started where parents are paired across grades. Parents Parents will be surveyed to determine the workshops they would find meaningful. Workshops will occur monthly at minimum. Workshops will be provided both by the Leadership Program and teachers. Parents Parents will be given the option to change the PTA meeting times. Parents Parents from the sixth grade will join the executive board of the PTA so that they have a decision making voice immediately. Parents Parents will make calls to each other to encourage increased attendance. September, 2018 to June 2019 September, 2018 to June 2019 September, 2018 to June 2019 September, 2018 to June 2019 March 2018 to June 2019 Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Parent Coordinator Parent Coordinator Parent Coordinator Parent Coordinator Parents Parent Coordinator 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. * Good Shepherd Services After School Program * Korean Language Foundation * Digital Girls * Sing for Hope * Royal Madrid/EF Educational Tours 2018-19 SCEP-FL 37  * Arts Matter * Urban Advantage/STEM * St.John's Bread & Life * 100 Schools Projects * Balance Dance Theatre * Global Cities * Algebra For All * Columbia TC Reading & Writing Program *Entertainers 4 Education Alliance * NYC Community Schools: The Leadership Program * Middle School Quality Initiative * BELA Charter High School * American Association of Blacks in Energy * College Access for All Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Funds will be used to support events for parents and students, supplies and materials needed for brochures and flyers, teacher per-session, and books. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP X Title I TA Title I 1003(a) Title III PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant X 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other 2018-19 SCEP-FL 38  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. An interim parent survey will be conducted in February to determine parent satisfaction with a goal of 80% positive responses. Workshop, meeting and participation logs will be also be used as a mid-point check. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. School created survey Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 39  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) All students based on DRPscores Mathematics The bottom 1/3 of students performance on state exams and report cards Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Scheduled What I Need (WIN) Strategic Reading Period/Group Targeted, needs-based instruction in reading and writing Targeted tutoring pull-out Blended learning Use of online leveled self-paced, small groups, close reading, think-pair-shares, and guided reading practices Afterschool academic support Intervention Reading Groups Science Teachers will support Math in cross curriculum planning. Targeted, needs-based instruction in mathematics Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small group/ one-on-one/Flexible grouping Services occur during and after the school day Small group/ one-on-one/ Flexible grouping Full Class During the school day Before and after school 2018-19 SCEP-FL 40  Targeted tutoring pull-out Push-In services for students with IEPs and others determined “at risk” Explore and Discovery, Solve and check, online and independent practice Science Bottom Third of students performance on report cards, teacher made assessments and performance tasks. Social Studies Bottom 1/ 3 of students performance on report cards, teacher made assessments and performance tasks. Student lunch and learn After school academic support WIN Strategic Reading Targeted tutoring pull-out during lunch After school academic support Differentiated instruction will be implemented in Science classrooms. ELA and math skills and enrichment enrichment classes. WIN Strategic Reading Period Small group/ one-on-one/Flexible grouping Services occur during and after the school day Small group/ one-on-one/Flexible grouping Services occur during and after the school day Targeted, needs-based instruction in reading and writing Targeted tutoring pull-out Blended learning . Online leveled self- 2018-19 SCEP-FL 41 At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Referral from school staff SIT meeting paced, small group, close reading, think-pair-shares, and guided reading. After school academic support Enrichment classes. Reflection, Discussion, Goal Setting, Mediation, Restorative Justice Practices. The Guidance counselor meets with students for mandated counseling and students who are " at risk" behaviorally, socially and academically. Small group/ one-on-one/Flexible grouping Services occur during and after the school day 2018-19 SCEP-FL 42  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 11 students are in temporary housing currently 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Services include counseling supports, free after school support, clothing/ from the PTA assistance with paid events. Uniforms Glasses Hair Cuts School supplies Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 43  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 44  Section 8: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. * The Principal and Personnel Committee members will attend hiring fairs and recruit highly qualified teachers. * The Principal will work closely with the members of the Personnel Committee to screen and interview applicants. * The school secretary will work closely with BFSC HR Directory to ensure that non- HQT meet all required documentation. . Individual weekly check-in meetings with principal to discuss goals, plans, concerns, strategies, and ways to improve teacher practice. Embedded professional development that is differentiated to fit the needs of each teacher and includes common planning, weekly PD, peer observations. External professional development provided by outside organizations such as Teaching Matters, Teachers Incentive Funds, Teacher Development Center and Middle School Quality Initiative. Provide qualified staff with opportunities to develop capabilities for future administrative roles. Development of a collegial, collaborative and professional community. Maintain an open door policy Staff is recruited from a variety of sources including NYCTF, NYC Teaching Collaborative, Teach for America, and Math for America to ensure that the pool of candidates we attract and retain are highly qualified. Professional development is ongoing and begins with a week of pre-service training for all teaching staff. Staff is partnered for support and work in both grade teams and content area teams throughout the year. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 45  2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). 1. Principal provides weekly PD that engages teachers in new learning and best practices to support implementation of goal. 2. Principal will attend regularly professional development and turnkey emerging best practices to the learning community. 3. Teachers will attend PD sessions sponsored bt BFSC, CBO partnerships , District Talent coaches , Instructional Coach, Peer Instructional Coach etc. 4. Principal meets weekly with individual teachers to provide one-on-one instructional support and differentiate teacher’s professional development. 5. Principal meets weekly with each department to engage in common planning around curriculum mapping; analyzing daily, weekly and unit data; and looking at student work. 6. School-based embedded PD which includes: weekly PD, common planning time, weekly department meetings, individual check in time with teachers, peer observations, cycles of “reflection to action” for each teacher, external PD aligned with school’s mission and vision (Danielson, ASCD, Teaching Matters, Mastery Connect, Middle School Quality Initiative ). 7.Teachers attended Summer PD around the Teacher Evaluation System and Danielson Rubric. 8. Teachers will receive training from Instructional Coach around writing, inquiry, reading, collaboration, and student organization. 9.. Teachers took part in school-based PD that analyzed the Danielson rubric in order to construct individual goals. 10.. Teachers met individually with principal to discuss individual goals and create a plan as to how those goals will be met and what evidence will be provided. 11. Weekly common planning to assist teachers in lesson planning and curriculum planning that will address the school’s mission/vision and the Danielson Framework. 12. School-based embedded PD framed around teacher needs based on informal observations and individual goals. 13. Providing teachers with monthly “Instructional Non-Negotiable” (scaffold instructional expectations) to guide teachers in implementing school-wide instructional priorities). 14. Collaboration with talent coach to support the implementation of the Advance System. To ensure high quality professional development to support the entire school community a range of approaches will be used including Principal and consultant led professional development, on-demand professional development (based on teacher identified needs), use of the talent coach and the instructional support person assigned to our school, targeted research based book studies, coach led professional development, 2-day staff retreat with targeted 2018-19 SCEP-FL 46  intensive professional development, and attendance by the team leaders and principal at the national ASCD conference. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers meet one time each week to share data from assessment and co- plan performance tasks. Teachers worked over the summer of 2017 and during the school year to design assessments for use as a measure of skills mastery. Training for this work began at the end of the 2016-2017 school year and will continue throughout the upcoming 2017-2018 school year. Instructional Coach along with the Peer Collaborative Teacher will plan for two weeks focusing on unit plans, assessment, data and interdisciplinary projects. It will be supported by consultants, instructional coach and principal. Teachers will be provided with samples as exemplars. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (SCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the 2018-19 SCEP-FL 47  intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) 5A n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 5A, B, C, D, E Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Title I Part A (Basic) Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 154,070.00 0 0 0 0 0 1,576,432.00 X n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a X 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 48   A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/SCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG or SIF funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 49  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Madiba Prep, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Madiba Prep will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 50  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 2018-19 SCEP-FL 51  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) Madiba Prep Middle School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 2018-19 SCEP-FL 52  improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 53  ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 54  II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; III. Student Responsibilities 2018-19 SCEP-FL 55  ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. Addendum: Community School Partnerships Directions: The Community School (CS) strategy is directly aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. Community Schools bring schools and community partners together and integrate academics, health, youth development, and family engagement to provide students with the tools and opportunities they need to succeed. The Core Services in Community Schools are Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness. Part 1 – Community School Partnerships Goal(s) How is the CS strategy integrated into academic instruction at your school, and what impact has it had on student academic outcomes? Madiba Prep Middle School’s focus on the rigorous pursuit of critical thinking skills, communication, technological literacy, self-awareness, social, and character development is well supported by the community school model via the academic enrichment classes offered before, during and after school by our CBO partners and 21st CCLC funding. These enrichment opportunities include: Leadership/Mentoring/Global Citizens, Fencing, Morning Burn Basketball Club, Visual Arts, 3D makers Club, targeted interventions in Math and ELA for all grades (6-8th) Many of these clubs utilize the Experiential Learning Cycle and lessons in leadership in order to : Augment students skills in self-regulation to be more successful in not only school but in in life. Improve on social and interpersonal skills to create and maintain positive relationships. Increase responsible behavior and improved decision-making across all contexts of a student’s existence Indicate the summative goal(s) of the Community School for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. 1. Program Goals and Objectives GOAL 1: The academic performance of participating students will improve through homework, 2018-19 SCEP-FL 56  tutorial, and enrichment services in the content areas of READING, MATH and SCIENCE. Objectives: • Improve student achievement • Reach targeted participation levels in core education services • Reach targeted participation levels in enrichment and support activities GOAL 2: 21st CCLC students will be exposed to and experience a wide variety of enrichment activities which will enhance their learning from the academic program and connect it to the students’ world. GOAL 3: Youth and family Development classes and activities will engage students and parents in a learning environment towards developing positive interpersonal and social emotional skills. Objectives: • Improve student behavior • Retain participation students • Facilitate the social development of participating students GOAL 4: All 21st CCLC activities will take place in safe and healthy environments. 21st CCLC students will increase their knowledge of appropriate social skills, good nutritional habits, and other wellness skills. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Community School Annual Goal(s): How will achieving your Community School Goal(s)--in Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness--support your academic goals for students? The purpose of this 21st CCLS After School program is to ensure, through our CCLC After School Program, that students will develop and demonstrate scholastic, technological, physical, social, and problem-solving skills essential for achieving academic, occupational, and personal success today and in the future. Part 2 – Community School Partnerships Core Services Action Plan 2018-19 SCEP-FL 57  Part 2a. Identify the Community-based Organization (CBO) partnerships that you will develop in ELT, Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness, their target student population(s), and scope of the services provided. As well as supporting schools’ supportive environment and attendance work, CBOs should be helping to support your school’s instructional focus. CBO Partnership Target Population Scope of The Leadership Program The Leadership Program Part 3 – Budget and Resource Alignment N/A N/A Service N/A N/A SY18-19 SMART Goal N/A N/A Part 3a. Indicate resources your Community Partnership will leverage to achieve your summative SMART goal(s) and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. N/A Part 3b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside X 21st Century C4E SIG Grant School Achievement X Other Funding Part 3c. Describe how the school will partner with the Lead CBO to do the following: 1. Community Schools are expected to partner with a community-based partner organization (CBO) and together with members of the School Leadership Team, hire a Community School Director. The Director will lead implementation of the asset and needs assessment process, and other critically important coordinating activities. Indicate how you will leverage this aspect of the work. Community Schools are expected to personalize the needs of all students, through strategic programming and services, as determined by the asset and needs assessment, and must also offer Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and mental health programming. In completing this section, ensure that you think about how: (1) the right services are provided to the right students and families at the right time; and (2) how you will seamlessly coordinate services with instructional programming happening throughout and outside of the school day. Indicate how you will implement this work, and describe other programming you anticipate to be in place to strengthen this initiative. Community Schools are expected to emerge as Partnership Schools, which are places where parents and families feel welcome, actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. Monthly meetings and Community School Forums engaging families and community stakeholders will be a critical part of this family engagement strategy. Describe how you will implement this aspect of the work. Community School Principals are expected to meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. Data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter - and training will be available for schools to use. Indicate how you will implement this aspect of the work. 2. 3. 4. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 58  Madiba Prep Middle School of Social Justice and Innovation, in collaboration with parents and the community, seeks to inspire all students to become well-rounded, innovative thinkers and problem solvers with the intellect, ethics, and confidence to compete in a global arena. Parents and community stakeholders support the development of scholars who are productive, contributing citizens in the local and global context. Family and Community Engagement efforts provided by the Community School Model largely take shape in the form of family and community workshops on a variety of topics to support families and their students’ academic achievement and social emotional well-being. Workshops for families are generally integrated into monthly PTA meetings to inform parents and guardians and to further build the home- school link Family Engagement workshops include: 1. Creating community and destressing together: Learn to knit Circle 2. Free family fun for the Holidays 3. Food for Life: Learn about good nutrition habits and healthy food choices for the Family 4. Creative Spirit: Making a Community Quilt 5. Om in home- Basic yoga techniques and their beneficial effects for the family Professional Development Opportunities for staff on Mondays and Tuesdays during designated professional learning and family engagement times include: 1. Stress Less: Participants learn to define stress and learn stress prevention and management strategies to use in their lives 2. Positive Mindsets The Power of Mindful Thinking: strategies for taking small daily actions that can literally change your thinking. 3. Creating positive school culture: examine the essential ingredients to creating a culture of positivity and possibility, through the leadership mindset 4. Effective partnerships within schools: Opportunities for increased engagement and more effective communication among teachers and families 5. SMARTER Goal SETTING: strategies for effective goal setting to get better organized Part 4 – Community School Partnerships Oversight 2018-19 SCEP-FL 59  Part 4a. Key Staff and Partners 1. Name and describe the scope of involvement of all community partners working in the school (include partners supporting ELT, counseling, enrichment, etc.) 2. Name the members of your Community School Team and how meetings will be organized and structured to engage all stakeholders and be focused on results. 3. Explain data strategies including the use of the data sorter, and steps that the school will take to ensure that the appropriate interventions are provided to the right students A part- time Community School Director provides support and coordination of family workshops, professional development workshops, as well as 15 hours of Out of School time academic and enrichment clubs for students . The CSD is accountable for all data collection, recording and reporting. Our CBO partner, The Leadership Program, provides teaching artists for several hours most weekdays before, during and after school, helping to support several classroom teachers on each grade, 6-8th working per session 2 days/week to provide academic enrichment and support. The Dept of Health provides full school vision screening to all Madiba Prep students and free corrective glasses in designer frames to any students who require glasses Healthy Smiles: dental care screening and preventative services to all students Part 4b. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the Community School program. 21st CCLC funding Part 4c. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. Timeline 2018-19 school year Part 4d. Mental Health Work Plan Separate from this S/CEP, schools will complete a Mental Health Work Plan that will become an addendum to this document. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 60  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 16 School Name Madiba Prep Middle School Borough Brooklyn School Number 681 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Sharon Stephens Coach N/A ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Love Thornton-Jeudy- ENL Teach Teacher/Subject Area Jean Claude Dorelus-Humanities Teacher/Subject Area Derryale Barnes-Fielder- ELA Related-Service Provider Susan Steven-ELA/SETSS Superintendent Evelyn Santiago Assistant Principal Michele Goudy Coach N/A School Counselor Shaquana Montgomery Parent Delsia Rameriz Parent Coordinator Sharon Brantley-Patterson Field Support Center Staff Member Yazmin Torres Other (Name and Title) N/A C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification 0 0 Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 2018-19 SCEP-FL 61 Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class 0 0  who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 184 Total number of ELLs 11 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 5.98% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 0 1 3 2 4 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 0 6 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Paste response to questions here: Madiba Prep Middle School is currently using DRA, Periodic Assessment, MOSL and Benchmark Assessments throughout the year. The data allows us to know the level and skills that the ENLs are deficient in (i.e. phonemic awareness, grammar, reading comprehension, etc.). The data helps in modifying lessons for teachers to make more effective plans for the ELL population. Out of 11 ENL students, two of our students showed an increased in their NYS ELA and 2018-19 SCEP-FL 62  Math scores. One student advanced to a level 2 in ELA and another advanced to a level 2 in Math. We intend to continue pushing these students, and all students, by supporting them in ELA, where they continuously score below the grade level. The success of our program is measured by how our ENLs progress through each benchmark. Overall, each year we will revisit the instructional program's effects and determine what is working and what needs improvement. Through staff discussion, data analysis and peer review, we will evaluate the success of the program. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Paste response to question here: The success of our program is measured by how our ENLs progress through each benchmark. Overall, each year, we will revisit the instructional program's effects and determine what is working and what needs improvement. Through staff discussions, data analysis and peer review, we will evaluate the success of the program. Monthly goals are created for each sstudent to monitor their progress. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Paste response to question here: N/A 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Paste response to question here: Comparing to last year's data with the previous year, scores have declined for all students with the exception of one in ELA and one in Math. This could have be due to the change in the test format. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Paste response to questions here: Madiba Prep Middle School has completed 3 school years and is in it's fourth year running, since opening in the Fall of 2012. The school is comprised of general education, ICT classes and Self-Contained classes in grades 6, 7 and 8. ENL students are placed in classes according to their grade, I.E.P. and assessment status. All students are in hetergenous classes. A collaborative team-teaching nodel, where ICT, SETSS, Self-Contained and General Education courses are provided. Within almost every core area class, such as humanities, 2018-19 SCEP-FL 63  mathematics, and science are there are two teachers. Each core has a double-block class. All students also have access to one block of writing, art, and foreign language per week b. TBE program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: c. DL program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Paste response to questions here: Free-standing ENL is provided 8 periods a week for entering and emerging students and 4 periods a week for transitioning and expanding studnets in which the students are placed in groups based on their proficiency level achieved on the LAB-R and/or NYSESLAT Tests. Language objectives are then developed and taught throug content area material in small groups for the mandated segments of time (360/180). 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Paste response here: Instruction in all ENL classrooms is aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards. Students received modigy core content insstruction that is aligned with the Common Core Learning Standards. There are clear objectives for each content area lessons. Resources and materials for interactive activities are provided for ENL students. Students are given activities to build prior knowledge on the specific subject being taught. Content vocabulary is previewed in English and skills are pre-taught based on the instructional outcomes outlined in the content unit. Sentence structure, as well as graphic organizers, are used to help outline the information and teach organizational techniques that support comprehension. Teacher lessons include culturally responsive and meaningful topics and activities. Based on Danielson Rubiric of Highly Effective Teaching, lessons are differentiated, scaffold for ENLs, provide higher order questioning and discussion techniques, essential questions, student grouping and instructional shifts. An assessment for each content area is within each lesson. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? .Paste response to question here: By the use of Achieve 3000, students are given enough time to read in the home language throughout the year. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Paste response to questions here: SIFE students are emersed in the basics of the English Language during small group time in class, and during the Cerebral Diversity class. They also receive academic intervention services to support their learning and to facilitate a safe learning environment. Newcomers receieve language support from the ENL teacher, special education and classroom teacher as well. The classroom teachers are using differentiantion to scaffold lessons and address the needs of the students. Long-Term Ells are receiving their mandated sessions with the ENL teacher. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 64  6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Paste response to question here: ENL students use dictionaries, graphic organizers, textbooks, library books (chapter books), and other resourceful materials to enssure English language development. In addition, ENL-SWD students receive assistive technology (laptops and iPads). 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Paste response to question here: All ENL-SWD students receive a double-block period in each core subject area. Instruction is scaffold as needed to meet each student's individual needs according to their I.E.P. For academic support, ENL_SWD students meet with ENL and SETSS teachers for small group instruction. In addition, SETSS students have ICT core classes with two instructors. They receive push-in support and one-block of writing, foreign language and art classs each week. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Paste response to question here: In our Free-standing EN Program, sstudents receive all instruction in English. ENL-SWD students receive small group instruction and push-in during ICT classes to remain in the least restrictive enironment. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Paste response to question here: New course will be considered this year: Algebra and Geometry for 8 th grade students. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? Paste response to question here: Currently, there are no programs that will be discontinued this school year. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Paste response to question here: The disparity in levels of proficiency between listening -speaking and reading-writing are reduced as our instructional methods are effectively implemented. This effort provides students with additional instructional opportunities to meet academic standards. In order to develop the whole child, self-awareness, training, advisory, art, writing, lab and Spanish as a foreign language are offered during the school year to all students. After-school sports and robotics are included in these opportunities for all students. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Paste response to question here: The use of technology continues to strenthen the academic rigor already present in the classrooms. Audio enhancement is employed by teachers in classrooms. Professional periods allow teahcers to discuss and ensure the appropriate technological components needed in planning to promote highly effective lessons. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Paste response to question here: ENL students receive instruction in English for all programs offered. Information regarding the program is sent home in the student's home language for parents to fully understand the programs their child is enrolled in. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Paste response to question here: The school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs by tracking ELLs not making adequate progress and provide support as needed as per Part 154. By monitoring the ENL students' 2018-19 SCEP-FL 65  academic progress, teachers can determine where the needs are and provide the necessary services along with the required mandated services. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Paste response to question here: The use of technology continues to strenthen the academic rigor already present in the classrooms. Audio enhancement is employed by teachers in classrooms. Professional periods allow teahcers to discuss and ensure the appropriate technological components needed in planning to promote highly effective lessons. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Paste response to question here: All students take part in student government elections. All students are candidates for position of an office. Ms. Wint, ELA Teacher, is in charge of the Student Governmen and the activities. Art and Theater are provided by Ms. Santos and Ms. Middleton. This is a collabortive team. After-school (Good Shepherd - Director Andy) provides a wide range of activities for all students: Sports, robotics, digital music, dance, guitar, art, ELA and Math classes. Fencing is also offered for all students. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Paste response to question here: Foreign Language (Spanish) is offered. The instructor is Ms. Stevens. Ms. Stevens is also a SETSS teacher. The ENL-SWD students will see Ms. Stevens. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Paste response to question here: Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Paste response to question here: To enrich such knowledge, teachers take opportunities to attend professional development sessions, both at school and at NYCBOE and BETAC sites. Mainstream and Special Education teachers take the mandated ENL training hours in order to use ESL strategies with ELLs and to also be able to promptly identify students with disabilities. Paste response to question here: During grade-specific Professional Development periods, teachers are trained in best practices for the teaching of ELLs. The parent coordinator, ENL teacher receives training and continued assistance on ELLs policies. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 66  Paste response to question here: Teachers receive training regarding transition. Our 6 th grade teachers work closely with those ENL students coming from elementary school to middle school. Teachers explain middle school expectations, policy, procedure and routees to allow students to adjust. 8 th grade teachers prepare students for high school by offering high school classes that prepares them for regents. 8 th grade students are also given an application for high school to apply for a program. They have the choice of 12 programs to choice from. Applications are matched to one of their choices according to priority and availability. Paste response to question here: Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Paste response to question here: Our school has an open policy where we meet parents all day long. Individual meetings with parents to discuss their child's progress, programs offered and/or needs and serviecs for their child is available. Parents will be invited to our Caregiver Workshop which will be held in the evening, to support them in helping their children at home. For those parents who might need a translator, one could be provided. Our administration and teachers serve as liaisons to our students’ parents to elicit information regarding parent needs and provide the appropriate support. In addition, much correspondence directed towards parents/guardians generated citywide has available translations in written form from NYCDOE website. These services are timely because they are prepared simultaneously with the English correspondence. We are reaching out to the available services offered by the Translation and Interpretation Unit to provide necessary written communication to parents of our remaining home language groups. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Paste response to question here: ELL parents are informed of all activities parents are invited to and given the opportunity to attend and/or participate. Parents are encourage to take part in all activities including their monthly parent meeting. Parents are invited to activities during school as well as after-school. Special parent activities are offered throughout the year and made public for all parents. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 67 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Anne Marie Malcolm, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 68  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Madiba Prep Middle School School DBN: 16K681 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Sharon Stephens Title Principal Michele Goudy Assistant Principal Sharon Brantley-Patterson Parent Coordinator Love Thornton-Jeudy ENL/Bilingual Teacher Delsia Rameriz Parent Jean Claude Dorelus Teacher/Subject Area Derryale Barnes-Fielder Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Shaquana Montgomery School Counselor Evelyn Santiago Yazmin Torres Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 69  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 16K681 School Name: Madiba Prep Middle School Superintendent: The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this (*Primary) conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Langauge preferences are assessed in a number of ways. We conference with the parent and ask the prefered language. The Home Language Identification Survey is also administered for students entering a NYC DOE school for the first time. Where the student is either a transfer student or is articulating from a district elementary school we use ATS data to determine language preferences. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 70  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language preferences at our school include Spanish and Bengali. In the past prefeerences have also included Haitian Creole. 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Documents that are disseminated annually that require translation include parent handbooks, high school articulation information, policy information, health and medical information such as 504 notices and medical permissions for the nurses office, state testing information and dates, Common Core information, promotion in doubt information, marketing materials, and letters from the school leadership. Month/Frequency How do you Distributed to plan to Families translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 71  Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Our face to face meetings are consistent with the citywide calendar for open school evenings. The first meeting of the year held in September 2015, is a curriculum back to school night. The second meeting held in November is a Fall parent teacher conference night. The third meeting is a Spring parent teacher conference night. The final meeting of the school year held in the Spring is student led conferences where students showcase their learning. In addition to these meetings we have an annual Thanksgiving Harvest Feast in November for our scholars and an annual Boys to Men Night, and Sister to Sister Events in the Spring. There are also impromptu parent meetings and conferences with the parent coordinator, guidance counselor and/or dean during the course of the year. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 72  In accordance with the Chancellor's regulations welcome posters are posted at the entrance of our school and Campus. Parents received copies of their Bill of Rights and the Parent Compact. The guide to language access will also be distributed to our families. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? To gather feedback about both the quality and availability of services we will administer an annual parent survey. Each year we review and discuss the results of the survey as a team and reflect on the adjustments that are warranted based on the feedback we have received. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 73 
