 04M155 School Name: P.S. 155 WILLIAM PACA Principal: MARCIA SULIT 2018-19 SCEP-FL 1  School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Section 4: SCEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information William Paca Elementary 04M155 310400010155 3K through 5 School Number (DBN): 319 East 117 th Street New York, NY 10035 (212)860-5885 (212)860-5856 Phone Number: Marcia Sulit Fax: MSulit@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Marcia Sulit Ms. Ruth Santiago Selene Cortes Ms. Ruth Santiago Lakecia Davis n/a n/a n/a District Information Geographical District: 04 Superintendent’s Office Address: Ms. Alexandra Estrella Superintendent: 160 East 120 th Street New York, NY AEstrel@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: (212)348-2873 Phone Number: (212)348-4107 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 3  Manhattan FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Yuet Chu Executive Director: 333 Seventh Avenue, 8 th Floor New York, NY 10001 YChu@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 646-470-0721 Phone Number: 917-339-1765 Fax: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the SCEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Marcia Sulit Ruth Santiago Selene Cortes Veronica Mashack Lakecia Davis Ruth Santiago Edith Morales *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Teacher/Dual Language Parent Member 2018-19 SCEP-FL 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Victoria Lopez Silva Parent Member/ PTA Co-Secretary Ivy Collazo Janet Galindo Monolingual Teacher Parent Member Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 SCEP-FL 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) is a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. The process of developing and implementing the SCEP is aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding SCEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and SCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 7  In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement 2018-19 SCEP-FL 8  NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the SCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the SCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for SCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 9   Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 5: Build consensus around activities, strategies and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 6: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 7: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 10  1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: SCEP Overview Our mission is to create a school that cultivates global citizens who are critical thinkers, inquisitive and avid readers. Our mission is to deliver the highest quality of education through collaborative teacher teams, student centered curriculum, and community partnerships. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. P.S. 155 is located in East Harlem and serves 250 students. One hundred percent of our students receive free/reduced lunch. PS 155 has a large ELL (English Language Learner) population that we are extremely proud of and that are a cornerstone of our school population. We service these students using three different bilingual education models: 1) ENL only (Freestanding); 2) Dual Language (DL) classes, including a Dual Language ICT program; and 3) Transitional Bilingual Education classes (TBE), including ICT and self-contained (12:1 and 12:1:1) classes. We have five languages other than English that are spoken among the students of P.S. 155, regardless of ELL status: These are Spanish, Arabic, Filipino, Japanese and French. Our school partners with the Renaissance School of the Arts (RSA), which is a middle school member of our Campus Community. We work closely with the Principal and teachers to collaborate for performances (including “The Lion King” performance at the end of last year), which parents and the community are invited to. Teachers from both PS 155 and RSA meet and collaborate for academic workshops and planning campus-wide initiatives. In addition to RSA, PS 155 collaborates with Hillsong Church to provide school supplies (assess student needs for donations), social events for the community, facilitate classroom set-up in September, and aid in setting up bulletin boards. We also work with Union Settlement and Little Sisters’ social workers to help parents and teachers fill out important forms and assist families in accessing community resources. “Crea” is an organization affiliated with Little Sisters that also provides PS 155 with social workers to educate families on basic skills, including the following: GED, job placement, job readiness, and resumes. Department of Health supervises the programs named Buen Provecho and the Asthma Center, which provides healthy snack education and supervise our Wellness Council in the school, knowledge and exposure to available community grants, nutritional class for students in 3K, 4K, and Kindergarten in our school. The nutritional classes for parents are available for all grades (Pre-K – 5th grade). Boriken Health Program provides hearing, vision and dental exams and follow-up, including screenings. Verizon / One Sight provides glasses and eye exams for students in grades Kindergarten – 5th grade. Consortium Education provides English classes to our Muslim community. New York Historical Society provides citizenship classes called Citizenship Project. Asphalt Green provides lunch coaching to train school aids to provide structured play and structured activities so students are more engaged and receive more exercise during recess. PS 155 also works closely with the Leadership Program / Violence Prevention Program that provides support during the school hours as well as after-school clubs. A Boys’ Mentoring Program will also be provided by the Leadership 2018-19 SCEP-FL 11  Program. In addition, they provide clubs after-school for students in grades 1st – 5th (including Music and Movement and “HerStory/MyStory”). They also have a “Saturday Program” which provides academic clubs. Up Next is a fatherhood engagement and workforce readiness program that we are currently collaborating with and that will begin in January. We are working to reconnect and strengthen relationships with fathers and to help them navigate family court and child support so they can have stronger relationships with their students. We are hoping to bridge gaps between absentee fathers and our school. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. As noted in the data in previous fields, a large number of students at 155 have IEP's. To respond to these students' needs, administration has embraced integrated co-teaching and is encouraging innovative pedagogy to address student needs. An even larger percent of the school population, are English Language Learners (ELL). Among ELLs there are also ELLs with disabilities. Among the ELLs a large majority speak Spanish (see above), and there has also been small growth in student populations speaking three other languages other than Spanish or English at home (also above). To respond to the needs of these students one initiative is to implement a Dual Language program to offer ELLs a program that is shown to produce much better academic outcomes than Transitional Bilingual Education, a program traditionally implemented here. By September, 2020, the school will have phased out the Transitional Bilingual Education instruction, and will have implemented a full Dual Language program. An additional strength is that ELLs with disabilities who speak Spanish, representing the linguistic majority, are served in bilingual, rather than monolingual programs. Regardless of program, access to the home language and culture are known to benefit the students and the school is therefore addressing pedagogy across bilingual programs to improve the ways in which the home language and culture can be leveraged to help these students academically. Last, we have noticed some historical trends that are indicative of a need to emphasize improved pedagogy in academic language. Specifically, there is a frequent occurrence of students whose proficiency levels reach Transitioning, or Expanding, and remain there for repeated years. Often an explanation for this can be in part related to a need for academic language. For this reason, key staff and teachers will see this emphasis in professional learning. Finally, this school has a high percent of families who live in poverty. In addition, many of our parents are immigrants and depend on the school to provide a rich learning environment for both parent and child. As a Title I School, we provide many services at a social-emotional level for the entire family, and make them accessible across family language groups. We also design programs to promote family literacy, in recognition of the fact that impoverished families often lack books at home. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 12  This year, PS 155’ s goal is to improve student performance by strengthening teacher practice. To ensure this, we undertook four major initiatives. (1) We fully adopted the Teacher's College Writing curriculum and supported teacher practice through collaborative planning (2) Teachers of grades Kindergarten to 2nd will work with the Universal Literacy Coach that was provided to all DOE schools with a focus on guided reading and small group instruction ; (3) Grades 3 through 5 will work with a literacy consultant, Dr. Maria Akinyele that will work on guided reading, text annotation and thinking jobs. (4) A fourth initiative we will work on is developing students' ability to have rich discussion and discourse about texts, and or real world issues. Our focus at PS 155 improving balanced literacy skills, while training students to become fluent in utilizing their academic vocabulary in questioning and discussions in the classroom. This practice will in turn influence the students’ reading stamina and the quality of their pieces of writing. This also impacts our students in the area of math, as often times students struggle with word problems and process writing, where they would need to utilize academic vocabulary to explain the work they have done to solve a problem. We will work with our teachers to continue to provide differentiated professional development in cycles that will focus on areas of need, according to test results, surveys and ADVANCE performance. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 13  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 04M155 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 260 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual YES Dual Language YES Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 38 36 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 19 4 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 98.0% % Attendance Rate 97.3% % Reduced Lunch 41.2% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 2.3% 86.5% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 0.4% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 0.1 0% 3% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 20.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 59% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No No Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups - Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities N/A NO N/A NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A YSH NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A NO N/A N/A NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 59 61 92.6% 0.8% 30.0% 8.8% 1.9% 2.3% 0 0% 12.7 15.9% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No Yes N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 14  Economically Disadvantaged N/A ALL STUDENTS N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 15  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed x x x x Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. After completing a comprehensive review of ELA and Math results from the New York State testing in 2018 and 2019, results from running records, school wide interim assessments, Accelerated Reader and other formative assessments, it was determined that teachers must expose all student including ENL and SWDs students to rigorous on grade complex text in order to improve reading comprehension and increase student achievement as measured by Teacher College Running Records and the State Exam. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 16  By June 2019, 50% of students will improve reading comprehension and literacy proficiency, as evident by an increase of at least four Teacher College reading levels monitored through running records and Teachers College reading assessments, resulting in 20% increase in students performing at grade level as measured by the NYS ELA exam. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 17  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Teachers will dissect Next Generation Standards to align with T.C. Reading and Writing in order to highlight the big ideas / essential questions. Teachers will implement Teachers College Reader's and Writer's Workshop model across grades and classes. All students 3K-5 September, 2018- June, 2019 Teachers, paraprofessionals, and READ East Harlem liaison Teachers will then plan lessons while incorporating the five pillars of reading within a balanced literacy block. This will allow students to participate in literacy stations that will address students’ areas of growth and give teachers the opportunity to provide small-group instruction in order to move students’ thinking and performance to higher levels, which will be evident in student discussion, activities, and writing performance . Additionally, build into curricula and approach in all programs and languages instruction the four key competencies for advance literacy. 1) Academic language skills 2) Content and Conceptual Knowledge 3) Critical interpretation skills 4) Argumentation skills Infusing a Bi-literacy Framework into all Dual Language Ed. and Traditional Bilingual Ed. Classes as a lens and structure to implement the adopted literacy and content curricula. Also, obtain and implement aligned Spanish and English curricula and resources across grades, classes, and programs to promote equity in attributes across languages of instruction. School-wide Initiatives 1. Teacher's College Reading and Writing Workshop Model Grades 3K-5, September, 2018- June, 2019 Teachers, paraprofessionals, and READ East Harlem liaison 2018-19 SCEP-FL 18 2. Daily-guided reading instruction will be provided to all students in grades 3K-5 via a school-wide guided reading period. Infuse into all programs and language of instruction the four key competencies for advance literacy. Implement Learning stations 3. 4. Professional Learning Communities Instructional staff (including paraprofessionals and related services) will meet during Monday CTLE/ PD time for 80 minutes to gain a clear vision of instructional expectations and develop instructional strategies regarding literacy and reading comprehension to improve student achievement. Relevant topics will include, but are not limited to:  CCLS alignment  Depth of knowledge and questioning  Formative assessment and student led - teacher facilitated discussion  Data driven instruction, including child friendly actionable feedback Instructional Staff September, 2018- June, 2019 Teachers, paraprofessionals, and READ East Harlem liaison Four Key Competencies for Advance Literacy  Guided reading strategies   Reading and Writing Workshop Model   Station Learning Series of PD's on how to support ENL students Culturally and Linguistically to improve academic achievement. (Rigorous Instruction, Collaborative Teachers, Effective School Leadership) Paraprofessional Professional Development Paras Paraprofessionals will be trained in “Great Leaps,” and Guided Reading. (Rigorous Instruction, Collaborative Teachers, Effective School Leadership) Sept. '18- June '19 Principal, Assistant Principals, Paraprofessionals Extended Day Tutoring  Partner with Coalition School for Social change (Students Interns). 2018-19 SCEP-FL 19   Union settlement (Tutoring) After-school programs will provide students in grades k-5 with enrichment in reading, writing, and the four components of the NYSESLAT exam—listening, speaking, reading, and writing. Students, Teachers October '18- May' 19 Principal, Assistant Principals, Teachers Students, Teachers Sept '18-May '19 Principals, Assistant Principals, Teachers Special Ed. Liaison SETTS Teacher Paraprofessionals Parents, Students, Teachers Sept. '18 - June '19 Principals, Assistant Principals, Teachers (Rigorous Instruction, Supportive Environment, Collaborative Teachers, Effective School Leadership) Academic Intervention Services AIS teachers will communicate with classroom teachers students progress and next steps via google doc (AIS Learning Community). Providers will service students who are in the lowest third in ELA/Math using F/P intervention Program for ELA and Engage NY for Math. (Rigorous Instruction, Supportive Environment, Collaborative Teachers, Effective School Leadership) Parent Workshops Monthly curriculum nights will be provided in order to introduce parents with instructional content, strategies, and resources to help their children with schoolwork. Additionally Bi-weekly teachers will provide parents with PDs on how to support their children with upcoming unit of study by building parents content knowledge and providing them with specific strategies to assist their child in the home as a home connection to unit of study. (Rigorous Instruction, Supportive Environment, Collaborative Teachers, Strong Family Community Ties, Effective School Leadership) 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 20  Family engagement will include family workshops, family fun nights, and publishing parties in writing. Teachers create monthly grade specific newsletters to parents that detail priority and focus standards with resources, websites and strategies to support learning at home. The PS 155 website, ps 155.org also has links to online resources. Each unit runs approximately 6-8 weeks depending on the grade and particular unit of study. Grade teams, parent coordinator are mainly responsible for implementation. Oversight is supported through administration and the budget manager who will ensure proper materials and supplies are available. Person responsible for implementation, Nora Montero. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. School-wide Academic Intervention services will take place daily, in small groups and at a regularly-scheduled time. Groups will begin immediately after September’s Teacher’s College Reading Assessment (given to acquire the students’ current instructional reading levels, as often students’ levels decrease over the summer due to lack of guidance and practice). Related service providers and paraprofessionals will meet their groups and provide guided reading lessons that will be planned by the licensed pedagogue. PS 155 will be researching any additional grant opportunities that may enhance programs. Professional Learning Communities: Instructional materials   Professional consultant (about $1,200 per day) Paraprofessional Professional Developments:  Substitute-paraprofessional compensation Extended Day Tutoring:  Teacher per-session  Instructional materials Parent Workshops: Instructional materials  Refreshments   Give-aways (books, etc.)  Teacher per-session Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring 2018-19 SCEP-FL 21  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By the end of October 2018, graded benchmark assessments will be completed for 100% of the students. By the end of November 2018, William Paca Elementary will have had a parent workshop/ curriculum night focused on literacy By the end of November 2018, 100% of instructional staff will have participated in Monday CTLE/ PD around Depth of Knowledge, quality questioning, and student led- teacher facilitated learning conversations By the end of December 2018, graded benchmark assessments will be completed for 100% of students By the end of February 2019, graded benchmark assessments will be completed for 100% of students Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Assessment Pro and school wide interim assessments will be used to progress monitor this goal. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 22  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. x x x x SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Teachers expressed a need and a concern that their students lack motivation during writing due, in part, to our school’s past movement away from creative writing and more toward process writing and responding to literature. Our intention is to create a structured writing block that generates a balance between the type of writing that occurs during the writing block, such as responding to literature, and creative writing that has students viewing themselves as authors. In an effort to be in alignment with the district's goal to enhance writing skills, we have incorporated Self Regulated Strategy Development (SRSD), On-demand writing, as well as being apart of Teacher's College Writing Initiative to ensure that students are writing on grade level. These efforts are due to student needs which demonstrate that quality of our students’ writing did not match their grade level. For example, our students are producing writing that represents (on average) a grade level or two grade levels below where they should be in their writing, according to the Common Core Learning Standards. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 23  . The administration will support teachers with real time coaching session that are non-evaluative and attend professional development. Students will conference with teachers about the progress, teacher will provide quality feedback to students. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools –Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 70% of teachers will utilize a structured writing block and formative assessment strategies and deliver actionable timely feedback to students, as evident by classroom observations, advance ratings and a 10% increase in student performance in writing. Teachers will demonstrate an increase in performance in Advance specifically, domain 1f: designing student assessments and 3d: using assessment in instruction by 10%. By June 2019, 70% of teachers will improve their pedagogical practices related to the instructional approaches and programs adopted, the Readers and Writers Workshop Model. Teachers will demonstrate an increase in performance in Advance specifically, domain 1 Planning and Preparation: 1e designing a coherent instruction and 1c setting instructional outcomes by 10%. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 24  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? All students, All grades Ongoing -Sept. 2018 to June 2019  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). ● In an effort to build students’ stamina in writing independently and uninterrupted, PS 155 teachers in all grades will use the “Teacher’s College Writing Program” to create on-demand writing assessments that will be given at the beginning of each new writing unit in order to guide teachers’ instruction throughout the unit. Teacher teams will then meet to discuss next steps. In addition to students’ published piece(s), end-unit on-demand writing assessments will also be given to assess level of mastery of the unit. On demand writing once a week checked and displayed, writing topics will relate to current events.  Through the use of Mini Lessons in Reading/Writing students creative writing are promoted as well as making their thinking visual to readers. Additionally to, students will gain strategies or tips in reading that they will often use as readers. TC benchmark mark will be administer as a formative assessment. Four benchmark will be schedule for the year to assess students progress. Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Administration will oversee implementation, with Grade Leaders reporting on progress and updating Administration on changes and/or additions to writing and reading units. ● Students with Disabilities (SWD) and English Language Learners (ELLs) in particular will be taught using differentiated instruction and best practices that appeal to all types of learners. We have noticed a school-wide trend in these groups of students having particular difficulty writing independently (without needing continuous assistance from a teacher or paraprofessional). Techniques to improve motivation and stamina will include the following: visuals, individual timers with graphing of progress, class timers with graphing of progress, differentiated graphic organizers, kinesthetic approaches to writing, word lists and individual word “walls,” student surveys indicating what they are truly interested in as writers, and surveys or charts noting what students know a lot about as writers. SRSD writing routine will be embedded within instruction. SWDs and ELLs in all grades Ongoing -Sept. 2018 to June 2019 Administration will oversee implementation via ADVANCE observations and feedback. Grade leaders will encourage all teachers to share best practices. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 25  Additionally, in reading thinking maps will be used during response to literature to monitor students understanding and be able to intervene when students is not clear. Also, using some of the approaches mention above that are suitable for understanding language and content of the text. Student choice in writing topics will lead to increased motivation and writing stamina in all grades. Teacher planning sessions (with individual lesson plans as well as unit plans) will include opportunities for student choice and an accompanying rubric for each unit. Including Intense phonics structures within writing and helping with grammar. Student choice of authentic text will increase their understanding of the author craft and purpose. Additionally, through the use of strategies or tips taught prior students gain understanding of what the author is conveying in the text. ● Administration and the PS 155 Professional Development Committee will organize a series of Professional Development Cycles (including sharing of best practices, lesson/unit planning, and examining student work) during the 80-minutes provided on Mondays (see 5C below Framework for Great Schools). One of these cycles will focus on delving into the Teacher’s College Writing Program in order to create a school-wide writing block focused on improving both writing stamina and complexity. The writing block will be consistent across grades and highly structured, with a scope and sequence that effectively builds upon the previous grade-level’s Common Core Learning Standards and skills while wholly preparing students for those writing standards and expectations in the next grade. Administration and the 155 Professional Development Committee will organize a series of Professional Development Cycles that are related to best teaching strategies for reading. During the reading block teacher will model best reading strategy to better understand text and how to make connections to text. Through the mini lesson teachers will be able to demonstrate to students and practice strategies that assist the reader during reading how to navigate through rich complex text without losing the meaning of text. Teachers will use the TC Readers Workshop unit of study teacher resource book to guide themselves and prepare their unit of study as well as ensuring the strategies selected to be taught in reading are align with CCLS expectations. For example, teaching students the reading All students, All grades Ongoing -Sept. 2018 to June 2019 Administration will oversee implementation, with Grade Leaders reporting on progress and updating Administration on changes and/or additions to writing units. All teachers and paraprofessionals Writing PD Cycle to take place in Fall 2018 Administration, in conjunction with the PS 155 Professional Development Committee Reading strategies for reading takes place in the Fall 2018 2018-19 SCEP-FL 26  strategy: how to infer within the text. Through the use of inferences students can identify author's point of view or use informational text to draw conclusion base on facts. Professional Learning Communities Teachers, Paras Sept. '18 - June '19 Principal, Assistant Principal, Teachers, Paras Instructional staff (including paraprofessionals and related services) will meet during Monday CTLE/ PD time for 80 minutes to gain a clear vision of instructional expectations and develop instructional strategies, which include differentiation, teacher to accommodate multiple intelligences, and allowing for multiple entry points to achieve the same objective. (Rigorous Instruction, Collaborative Teachers, Effective School Leadership) Teacher Teams: Teachers will collaborate on grade level and content area through common planning to create common assessments and engage in data driven instruction planning and implementation. Common assessments will be utilized to determine the next steps in teaching. Teacher teams will also conduct in inter-visitation in order to share actionable feedback strategies, which include student peer and self formative assessment. All teachers and paraprofessionals Sept. '18 - June '19 Principal, Assistant Principal, Teachers, Paras (Rigorous Instruction, Collaborative Teachers, Effective School Leadership) Data Inquiry Teams All teachers Teachers will reflect on current and previous instructional data, analyze student work, and create new goals based on feedback from lessons/units and student progress. Teachers will incorporate UDL for all students, including students with disabilities and ELL students. (Rigorous Instruction, Collaborative Teachers, Effective School Leadership) Sept 18- June 19 Principal, Assistant Principal, Teachers, Paras 2018-19 SCEP-FL 27  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Family engagement will include family workshops, family fun nights, publishing parties in writing, our Parent Exploratorium, which allows parents to visit classrooms of their choosing and see students in action. Teachers create monthly grade specific newsletters to parents that detail priority and focus standards with resources, websites and strategies to support learning at home. The PS 155 website, ps155.org also has links to online resources. Project Based Learning (PBL) units culminate in a presentation for students in all grades PK - 5 in which parents are invited to see how all subjects contribute to the completion of a task and application of standards and skills across the grade. Each unit runs approximately 6-8 weeks depending on the grade and particular unit of study. Grade teams, parent coordinator are mainly responsible for implementation. Oversight is supported through administration and the budget manager who will ensure proper materials and supplies are available. When applicable, PS 155 will partner with Sheltering Arms, our after school CBO to present information through workshops, and presentations for families. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Our new curriculum plan was driven and created solely with the Common Core Learning Standards and content standards and thoughtfully integrate the instructional shifts to support coherence across grades and subject areas to promote college and career readiness for all students. To support this endeavor, the following resources, materials, and scheduling adjustments have been used: ● Eureka Math program for all K-5 classrooms ● Instructional coach ● Amflying Science ● Accelerated Reading ● Passport to Social Studies ● Magnet curriculum specialist, staff developer, IEP teacher, ESL teacher and data specialist to facilitate professional development and curriculum development and Project Based Learning (PBL) units and assessments. ● Professional learning books such as “Advance Literacy skills”, “Making Thinking Visibile”, “Lesson-Plan Study” and to support teacher teams in professional learning communities. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 28  ● Common planning time for all grades has been incorporated into the teacher’s weekly schedules. ● Teachers College Reading and Writing Project Units of study for grades K-5 all classes Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By the end of October 2018, graded benchmark assessments will be completed for 100% of the students. By the end of November 2018, William Paca Elementary will have had a parent workshop/ curriculum night focused on literacy By the end of December 2018, graded benchmark assessments will be completed for 100% of students By the end of February 2019, graded benchmark assessments will be completed for 100% of students By the end of April 2019, graded benchmark assessments will be completed for 100% of students 2018-19 SCEP-FL 29  By the end of June 2019, graded benchmark assessments will be completed for 100% of students The progress monitoring of our curriculum will begin early in the school year and be a major aspect of our normal routines. However, we will conduct school wide data days to evaluate our progress and the overall impact of our curriculum on student achievement and make effective adjustments to meet all students’ learning needs and students are aware of their next learning steps. These data days will be conducted in October, November, December, February, April and June. In February we will have a mid-year school wide performance task assessment to measure our progress toward meeting this goal. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. We will use student portfolio to assess student growth and three school based writing assessments Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 30  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. SOP(s) Addressed x x x 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. x 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. After completing a comprehensive review of subgroups such as ENL and SWDs students in the ELA and Math State exam, observation reports in Advance, and school wide data there is a need for teacher to enhance their practice around providing scaffolds to support student learning. PS 155 is in a transitional phase in its attempt to systematize its practices and strategies around planning that addresses the needs of all students. We are aiming to norm our conversations around lesson planning, looking at student work, assessing student learning and other teacher practices. To that end, we continue to develop PD plans that address the specific pedagogical needs of the teachers based on best practices as modeled and coached by our consultants and admin team. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified 2018-19 SCEP-FL 31  priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of instructional staff will take part in professional development focused on differentiated instruction, multiple intelligences and entry points and utilize learned practices within their daily lessons, as evident by an increase in performance in Advance specifically domain 1e: designing coherent instruction and 3c: engaging students in learning by 10%., resulting in an 15% increase of student performance in the ELA and Math State Exam. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 32  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). ● Our Professional Learning Calendar for the 2018-2019 school year relies on information provided by surveys and teacher interests and needs, as noted in their ADVANCE observations and feedback sessions—but with the one significant change from last year’s calendar. Specific research-based instructional programs and lessons for small-group instruction planned for in this year’s Professional Development Plan are (in part): “Teacher’s College Writing Program,” the restructured writing block focused on balancing creative writing with writing that is done during the reading block (such as response to literature), “Focused Guided Reading Lessons and Accurate Data Collection,” “Great Leaps,” “Reciprocal Reading,” “Visual Thinking Strategies (VTS),” “Estrellita (a Spanish phonics program), “SRSD writing routines,” and the “Wilson Reading Program / Fundations”. ● In order to develop the differentiated professional development, surveys are given to all staff members at the beginning of the year. Progress-monitoring includes: ---a mid-year checkpoint survey given in January 2019 ---two additional surveys (regarding maintaining a Professional Learning Community) given in December 2018 and March 2019 The Professional Learning Calendar will be updated or changed accordingly. Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) All members of the Professional Learning Community Ongoing from Sept. 17, 2018 to June 22, 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, teachers All members of the Professional Learning Community Ongoing from Sept. 2018 to June 2019 Professional Development Committee, ● Administrators have created Team Teacher Meeting Protocol consisting of agendas, roles, responsibilities, and weekly focus for all grade-level teams. Teams will also be responsible for analyzing data, identifying the learner-centered problem and the problem of practice. Grade-Level Teams Ongoing from Sept. 2018 to June 2019 Administrators ensure that Teams are following the Protocol. Grade Leaders schedule weekly grade meetings and provide the weekly focus, as per 2018-19 SCEP-FL 33 All members of the Professional Learning Community Ongoing from Sept. 2018 to June 2019 discussions with Administration. Administrators schedule monthly Curriculum Committee meetings. Teachers, Paras Sept. '18 - June '19 Principal, Assistant Principal, Teachers, Paraprofessionals Teachers, Paras Sept. '18 - June '19 Principal, Assistant Principal, Teachers, Paraprofessionals ● A Curriculum Committee, composed of vertical teacher teams (mixed grades), will meet monthly in order to discuss specific Common Core standards, how these standards flow throughout each grade, and to share best practices on how to reach all students in terms of the standard(s) in focus for that meeting. This will promote shared responsibility and collaboration throughout the grades, in turn leading to a higher degree of trust among staff members. Professional Learning Communities Instructional staff (including paraprofessionals and related services) will meet during Monday CTLE/ PD time for 80 minutes to gain a clear vision of instructional expectations and develop instructional strategies, which include differentiation, teacher to accommodate multiple intelligences, and allowing for multiple entry points to achieve the same objective. (Rigorous Instruction, Collaborative Teachers, Effective School Leadership) Teacher Teams: Teachers will collaborate on grade level and content area through common planning to create learning experiences for students that address multiple intelligences and differentiate the lesson to accommodate students' needs so that everyone has an entry point to learning. Teacher teams will also conduct in inter-visitation in order to share strategies. (Rigorous Instruction, Collaborative Teachers, Effective School Leadership) and use a protocol for looking at student work. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Monthly family activities and workshops that include but are not limited to Learning Leaders training and workshops, Parent Exploratorium, Tuesday Parent engagement meetings, Teachers are also able to communicate student successes and continued areas of growth through Teacher Ease. Parent Engagement time is every Tuesday for 30 minutes when parents can make appointments to meet with teachers and for the first time this year, all parent teacher conferences will be done by an online appointment scheduling system to ensure that all parents have adequate time to meet with their child's teachers. Grade level newsletters are published every month that also specifically details the upcoming units of study and prioritized standards. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 2018-19 SCEP-FL 34  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Schedule adjustments are needed so that all grades have at least 4 common preps a week to hold grade meetings using the Protocol created by Administrators. The Data Team will be scheduled to present their findings and Professional Development Cycles to staff during Monday’s 80-minute professional development time. This will be incorporated into the Professional Learning Calendar. Per-session for data team members to analyze student work school wide Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By October 2018, cycle one and two for professional learning will be complete and available to 100% of the staff memeber, teachers will be able to choose as well as be assigned the learning session. Professional learning will improve student achievement by 20% in ELA results with the 2018-19 school year.. By December 2018, Administration will observe implementation within each classroom of specific strategies and/or following protocols or procedures presented during each PD during weekly walk-through, informal and formal observations and monthly conferences. By February 2019, 100% of teachers will receive a survey to adjust and modify the professional learning plan. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Maintaining a Professional Learning Community survey, and observations of teacher teams Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 35  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). x x x x SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. At PS 155 school leaders and all faculty members are working together to ensure that curricula is aligned to the CCLS and/or content standards. School leaders gather information via observations, school wide interim assessment, on-demand writing task, student notebooks, student portfolios, and teacher conference notes, one on one discussion with faculty and teacher surveys to identify, plan and provide the professional learning community at PS155 with targeted, specific, and individualized Professional Development sessions. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART– Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 36  By June 2019, , school leadership will effectively communicate high expectations to staff and provide all necessary supports including professional learning opportunities and effective feedback from all informal and formal observations that will result in 80% of teachers receiving effective ratings in Advance . 2018-19 SCEP-FL 37  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Implement schedules for meeting for data, new teachers, data analysis, etc.. All eligible teachers and paraprofessionals Ongoing, from Sept.2018 Administrators Develop "Look Fors" for Classroom Observations Implement school-wide protocols for student work analysis Teachers will incorporate Danielson best practices within common core aligned revised curriculum with specific strategies to meet the needs of subgroups including English language learners, special education and academic intervention services. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement All members of the Professional Learning Community All members of the Professional Learning Community All Teachers to June 2019 Ongoing, from Sept. 2018 to June 2019 Ongoing, from Sept. 2018 to June 2019 Ongoing, from Sept. 2018 through June 2019 Administration and Teacher Teams Teacher Teams, Administration Administration, Grade Leaders . How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. A Principal's Snapshot is a monthly overview that is distributed to families at every PTA meeting. This is an overview of the state of the school with highlights of trends in the building, updates on initiatives and notes of best practices in the school. Contributions to this snapshot will be made by both assistant principals with respective information that showcases an overview of grades and content area news. This snapshot will be generated monthly. It will be distributed to each student as a hard copy and archived on the school website. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 38  Bi-Monthly parent forums and monthly Parent Exploratoriums provide an opportunity for parents to visit the school and debrief with school leaders for clarity and to provide feedback and ask questions. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human resources include Administrators scheduling inter-visitations, substitute teachers (as needed to provide teachers the opportunity to attend PDs, visit other schools, etc.), copy /printing of materials (ink, paper, etc.) follow-up sessions, and training in instructional programs— “Teacher’s College Reading/Writing Program” Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. ●By February 2019, 100% of teacher would have had two scheduled data meetings. ● By February 2019, 100% of teachers will receive a variety of protocols in order to ensure that the meetings have a set structure and lead to next steps that will improve student outcomes. The protocols will be set around planning sessions, looking at student work, and the analysis of data that has been collected in order to drive instruction. By March 2019, 100% of teacher will give feedback to student around literacy as measured by conference notes Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Teacher team agendas, minutes, lesson plans and advance rating in Domain 1 and 3 Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 39  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. x x x x SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to results from the 2018-2019 Learning Environment Survey, parents believe that our school has high expectations and encourages students to have stamina and persistence with challenging work. Parents were in agreement that they are kept informed about their child’s progress. Parents felt that the school creates a physically and emotionally secure environment in which each child can focus on learning. We strongly believe that through celebrations and tradition, professional development and partnerships, we strengthen and support our school culture and sense of pride in our school community. Our focus for 2018-2019 is to provide enhanced opportunities for our parents and students to participate in a wide variety of programs and partnerships across the grade levels. Currently 25-30% of our parents attend school wide events as demonstrated by parent coordinator attendance record. Part 2 – Annual Goal 2018-19 SCEP-FL 40  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 50% of students will be able to read and write on or above grade level (decode & comprehend), growth will be measured by TC rubrics and TC bi-monthly benchmarks. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 41  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Administration will provide Administration, classroom teachers and specialists will review and refine the current school-wide protocol for Tuesday Professional Work Time to increase parent outreach and communication Parent and Legal Guardians of students in grade K-5 Grade level teachers and support specialists September 2018- June 2019 September 2018- June 2019 Promote attendance at parent conferences, awards assemblies, curriculum evenings and parent workshops through continuous communication with parents including newsletters, auto messenger, school website, emails, flyers and announcements. Grade level teachers and support specialists September 2018- June 2019 Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Principal, Assistant Principals, Grade Level Classroom Teachers and Support Specialists Principal, Assistant Principals, Grade Level Team Leaders, Professional Development Committee Principal, Assistant Principals, Grade Level Classroom Teachers and Support Specialists Teacher lead parent workshops to reinforce reading and math strategies at home. Parents November 2018- June 2019 Parent Coordinator, Assistant Principal , teacher volunteers. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Monthly family activities and workshops that include but are not limited to Learning Leaders training and workshops, Parent Exploratorium, Tuesday Parent engagement meetings, Teachers are also able to communicate student successes and continued areas of growth through Teacher Ease. Parent Engagement time is every Tuesday for 30 minutes when parents can make appointments to meet with teachers and for the first time this year, all parent teacher conferences will be done by an online appointment scheduling system to ensure that all parents have adequate time to meet with their child's teachers. Grade level newsletters are published every month that also specifically details the upcoming units of study and prioritized standards. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 2018-19 SCEP-FL 42  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. As a Title I School-wide program school, Conceptual Consolidation will allow us to combine Federal and local funds such as Fair Student Funding (Tax Levy), Title I Funds, Title II Supplemental Funds and human resources to support system-wide implementation of enhanced family and community activities. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By the end of each month, PTA meeting attendance will be monitored. By the end of October 2018, attendance of the Fall Curriculum night will be analyzed By the end of November 2018, attendance of the Parent Conference Day and Evening will be analyzed By Spring 2018, Results of Learning Environment Survey will be reviewed and shared with parents at PTA Meetings, faculty meetings and school newsletters. The SLT will review and discuss the results of the Learning Environment Survey. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Attendance will be monitored during Fall Curriculum Night and November Parent Conference Day. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 43  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) (a) guided reading (b) balanced literacy with small-group skills lessons Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) (a)Homogenous small group instruction a)During the school day (b)Small group instruction (b)Twice a week after school (c) repeated readings and tutoring (c) 1:1 tutoring (d) computer-guided and generated reading quizzes (d) 1:1 computerized tutorial (e) Saturday Academy (e) small-group test preparation lessons (c) 1x/week during the school day for a period of 45 minutes (d) 3 times a week (e) 10 – 90 minute Saturday sessions Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) (a) An additional 50 minutes for school-wide guided reading determined by Teacher’s College Reading Assessment results (b) Afterschool reading program—eligibility determined by Teacher’s College Reading Assessment results (c) Intergenerational Tutors—eligibility determined by Teacher’s College Reading Assessment results (d) Accelerated Reader program in the classroom—all students participate on their instructional level (e) Saturday Academy—lowest 1/3 of class eligible a) Afterschool mathematics program --eligibility by lowest 1/3 on unit Mathematics (a) Word problems and procedural writing a)Homogenous small group instruction (a) Two times a week after school 2018-19 SCEP-FL 44  Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) exams and benchmark quizzes (b) small-group test preparation lessons (b) Saturday Academy (b) 10 – 90 minute Saturday sessions (b) Saturday Academy-- eligibility by lowest 1/3 on unit exams and benchmark quizzes (c) lessons to re-teach, intervene, and enrich (c) Small group instruction (c) Daily (30 minute sessions) (c) Go Math Program- RTI resources—eligibility determined by which students need extra help after each lesson a) Pre Unit Assessment, benchmark assessment and post unit assessment as a form of data-driven instruction – all students eligible (b) Saturday Academy for Science—all students eligible a) Pre Unit Assessment, benchmark assessment and post unit assessment as a form of data-driven instruction – all students eligible a)”At-risk” services provided by Guidance Counselor and Social Worker -- all students eligible and determined by needs at the time . (b) “At-risk” push- in/ pull-out SETSS services to address targeted academic (a) differentiated small groups (b) hands-on science experiments and procedural writing a)Whole class and small group instruction (a)Biweekly 60-minute sessions (b) Saturday Academy (a) differentiated small groups a)Whole class and small group instruction a)Biweekly 60-minute sessions a) 30 minute sessions in a 1:1 or group setting (max: 3) a) During the school day (max. Twice a week) (b) Daily (b) 50 minute sessions in a group no larger than 8 students (a) push-in social skills training, behavioral modification (b) intervention programs including “Wilson Reading Program” and conferences in ELA and Math 2018-19 SCEP-FL 45  areas in need of improvement -- all students eligible and determined by needs at the time 2018-19 SCEP-FL 46  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Seven Families The students in temporary housing will be enrolled in after school programs and will also receive counseling. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). n/a 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 47  n/a 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 48  Section 8: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. All teachers at P.S. 155 are highly qualified and have the appropriate credentials. A two-day (optional) teacher induction program is available. Newly hired teachers are provided with professional development that welcomes them to the PS 155 school community. Specifically, the teacher induction program provides an overview of the Quality Review rubric, results of the Quality Review, school progress report, school learning survey and snapshot, the 8 components of the Danielson Framework on which teachers are rated, teacher handbook, parent handbook, NYSESLAT scores and a review of the student articulation cards. The student articulation cards are tailored to allow the new teacher a history of the student performance, a review of strengths and weaknesses of the student as well as parental involvement. In addition to this, special education teachers are introduced to SESIS and bilingual teachers are familiarized with the schools NYSELSAT scores and a comprehensive analysis of the scores and areas that are in need of targeted intervention. Newly hired teachers are provided a one year mentoring program that consists of a minimum of two 50 minute sessions per week. The mentor may push in for constructive observations followed by a debriefing session and co-planning for “next steps”. The mentor may also model specific instruction in content areas. In addition, the mentor-mentee collaboration allows for increased opportunity for inter-visitations between the mentee and co- grade teacher, building a strong foundation for a professional learning community. New teacher will also have monthly new teacher meetings with Administration. New Teachers are recruited through partnerships with various colleagues, teacher fairs, and the new teacher finder, teachers assignments are determined based on need and qualification PS 155 is very proud to have a very low turn- over rate. With that said, the professional learning community is composed of long-standing highly qualified teachers. Teachers are provided with differentiated professional development based on their professional needs which are assessed through the frequent, informal observations followed by timely feedback which allows for collaborative goal setting and professional development. Professional development may consist of targeted skill/strategy sessions in a collegial setting, inter-visitations as well as planning/modeling of lessons. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). 2018-19 SCEP-FL 49  PS 155 offers staff members a plethora of PD opportunities that is differentiated and tailored to specific needs based on Advance data. Newly hired staff is invited to participate in professional development as part of the teacher induction program and are provided per session pay (when available). All newly hired teachers are identified and matched with a mentor. A tailored mentor-mentee plan of action is developed and approved by all parties. The plan of action consists of specific short and long term goals that are set as a framework for ongoing support. The mentor-mentee collaboration and any information that results from this is confidential in order to provide support in a safe and non-threatening environment. The Professional Development Committee gives out several surveys to assess teachers’ needs in terms of their professional learning. A differentiated professional development calendar is created every year to address those needs. For the 2018-2019 school year, professional development will occur in cycles, leading to improved teacher performance and student outcomes. See Goal 5D for more information on workshop offerings. After each workshop or professional learning activity, participants fill out an “Exit Slip” and these slips, in conjunction with the surveys, inform future professional learning. Informal and formal observations take place regularly, based on each individual teacher selection on the ADVANCE program. Constructive feedback is provided in a timely manner in order to address competencies in the four domains in order to improve instruction and student outcomes. As a school we utilize various resources to enhance professional development sessions such as "We Teach NY" All resources are available to all staff members. Also, teacher leaders are coached and provided the tools to turn-key during grade-level meetings and during portions of the 80-minutes of professional development on Mondays. Paraprofessionals will partake in a book study and district wide paraprofessional meetings which will impact the individual and group support given by the paraprofessional Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 1. 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 50  Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). 1. Students and Parents attend workshop sessions provided by the Early Childhood Social Worker, Parent Coordinator and teachers/paraprofessionals. Topics presented support the child with developmentally age-appropriate specific strategies in Reading, Social and Behavioral skills. 2. Teachers complete ESR-I assessments within the assigned window period and develop small group needs-based instruction. 3. Teachers and paraprofessionals attend Early Childhood Department assigned Professional Development (as per school district). 4. Teachers collaborate and modify Core Knowledge units of study to ensure that students meet the CCSS goals. 5. External support, such as Bilingual SEIT specialists, work closely with students, parents and teachers. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. The Measure of Student Learning (MOSL) Committee met in July to familiarize themselves with the updated selection process. The Committee then turn-keyed to the staff as a whole, so that staff members could make informed decisions regarding their MOSL selections. In addition, during grade meetings, teachers discussed whether or not they wanted to participate in certain assessments this year (for example, the New York City Periodic Assessments). This year, we had options as to which assessments our school used (chosen off of the SchoolNet web site), and our teachers decided to opt-out of the Periodic Assessments. Although we are not giving these assessments to the students, we are giving students in grades 3,4, and 5 Fall , Mid-year, and End-of-year assessments in ELA in Math. We are using last year’s NYC Performance Assessments in order to provide a baseline score (for students in K-3). As a result of the data collected from these assessments, teachers collaborate and analyze students’ outcomes to improve and ensure effective instruction. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (SCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section 2018-19 SCEP-FL 51 Title I Part A (Basic) Federal Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) 238,633.00 16979.00 Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Federal Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Federal 75825.00 Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Federal Federal Title III, Immigrant Federal 74,344.00 15,956.00 12,000 Tax Levy (FSF) Local 2,268,817.00 references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) x x x x x x x Column B Section Reference(s) Section 5a Part 3, Section 5B Part 3,Section 5c Part 3 Enrichment programs; Section 5a Professional Development Section 5A, 5B, 5D Section 5A,5B Section 5A,5B, 5E Enrichment Programs including After schoolprograms; Section 5A Section 5A, 5C, 5D, 5E 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 52   Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/SCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 53  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. PS 155 , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. PS 155 will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 54  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 55  ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before October 31 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act. ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 56 School-Parent Compact (SPC)  School-Parent Compact (SPC) PS 155 , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 57  ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 58  ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 59  Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 60  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): K 6 1 7 2 8 3 9 4 10 5 11 12 2018-19 SCEP-FL 61  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: P.S.155M serves a total of 219 students in grades Kindergarten through 5th grade; of that number, 115 students (52%) are identified ELLs, including those who are identified as Commanding former Multi-Lingual Learners/English Language Learners (MLL/ELL) entitled to transitional English as a New Language (ENL) services. The school has a new Dual Language (DLE) program, spanning grades PK-2nd, a Transitional Bilingual Education (TBE) program spanning grades 3 to Grade 4; two of six grades are served by DLE and TBE in the form of Integrated Co-Teaching (ICT), by bilingually certified and special needs licensed teachers. Students in all grades also receive ENL-only services from an ENL teacher. Although there is great need to provide supplemental academic services for all of the ELL students, the Title III supplementary program will be used to provide our students of three proficiency categories the additional support. This is explained below. An analysis of NYSESLAT 2018 data revealed that the greatest numbers of MLL/ELL students in K-2 have achieved scores placing them in the Emerging, Transitioning, and Expanding categories; in grades 3-5 they are more densely clustered in the Transitioning and Expanding categories, and many are becoming Long Term ELLs with High Risk according to the EDAT. To address this issue, T III support will target students at earlier grade levels so that they have the opportunity to accelerate their English acquisition and so that the school may see more of these students exit the ELL category prior to reaching 4th and 5th grades. Of particular relevance to the selected students, is the increasing demand of academic language that they will face as they move toward upper elementary grades. This is also relevant when examining the data below that show that while student English proficiency increases in grades K-1, there is a drop in this increase pattern in grade 3 and 4. Academic language is necessary for school success for all students and a significant challenge for MLL/ELL students, especially as they move into higher grade levels. NYSESLAT modality analysis reveals that all students in grades K-5 need to improve in both literacy areas, and due to the broad grade level range, the intervention must impact literacy and oracy. Oracy is a critical support to literacy in the early grades, as well as in upper elementary, for academic discourse. By fortifying academic literacy and academic language earlier, students will improve their general academic knowledge and habits as they acquire English with closer guidance than that which they can receive in the classroom during the weekdays. Finally, based on reading data MLL/ELLs K-5 will be selected to participate in a program that provides supplemental academic services specifically for MLL/ELLs in building academic skills and literacy, described in the next sub-section. Selected students will be those working at early and transitioning reading levels, and those at extending levels where fluency has been identified as an area needing strengthening. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 62  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information <!--{cke_protected}%3Cmeta%20charset%3D%22utf-8%22%20%2F%3E-->The After School Program: The Title III program that will be implemented in afterschool is the Readers Theater program called "Spotlight on English Reader’s Theater K–5" for academic supports for MLL/ELL students in grades 1 and 2. This program engages students in purposeful dialogue and reading experiences in a format that makes content and language more comprehensible, encouraging growth in English as a new language. Through small groups students will improve reading in English, particularly in fluency, a key area of reading development needed for reading after students reach early reading levels. Opportunities for public speaking and development of complex ideas offered by the program will boost the academic language development these students will need as they enter later grade levels. Reader’s Theater is a forum for students to discuss and reflect on decisions that impact the enactment and production of theatrical skits. Along the way, students can create props, scenery, costumes and generate invitations to a performance. Ultimately, students will write their own script, adapting a favorite book, or settling on a topic of choice. In so doing, they will build confidence in reading with expression, aloud to an audience. The process of multiple readings and rehearsals will present opportunities for informal assessment. Teachers will use formative assessment and classroom data to guide their instruction. The goal of Readers' Theater is to give the students a reason to read aloud, as they prepare to perform for an audience. This is one sure way to improve their reading skills and level of confidence. As a culminating activity, the students will send out invitations and will perform their skits for the parents. Schedule: This program will be held Wednesday and Thursday afternoon from 2:30 to 4:30. The duration will be 35 sessions and will be taught by a certified bilingual teacher. <!--{cke_protected}%3Cmeta%20charset%3D%22utf-8%22%20%2F%3E--> The Saturday Program: The Title III program that will be implemented on Saturdays is a school newspaper called "PS 155 Saturday Times" for academic supports for MLL/ELL students in grades 1 and 2. The focus of the student newspaper will be writing and reporting on school issues. The goal, which is important for student motivation, will be to publish and share their ideas in a newspaper. This program will be held on Saturdays, from 9:00am - 1:00pm. The 4-hour Saturday program will begin March 2, 2019 and will end after 13 Saturdays (see below). Introducing students to a school newspaper can help to strengthen students' academic skills while making learning fun. Creating a newspaper provides an opportunity to combine two literacy skills: reading about the news, and writing the news. Introducing this medium way before high school or college, broadens the students’ awareness to real life practical applications for reading and writing. Contributions to the newspaper can be varied and wide ranging: from publishing a poem, or a cartoon or a drawing to writing facts in an article on a topic, to writing an opinion or a persuasion piece. Students can wear hats as reporters , employ the craft of note-taking on a note pad, take pictures or conduct interviews. They will learn the basic structure of writing an article, along with the fundamental advantages of asking and answering the WH questions. Students can work solo or on a team as they take on jobs that are best suited to their language ability. They will have ample opportunities to read, re read, or even work through the phases of the writing process as they edit and polish their copy, and in so doing, build on their academic skills and academic language. The culminating end product of this project based activity will be a school 2018-19 SCEP-FL 63  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information newspaper. The language of instruction will be English with support in the home language when needed. Tentative Saturday Dates: March 2, 9, 16, 23, 30 April 6, 13 May 4, 11, 18, 25 June 1, 8, Student Groups and Staffing: Two groups of 20 students will be created based on student data and grade levels. There will be two certified ENL/Bilingual teachers servicing the group. A supervisor will be employed for each of the Saturdays and for the after school program. Title III as well as other funding sources will be used to ensure staffing for all aspects of the program. This additional funding will be provided by the extended day after school grant and fair student funding. Materials: Teachers will use "Spotlight on English Reader’s Theater K–5", a variety of leveled books in English with strong visual supports, notebooks, pencils, pens, as well as a class subscription to Scholastic News Magazine for grades 1 and 2. Title III as well as other funding (named above) will be used to ensure all materials needed are purchased. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: To insure MLL/ELL students' literacy, oracy and academic language are targeted areas of focus in their intervention programs and in classrooms, the teacher in the Title III program will participate in professional development. Initially, professional development will focus on implementation of Readers' Theater and its benefits to academic language, oracy and literacy. Following this, on each of two additional Mondays the teacher will focus on one of the two major aspects addressed by the program. In the first session, teachers will learn about oracy as it is defined and used to develop literacy, as well as how it is used academically, with a focus on how to use the program to develop this language. The teacher will be able to understand oracy development in young children, and its application to academic work in school. The second topic will be reading fluency. The teacher will understand the role fluency plays in learning to read in English, and the challenges students face in fluency as they confront more complex language in texts. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 64  Part C: Professional Development Professional development sessions will revolve around differentiation strategies and techniques that will support all ELLs at PS 155. The school's ELL lead attends the Manhattan Borough Office's monthly PLO's. On October 1, 2018 The Professional Development shared with our teachers based on the Manhattan Field Support Team PD dealt with Four Key Shifts for Promoting Advance Literacy Instruction. Shift 1 Moving from supporting diverse learners through interventions to focus on strengthening their instructional core. Focus on writing to build language and knowledge. On December 10, 2018 The Professional Development shared with our teachers based on the Manhattan Field Support Team PD dealt with the skills our students need to be literate in the 21st century. We described and discussed effective instructional tools and scaffolding within language based learning projects. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: PS 155 is committed in continuing to develop solid foundations around parental involvement. We believe that families, teachers and school leaders should be involved in order to make education a collaborative effort between home and school. We will schedule five parent workshops, one at the end of each month of the program. Workshops will focus on literacy, oracy, academic language and bilingualism, and will include topics such as "How to Help Your Child at Home with Literacy/Oracy," and "What is academic language, and how is it different from everyday language?" One teacher will provide parents with a series of workshops to inform parents of additional important topics concerning the education of their children. Parents will be notified about these activities via school phone messenger and a school school mailing prior to each session. Translation will be provided in notifications and in the workshops. November 2018: What can I do to promote strong school work habits in my children? What are the characteristics of successful students? December 2018 : What is oracy? Why is it important? How can I help my child at home with oracy? January 2019: What is reading fluency? Why is it important? How can I help my child at home with reading fluency? February 2019: What is academic language? How is it different from everyday language? How is academic language taught in school? How can I help my children become skilled in academic language? 2018-19 SCEP-FL 65 Part D: Parental Engagement Activities March 2019: How are my children assessed at school? What are the different assessments and their purposes? How can I help my child do well? Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) 0 bbb  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 0 0 0 0 0 0 Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2018-19 SCEP-FL 66  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 04 School Name The William Paca School Borough Manhattan School Number 155 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Francesca Joseph Coach Juliet Luther, Bil Spec. ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Celeste Di Muro Teacher/Subject Area Maria Guzmán/Bil. Sci. Teacher/Subject Area Arelis Collado/DLE K Related-Service Provider Ms. Gill/IEP, SETSS Superintendent Alexandra Estrella Assistant Principal Minerva Guzmán, A.P. Coach N/A School Counselor Jane Nuñez Parent Janet Perez Parent Coordinator Nora Montero Field Support Center Staff Member Fanny Castro Other (Name and Title) Higgins, ICT/Hanley, ENL C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 7 0 1 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] D. Student Demographics 2018-19 SCEP-FL 67  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 295 Total number of ELLs 133 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 45.08% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. 1 2 Opened (e.g., 2013-14) year(s)? K 1 1 2016-17 2017-18 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 1 1 0 1 1 3 1 0 1 4 0 0 5 1 0 1 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 2 0 0 2 1 0 5 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? The following formative or curriculum assessments are used to guide instructional planning for ELLs: 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? The assessments are administered according to a school wide assessment calendar; Administrative monitoring is used to assure compliance. Below are the specific assessments and purposes. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 68  Reading in the Home Language: The school uses Teachers College Running Records to measure progress in English reading in decoding. This assessment, used for all students, including ELLs, identifies the students' independent reading level, areas of strength and need to be addressed in Guided Reading. For students in Dual Language, and TBE, the Spanish Evaluación del Desarrollo de la Lectura 2 (EDL2), the Spanish version of the Developmental Reading Assessment 2 (DRA2) will continue to be used beginning in the Fall of 2018. Phonics and Word Study: For the English Phonics and Word Study components of literacy instruction in grades K-5, Fundations is used K-2 by all teachers, including those in the dual language program. For grades above 2, word study is currently implemented in AIS, using the Reading A-Z resource and Guided Reading, using leveled texts and teacher-designed lessons. For phonics in Spanish in grades K and 1, La Estrellita is used K-1. For grades 2-4 Las Palabras a Su Paso is planned for beginning in 2017-18. Beyond grade 4, teachers will use teacher-created activities with published lists of grade level Palabras de Uso Frecuente, until another resource is identified. Oracy in the Home and English Language: Student oracy in English and Spanish, school-wide, is observed informally. Informal observations are used in English and Spanish to assess academic oracy in three domains (word, sentence, discourse). Writing in the Home Language: Writing is assessed in both languages using TC on-demand writing assessment tools pre and post-unit. Teacher-Team Created End of Unit Assessments for Writing are used to assess student writing in English and Spanish as home languages. Writing in the New Language: Writing is assessed in both languages using TC on-demand writing assessment tools pre and post-unit. Teacher-Team Created End of Unit Assessments for Writing are used to assess student writing in English and Spanish as new languages. Content Areas: Unit assessments are used in Math, Social Studies, and Science to assess content learning in each language. Informal Checks for Understanding are used in Shared Reading. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Screening On entrance, all students speaking a language other than English at home, are screened for English proficiency using a procedure that includes a test, the New York State Identification Test for English Language Learners (NYSITELL). Students identified as ELLs, entering for the first time who speak Spanish also take the one-time Spanish screener, Spanish Language Assessment Battery (SLAB), to determine a baseline in Spanish upon entrance to a U.S. school. Performance Tasks: Undecided. English Language Arts (ELA)/Math Periodic Assessment: All students Grades 3-8 take the ELA and Math Periodic Assessments to provide school-wide, grade-wide, and classroom group data relevant to the measures on the year-end, state assessment of ELA, and Math for school-wide planning for student support. ELL Baseline/Endline Assessments All ELLs will take the Fall and Spring periodic assessment in English. Home Language Arts BOY/EOY (Spanish) Periodic Assessment Home Language Arts (HLA) Spanish Performance Assessment task pairs*. Beginning in Fall 2018, Spanish language arts will be assessed twice a year using the Spanish Home Language Arts (SHLA) Assessment provided by the Office of Periodic Assessment*, for students in all grades K-5 in this school, in classes in which 2018-19 SCEP-FL 69  instruction is provided in Spanish. This assessment will provide detailed information about student language arts abilities, aligned with NYS Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS), soon to be the Next Generation Learning Standards. The information will be used to group students and plan instruction in Spanish. This assessment, together with screening, formative and summative literacy and content assessments in Spanish, will be used to evaluate program DLE effectiveness in the Spanish language. It will also inform the language allocation graduated changes across grades in TBE as well as assist teachers in grouping for instruction in class. Annual Assessments: New York State ELA, Math, Science (Grades 3-8) and the grades K-8 New York State English as a Second Language Achievement Test (NYSESLAT) assessments are routinely used to obtain summative achievement data. English is the language of assessment for all ELLs taking the ELA, and other languages are used, depending on the student, and available resources, in Math and Science. The NYSESLAT measures student progress toward English proficiency in English as a new language. These assessments inform measurement of adequate yearly progress (AYP) for the school, assist in promotional decision making for students, and are a key resource in school planning for the upcoming school year. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Data collected is analyzed by various teams, including administrators and specialists, and teacher teams. The approach taken is to bring together multiple data sources to inform next steps. Next steps include making school-wide plans for intervention, support, and enrichment during the school day. At the classroom level, teachers make decisions to adjusting instruction to respond to the results. Teachers use the data to create systems for grouping at-risk students for AIS services. Through differentiation of instruction in the classrooms, students at level, and students above level, are provided supplementary instruction by classroom teachers, through various grouping strategies. This instruction and scheduling is documented in class schedules, lesson plans, and classroom environment charts. Scheduling occurs on a certain number of days per week, depending on student needs, grade level, and available personnel. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Data used for RtI An ample supply of data taken from summative and formative sources across grades is used. These assessments have been listed question 1. In addition, in special cases, the classroom teachers organize to obtain further information, if the existing data is insufficient. Personnel RtI Framework begins with the classroom teacher. Teachers reach out, as needs arise, to consult with members of the administration, special needs teachers, teachers of ELLs, with access to additional staff, who may be included on a case-by-case basis. These include the bilingual guidance counselor, bilingual psychologist, and bilingual specialist/coach. Structure in Place for RtI Teachers perform Data Inquiry in the classroom to examine data for all students, breaking it down into sub-groups, to determine which students need support, and how that support should be provided. The Data Inquiry process informs how classroom level support is to be implemented, considering what may already be provided, what enhancements may be necessary, and create workable plans of response. These steps are taken for all students, including for ELL students in all programs. RtI Implementation Teachers organize for actions that may be taken to strengthen the instructional core for ELLs in all programs. Actions may include teacher team walk-throughs to analyze instructional format, goals, methods, delivery, or other aspects, with the objective of providing support to the teacher for change to the core, as necessary. Teachers form small-group (Tier 2)/individual intervention (Tier 3) for students including ELLs in all programs. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 70  6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The assessment data that will be used in 2018-19 to evaluate and inform the ELL programs' effectiveness and planning for the future, will be from NYSESLAT, ELA, State Math, Periodic English as a New Language and Spanish Home Language Arts assessments. These will be combined with content area unit assessments, and formative literacy and oracy assessments from the classroom to develop a description of program effectiveness in the following: NYSESLAT: Annual achievement in English as a New Language ELA: Annual achievement in English Language Arts Math: Annual achievement in Math ENL Periodic assessment: Pre-Post data in English as a New Language to show progress in English language across one school year. Spanish HLA: Pre-Post data in Spanish Language Arts to show progress in Spanish language arts across one school year. Content area unit assessments: Used to measure outcomes in Math for non-testing grades. Used in all grades to assess outcomes in Social Studies and Science. Literacy Data: TC Running Records for English reading outcomes; EDL2 for reading outcomes in Spanish; Assessments for writing and oracy in each language (named in item 3 above), Word Study data in each language. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? In 2018-19, teachers in PD will be supported to collect, analyze and use ELL assessment instruments and data. Specifically, teachers will be learning to interpret and adjust instruction using student data through the study of Driven by Data, by Paul Bambrick-Santoyo (potential). Teachers and other staff continue will learn or review the purpose of each instrument, how to collect the data effectively, how to triangulate and analyze data, and about what teaching actions are implied by the outcomes. Administrators and support staff will apply what is learned to make programmatic and/or school-wide adjustments. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Freestanding ENL is provided by one ENL teacher. She is responsible for students K-5 not participating in TBE or DL, where the majority of ELLs are served. All ELL students (Entering, Emerging, Transitioning, Expanding) and all students who have passed a NYSESLAT within the prior two years (Commanding) are fully served. In accordance with the revised Part 154 of the Chancellor's Regulations of New York State, ENL is provided through two formats. These are: Integrated ENL (All levels), and Stand-Alone ENL (entering, emerging, transitioning). The amount of time the teacher provides each type of instruction to students in each category applicable is assigned based on the guidelines set forth by Part 154.2. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 71  Integrated ENL is provided through a Push-In model. Students in each grade K-5 are part of a class of mostly English proficient peers (FELL and non-ELL). The ELLs are assigned to classes as other students are, so that they are heterogeneously grouped in terms of language proficiency, at the grade level. The ENL teacher, when providing services in the integrated format, is expected to co-teach the class for whole group instruction, and serve her instructional group of ELLs in the class in a manner that differentiates instruction, depending on student English language needs. When providing Stand-Alone, the ENL teacher uses a Pull-Out model that includes entering, emerging, and transitioning ELLs only. Among emerging and transitional students for whom Stand Alone is a flexible option decisions for how these students are served are data based, and as per teacher judgment informed by data. ELLs in Stand Alone may be of more than one grade level in a group, such that the group is heterogeneous in that sense as well as along proficiency level. The ENL provider is expected to focus on developing aspects of the English language, in a manner that provides meaningful English language instruction across the two proficiency levels, differentiated by grade. Stand-Alone and Integrated instructional time follows the guidelines set forth by Part 154.2. b. TBE program. If applicable. The ELLs who are served in TBE, are participants in either TBE ICT (grades 3 and 4) or TBE SPED (grades 4-5 bridge). ELLs in TBE ICT and TBE SPED are students with special needs who have been served in a bilingual setting, as per their IEPs, ELL status, and common home language, since Kindergarten. All ELLs, in the bilingual program types named above, receive ENL in their heterogeneously grouped classes. Depending on the students' English language proficiency level and requirements as per CR Part 152.2, students are programmed for required ENL, as heterogeneous and integrated ENL during ELA and/or content area instruction, and as Stand-Alone, in the form of small groups (EN, EM, TR, as per data informed decisions). The ELLs in these classes are provided with ENL by either the bilingually certified classroom teacher/co-teacher, or the ESOL certified classroom teacher/co-teacher. The teacher may group ELLs in the integrated portions of ENL instruction, in different ways to address their needs for support and language instruction within ELA and/or content areas, depending on student levels and options offered by the regulations. All students entitled to this type of ENL instruction are fully served during designated times on their class schedules. In Stand Alone instruction, the focus is language development, as per CR Part 154. Students entitled to this type of ENL instruction are grouped according to their NYSESLAT levels and other data as necessary and all are fully served in designated times on the class schedule. In the TBE program, instruction is provided in two languages, English and Spanish, each of which is taught every day. ESOL methods and strategies, are applied to support students when instruction is primarily in English, such as in English Language Arts, and integrated ENL instruction. TBE students receive home language instruction for 1 period every day, at times in literacy and at times in the content areas with emphasis on literacy in the content area. Differentiation to support language development in Spanish employs similar strategies and techniques as those used in the new language. Teachers use transitional methods during most other content area instructional periods (Preview/View/Review), in accordance with their needs identified by student data. By using a strategy of preview/view/review, teachers organize the use of each language in structured ways during instruction of different lesson components. Teachers also support student learning with vocabulary pre-teaching, and a focus on specific language objectives (beyond words), and grouping for instruction. c. DL program. If applicable. The Dual Language program, in Pk?-Grade 3 uses a one-world model. The goal is to make it a Two-Way for K this year, but enrollment of ELLs at the K level, whose families choose DL, and of non-ELLs whose families do not speak Spanish, and choose DL, will determine whether it will continue to be a One Way program or a Two-Way program. Currently there is a Kindergarten DL that is roughly split between ELLs and non-ELLs, in which most students (not all) have some degree of Spanish exposure. In Grades 1 and 2, students began as a 100% ELL cohort, all students speaking the same home language of Spanish. Last year, a conversion process took place mid-year, to create the new DL classes, in K- 2018-19 SCEP-FL 72  1. Both groups have moved up from K-1 to Grades 1-2. There is also a DL PK?, as there was last year. English and Spanish are used as the languages of instruction in each curricular area. Languages are separated by time and space allocations for this year 2018-2019, and going forward, through allocated space for classroom print, and an every-other-day rotation. This is the allocation to be applied in all curricular areas except for Guided Reading in which sequential literacy is used to implement it. Teachers differentiate to provide support for language development in ENL for all students to whom this applies, SNL for all to whom this applies, and ELA and SLA for all students. All classes are heterogeneous in each language across the ELL categories. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? 2. Ensuring the minutes are provided as per mandates: Teachers are provided with explicit schedules that include all services indicated in terms of time in which the services are to be provided. Student data necessary to provide for grouping in the times indicated are also provided to the teachers. Teachers are supervised by administrators who use the schedules to monitor the implementation of the mandated services in all programs. Services Across Programs: All ELL students, served by ENL in all programs and in all grades, are served as follows in ENL, by level: Entering and Emerging students receive a total minimum of 360 minutes per week. For both categories the time is evenly divided between Stand-Alone (180 min) and ENL-Integrated services (180 min). As per the allowance for flexibility, where feasible and where teachers or administrators determine it may be advantageous, Emerging students are, at times, also served in content areas for 90 minutes. ENL-Integrated services remain at 180 minutes, minimum. Transitioning students are served during a total of 180 minutes a week. Depending on the students' needs, as per student data, and scheduling feasibility, teachers may serve them entirely in Integrated format, or allocate 90 min for ENL-Integrated services, and the other 90 for either Stand-alone or content areas. Expanding students are served by a total of 180 minutes, all of which are provided in ENL-Integrated format. Commanding students, who achieved this score within the last two years, are provided with a total of 90 minutes of ENL, also all in the integrated format. Programming is designed differently in each program model: One ENL teacher follows a schedule to push-in to delivery ENL integrated services in classes she serves, and pulls students out to her classroom for stand-alone services; In TBE and DL classes, the classroom teacher/one of the classroom teachers is the ENL provider. Teachers document grouping for ENL instruction, through a variety of possible means, such as class schedules, grouping schedules/lists, or other posted means. indicates when ENL integrated instruction is provided, and Stand Alone is provided. In these classes, Stand Alone is done though small group instruction, rather than pull-out. In addition, some of the DL and TBE classes are ICT classes. This means that one of the two teachers in the room provides the ENL services using at least two co-teaching models that allow for the services to be provided by that teacher. One model integrates all students in two groups (whole group or via split class) for ELA/ENL, with ELLs in the group taught by the ENL/BE certified teacher; another may group all non-ELLs with the non-ENL/BE teacher and a small group of ELLs who need Stand Alone, for small group instruction in ENL, with the ENL/BE teacher. Home Language Arts in TBE: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 73  TBE students receive home language instruction for 1 period every day, at times in literacy and at times in the content areas with emphasis on literacy in the content area. Differentiation to support language development in Spanish employs similar strategies and techniques as those used in the new language. Home Language Arts Support in ENL: Home language arts support in ENL varies. Teachers who can support students verbally and in written communication, offer teacher-designed, or teacher-selected supports in both oral and written modalities. Teachers who cannot speak, read, or write the students' home language may provide students with support using resources to aid comprehension of content and develop English, such as reading material (digital or print), use of software, such as DuoLingo, the support to speak and write in the home language if needed for comprehension and participation in class activities. During class, students are permitted to use their home language repertoire to discuss and co-construct meaning with peers as needed. All teachers provide instruction in cognates. All DL class teachers provide instruction in Spanish that is designed to differentiate for those for whom Spanish is a home language, or a New language. 2a. In the Freestanding ENL Program, all ENL students receive ENL services from an ENL teacher. Depending on proficiency level, the students receive mandated services in Integrated ELA/ENL, Integrated Content Areas/ENL and/or Stand Alone ENL. For Integrated ENL, the ENL teacher pushes into the classroom to co-teach with classroom teachers; for Stand Alone, the ENL teacher Pulls students out. Integrated instruction in ELA/ENL or Content/ENL supports students to do literacy and content area learning and tasks with ENL supports, such as scaffolds, strategies and techniques. In Stand Alone, the focus is on language areas in need of development. In the TBE Program, all ENL students receive ENL services from the classroom bilingual/ENL teacher. Services are provided during specified scheduled times in the class program as well as through grouping for instruction that allots more than the minimums described above to each student, during English language instructional time in ELA and content areas. Home language arts is prescribed for TBE as a period each day and may be provided either through literacy or content areas, depending on class format. Time is allocated to integrated instructional focus (as above) and language development (as above). In the DL Program all ENL students receive ENL services by the classroom bilingual teacher, through grouping for instruction that allots more than the minimums described above to each student, during English language instructional time in ELA and content areas. HLA is provided across all literacy block and content areas during scheduled times for that instructional language, thus students therefore also exceed the minimums in language arts in Spanish. Time is allocated to integrated instructional focus (as above) in both languages and language development (as above) in both languages. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. For all instructional programs there are some universals: Balanced Literacy through TC is used to provide instruction in literacy, academic oracy is provided through Shared Reading, and classroom discussions. These approaches are taken across languages of instruction. ENL Program: Integrated format Integrated ENL instruction is provided in ELA, and for students for whom it is feasible in scheduling, also in content areas. In 2018-19 SCEP-FL 74  addition, content is integrated into some ELA periods in the general schedule so that students for whom the opportunity exists for this kind of integrated services allocation receive the services during this time. The teacher of ELA and ENL coordinate to provide CCLS based ELA; teachers of content and ELA/content are the same teachers. In each case the teachers coordinate to provide Common Core based instruction. The teacher of ELA/Content is primarily responsible for planning ELA instruction, and the ENL teacher provides ELLs with support for the language demands of all tasks. Content area integrated ENL is planned similarly. The language of instruction is English. The ENL teacher uses the Bilingual Progressions as a guide. ENL Program: Stand-Alone format Stand-alone instruction in ENL is used to provide language development opportunities in the form of additional focus on specific language for grade-level ELA and/or content area tasks. Through language development techniques, ranging from sheltering strategies, to explicit instruction in language features, ELLs receive instruction in necessary language to be able to engage in classroom tasks successfully. The language of instruction is English, and the BCCPs are also used to guide decisions. In both formats, teachers use research based best practices, such as, but not limited to, scaffolds, like grouping for instruction to co-construct understanding; they may engage students in differentiated activities to build content and language knowledge, use visuals, and provide written scaffolds for speaking and writing; they may provide guides for reading or listening activities. Teachers may also use techniques such as TPR, role plays, or other ENL strategies, to build language proficiency, reinforce comprehension, and provide structured support for future independent language production. The teacher, as able, may also provide home language support verbally. This may be in the form of providing an anticipatory set, or introductory segment of the lesson introducing the students to a concept that will be taught, and language that will be the focus, prior to teaching the lesson in English. It may also include conferring for the purpose of ascertaining what the student understands, or in what areas students may need additional information to continue to perform a task. The teacher may also use home language resources, such as texts or written graphic organizers, and cognate charts. Home language support may also be provided by encouraging collaboration between students sharing a common language. The BCCP is used as a guide. Transitional Bilingual EducationCore content is taught using languages allocated. Each program uses English primarily for literacy, and integrates at least one period of Spanish Language Arts into literacy. Spanish is also used to provide content area instruction, and grouping is used to differentiate across languages. Methods, strategies and techniques as per the above examples are used, as well as guidance from the BCCPs. Dual Language: The Dual language program provides all language arts, content area, and language development through the school-wide approaches in English, and through the adaptation of these in Spanish. Dual language teachers also employ the same kinds of comprehensibility supports and supports for language production that ENL teachers provide, but they do so in two languages. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Students are evaluated in the home language(s) depending on their instructional programming. Please see below: For students in TBE and DL Programs: Home language oracy: Spanish home language oracy assessment through the Universal English as a New Language Rubric, adapted to reflect the oracy of simultaneous bilinguals in Spanish, will be introduced this year among TBE/DL teachers. Resources from the Teaching for Biliteracy frameworks were used to adapt the assessment at the school level. Home language writing: Universal English as a New Language Rubric, adapted for Spanish, will be introduced, to assess writing performance in writing. Resources from the Teaching for Biliteracy frameworks were used to adapt the assessment at the school level. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 75  Word Study: For all bilingual program types, Estrellita (K-1) and Palabras a su Paso (2-4) assessments will be used to assess word study outcomes. Dictados are an option teachers that may also use a checklist criteria for assessment, and an informal, authentic, descriptive narrative, based on the targeted language taught in the classroom. Reading: The EDL2 will be used to assess reading in Spanish. In addition, unit assessments developed by the teachers in content areas will account for reading in the content areas taught in Spanish. These will include academic language. Standardized tests: Pre and Post tests in Spanish will be used. The Periodic Assessment Home Language Arts (HLA) Spanish Performance Assessment task pairs will be used to assess the home language of Spanish twice a year, for students in bilingual programs. Assessment of home language in ENL: Spanish speaking Newcomer ELLs will be assessed across oracy, literacy, and language domains using the oracy rubic mentioned above, the EDL2, and the Periodic Assessment Home Language Arts (HLA) Spanish Performance Assessment task pairs. Students in ENL speaking any home language, who have not received substantial instruction in that language for most of their education, will be informally observed, in accordance with the ways in which the teacher uses the home language to support their learning and English development. ELLs speaking a language other than Spanish at home: A very small number (2) of ELLs speak Arabic, and (2) Japanese. While the Arabic speakers are no longer new, the Japanese speakers have only begin late Spring 2018 to receive instruction in this school after first time registration. Assessing their home languages can be done in a very limited manner. As a general rule for students speaking low incidence languages in this school, the ENL teacher will ask the student to write their name, and write a story in their home language, which she can then show to a speaker of that language in the family or the community, to get a sense for the student's ability to write in the home language on first arrival. She will also ask parents to speak to her about the student's home language ability. These procedures will occur as a part of the identification process, and serve to screen. Beyond screening, the assessment of the student's ability to use the language is less relevant to instruction. For the purposes of testing, the student will be asked to read the home language to see if this language is useful as a language of testing. Student's opinion may also be considered. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. SIFE: Students with Interrupted Formal Education are provided with specialized, individualized, instruction. Since SIFE students represent a range of interrupted educational experiences, additional informal assessments will be used to identify what the specific needs of the SIFE student may be with regard to the instruction that is planned, and support will be customized to those needs. In general, a major priority is to provide home language instruction. This means that as a basic step is to provide the SIFE with a bilingual program, within the ability of the school to do so considering home language and numbers of students enrolled with the same home language. At the time of enrollment, and program choice, special care will be taken to explain to families the role played by the home language in the instruction of SIFE. More specifically, within any program in which the student is enrolled to address his or her needs as ELL and SIFE, a major priority to be addressed is to 2018-19 SCEP-FL 76  develop initial literacy or to address literacy grade level deficits in the home language. This means the student receives instruction in reading and writing at his or her level, designed to address the need for SIFE students to raise their literacy ability levels. SIFE students are also exposed to grade level literacy, academic language, and content with specialized support that includes more extensive background building, vocabulary development, and leveraging of the students' home language oracy and cultural experiences to connect with topics that may be especially unfamiliar to the SIFE student. Oracy at the grade level will be similarly assessed and SIFE students will receive individualized attention to their needs for grade level home language development in oracy. English as a New Language will be provided as per mandates, however, the development of the new language will need to be provided for using resources and techniques that account for their special characteristics. PS 155 does not have any SIFE students at this time, however when and if it does, school leaders will obtain specialized home and English language resources, such as lower text level, high interest texts, and SIFE kits that address topics commonly weak or absent in the SIFE student's school experience. The school will also provide professional development support to providers who teach and in other ways support SIFE in school, to address topics such as school acclimation, academic and literacy support, oracy needs, and socio-emotional support needs. In particular, the socio-emotional component of the SIFE student's experience will receive special attention through a strong family-school connection, and the grouping of professionals who can provide the student with guidance services. b. Newcomer students range in ability in the home language as well as in English. Newcomers can range from SIFE to academically advanced and already exposed to English. They may be multilingual. Through a profile, teachers will create differentiated instructional plans. A newcomer student profile will be developed by teachers who will, through interviews and assessments, develop knowledge they will use to teach these students. As with all sub-groups, depending on the outcomes of literacy, oracy, academic language, and content assessments, instruction in the home language, if possible, and in English will be differentiated. Differentiation may include providing oral and written sentence frames for different levels of ability, engaging students in vocabulary and cognate instruction, and introducing differences between discourse styles in each language. Students will be encouraged to continue to read and write in the home language as they are introduced to the new language. The BCCP will be used to guide differentiation. As a general statement, Newcomers also typically need to develop basic new language vocabulary and language to navigate their school, home, and community lives in English, if not exposed to these prior to entrance into the U.S. Also, they need to become familiar with the school and classroom routines and cultural expectations in the new country. Teachers will partner Newcomers for their school days, with a speaker of the same home language, whenever possible, and provide guidance to the student for how and when to do and expect activities. Guidance can come in the form of illustrated procedures, graphic organizers, role play, modeling, and collaborative work. Teachers will take time to assure the Newcomer is welcomed by others and appreciated in the classroom and school community, by peers and colleagues. Teachers will alert staff outside the classroom to the need to provide support to the Newcomer when s/he is not in the teacher's presence. Teachers will focus on these topics with parents and caregivers so that the families can be supported in understanding their Newcomer children's experiences in school. c. Developing students are known to the teachers through assessment profiles if they have been in 155 since prior to becoming emerging and transitioning students in English. Others will be assessed to develop a profile. Teachers will use many kinds of new language techniques as well as home language support to provide increasing challenges to these students in learning content and language, with particular attention to building academic language and content knowledge. The BCCP will be used to guide teachers to do this. By this time, developing students have some level of English ability, although it is often a wide range across the four modalities. d. Long Term ELLs are a widely varying group of students that research has struggled to define with a set of attributes. In general, they have been in US schools and have been exposed to English for more than 7 years. Their characteristics and needs are highly variable, so as a first step the school will include in the student profile, assessment activities that will identify some of the reasons for the student's long-term ELL status, to target the possible areas of support needed. To differentiate instruction, teachers will be made aware of the long-term status so that they specifically look for risk factors and strength 2018-19 SCEP-FL 77  areas on which to capitalize. Teachers who use tools such English and Spanish classroom assessments will be able to identify some areas of concern, and in classroom assessment investigate these further, and also reveal student strengths. In general, students who are long term ELLs usually need high support in the development of both academic language and content knowledge, but may possess hidden skills acquired from life experience that go unacknowledged in school, although they may be useful. Differentiation of instruction will focus on academic language and content knowledge as a baseline of support, and be designed to leverage the student strengths where they may be. Beyond these areas, as guided by the student profile, and the classroom assessments, teachers may also need to engage families more often and provide specific support for home, and counseling support. In addition, this population is at times maligned as not conforming to common beliefs about language and cultural practices and must be supported to see themselves within a framework of empowerment in the classroom. This means that what is also needed are: 1) teacher awareness of cultural and linguistic differences, 2) rejection of a deficit view others may hold about the LTELL, and 3) plans for intervention on the level of one-to-one conferring with LTELLs so that they strive to improve their academic performance and overcome the testing barriers they usually face. e. Former ELLs are Commanding students within two years of having tested out of the ELL status via the NYSESLAT. In general they can be said to perform similarly to students who were never ELLs however, they can also demonstrate the characteristics common to Expanding students. Teachers will use assessments to create plans for support that may address gaps in vocabulary areas (may be both basic and academic), needs for academic language of the sentence and discourse types, and create corresponding supports. They will also continue to provide content and cultural knowledge support as needed. Generally, teachers are expected to employ data to plan for ELLs in all the above categories. Guided by assessments, teachers will create goals that reflect advances toward higher levels of English proficiency in each modality, while providing strong, student-, or group-specific scaffolds to support achievement. These include, but are not limited to, visuals, anticipation guides, differentiated language introductions, specifically designed work with language, language models for speaking and writing, guides for reading and listening, role play, demonstration, TPR, collaborative learning, barrier games, other structured interactions, projects, and language support routines for both whole and small group instruction. Teachers are expected to use these many tools in accordance with what assessments show about students in the above sub-groups, and take into account what research suggests about the needs of students in these subgroups, to provide instruction. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? For school year 2018-19, ELL-SWDs are served mostly through bilingual ICT and fewer SPED classes. Using general curricular materials, and data-driven, teacher-created, modifications, scaffolds and adjustments, tied to the specific needs described by the student IEPs and language development assessments, teachers provide specialized instruction to these students. To further address the students' needs, in some classes station teaching forms of co-teaching are used during part of the day, to allow teachers to hone in more closely on specific areas ELL-SWDs may need. Although needs vary, Speech and Language needs are most often the need areas in the IEPs. Teachers therefore target language production, comprehension, and processing through various kinds of approaches that may include: Productive language: models for spoken and written language with opportunities to practice; specialized lessons in pronunciation and attention to spoken language rhythms and stress patterns in English and./or the home language; language practice through scaffolded and structured speaking activities with special attention to Speech and language student characteristics. Explicit writing support to use oral to written language strategies with attention to gaps that may occur due to special needs, is also used as appropriate. Receptive language: visual aides, audio-visual materials, the use of restatement and repetition, explicit teaching, graphic organizers and multiple ways to represent concepts are used as appropriate. The above are applied in English and the home language. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 78  For students who have other disabilities, such as socio-emotional or cognitive disabilities, instruction is specialized in each language, to the individual. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? For the school year 2018-19, the main model of Special Needs services currently is through ICT. This model is implemented in Transitional Bilingual Education and Dual Language classes. For applicable ELL-SWDs, SETSS is also provided. There are two classes that are a 12:1:1 classified class with ELL-SWDs. The IEP process is designed to specifically address the need to assure the ELL/SWDs receive consideration for the least restrictive environment. Curricular: Curricular materials are provided for both grade level, and non-grade level needs of ELL-SWDs. For example, while students who are ELL-SWDs must be exposed to grade level materials, they may also need resources addressing gaps. Teachers are able to obtain these and use them as necessary. Instructional: Instructional materials that assist ELL-SWDs to learn, such as manipulatives and tools that appeal to a variety of learning styles, or provided needed accessibility (physical, visual, auditory, psychological) are obtained as needed to support instruction to address IEP goals and language development. Scheduling: In ICT settings, after mandated program components are included in student programs or class schedules, teachers use grouping and station teaching strategies to address ELL-SWDs' needs in flexible groupings across the components. ELLs may be moved among groups for different needs and purposes, including language proficiency and IEP goals. In ICT settings, the two teachers share and divide responsibilities to offer the appropriate services, and they share information and plan together so that aspects of their teaching and assessment can be shared across instruction they deliver separately as well as woven into that which they deliver together to the whole group. In mainstream classes, SETTS services are coordinated to impact the student's classroom instruction to the least possible degree, using Push-In models wherever possible. ENL instruction is always provided through Integrated (Push-In) or Stand Alone (Pull-out). Classroom teachers, SETTS, and ENL providers have common planning opportunities they use to coordinate to provide instruction that attends to both language development and IEP goals, across the mainstream, SETTS, and ENL teacher perspectives. Teachers may thus address student goals at flexible times as per the design of instruction by the teachers in these three areas and their sub-areas. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. For school year 2018-19 Adaptive and Intervention programs in which ELLs receive support for ELA: Accelerated Reading: Classroom teachers will provide the Accelerated Reading adaptive reading instruction for all students, including ELLs; All students are grouped for accelerated reading instruction in English, using data from the program's assessments, to enhance reading achievement. Intervention programs in which ELLs receive support for ELA and Math: Academic intervention services in English, are used to provide specialized instruction in targeted areas to students, including 2018-19 SCEP-FL 79  ELLs needing support to address gaps in skills and language in ELA and Math. Students are chosen depending on assessment outcomes. It is anticipated that there will be an out of classroom AIS provider, pending budgetary decisions. School Inquiry Teams of various configurations, examine data across specific content areas, subgroups, and other need areas, as needed, including a focus on ELLs, and their sub-groups, to inform school-wide, classroom, sub-group, and individual instruction in RTI. The teams flexibly incorporate staff members who are certified in ENL, Special Needs, and Bilingual Education. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? For school year 2018-19 The Dual Language program was introduced based on the fact that nearly half of all students is comprised of ELLs and the vast majority share Spanish as a home language, suggesting that this is a model that would be highly supported by the demographic composition. In school year 2016-17, the Pre-K, Kindergarten and Grade 1 TBE classes became DL classes in January 2017. In 2017-18, enrollment continued to demonstrate the choice was appropriate and the program was expanded into Grade 2. For 2018-19, the Grade 2 will rise to Grade 3 in Dual Language. This program is expected to continue to expand in 2019-20. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? In 2016-17 TBE was replaced by DL in grades PK, K, and grade 1. Grade 2 was added for 2017-18. DL continued, as the school is interested in an additive rather than subtractive model, in the best interests of improving outcomes for students. It is expected that in 2018-19, there will be a DL PK, and a Grade 3 DL class. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Equal Access and Supplemental Services All programs that are in place at PS 155 are available to all students, including ELLs. These are: After school, Saturday Academy programs, and Parent/Child workshops to promote family literacy with a focus on ELLs. Each program is developed each new school year, based on data informing the school about areas of focus and grade levels of priority need. Enrichment programs are also provided. These programs will take shape in plans in October and launched in November, continuing to May or June. Some programs will be funded by Title III, and others through Title I or other funding sources. ELLs are welcomed to all of them. All materials prepared to invite students and parents to participate in any of the programs are provided in both English and Spanish (the dominant second language in the school), and translation services are used, in languages other than Spanish. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Instructional materials used to support ELLs in school year 2017-18 are: ENL: Teacher uses lesson plans and grade level materials, such as reading materials or content area texts and materials, to create differentiated tasks and scaffolds for students in ENL/ELA Integrated instruction. Teacher uses grade level materials of the same type as the above, to design language learning tasks to address their language learning needs in language arts and content areas, with teacher-designed scaffolds to support. DL/TBE: Readers Workshop: Teachers use Spanish and English mentor texts chosen from library resources, and student library resources to teach this part of the curriculum. Lessons are scaffolded and differentiated for ELLs. Writers Workshop: Teachers use Spanish and English mentor texts and writing materials to teach this part of the 2018-19 SCEP-FL 80  curriculum. Lessons are scaffolded and differentiated for ELLs. Word Study: For English word study, teachers use Fundations. For Spanish word study K-1 Teachers use La Estrellita. For Spanish word study 2-5, teachers use Palabras a Su Paso. Shared Reading: Shared reading in English and Spanish is done through articles chosen by teachers from Internet sources. Lessons are scaffolded and differentiated for ELLs. Social Studies and Science: using library resources, and supplemental materials, such as maps and concrete manipulatives, these content areas are integrated into literacy, whether in English or Spanish. Lessons are scaffolded and differentiated for ELLs. Math: For 2018-19 Engage NY Math curriculum with replace Go Math and be used in English and Spanish. Lessons will continue to be scaffolded and differentiated for ELLs. New technology for 2017-18 included installed Promethian Interactive Boards that can be used to electronically display visual and textual content, manipulate that content, and enhance access to content. For 2018-19, teachers will be provided with document cameras. These can be used to display books, student work, and for live demonstration. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? In school year 2017-18 home language support is assessed and delivered in different programs in different ways. DL Delivery: In DL classes the Home language is taught through all content areas in 50 percent of the instructional time. Support is provided as data indicates a need, through Tier II and Tier III options. Small group instructional formats are frequently used, not necessarily for support per se, but as a regular structure for teaching. Groups are flexibly changed to allow teachers to address differentiated support needs. Assessment: In DL classes, all content taught in the home language is assessed in accordance with what was taught, and in the language of the instruction, using the unit assessments created or modified by the teacher. TBE In TBE, home language arts is provided in either literacy or content area/literacy integrated periods. The home language is used for support during transitionally taught periods. Assessment: In TBE classes, all content taught in the home language is assessed in accordance with what was taught, and in the language of the instruction, using the unit assessments created or modified by the teacher. For transitional periods, assessment options are in English and/or in Spanish to account for how the student learned the content, or how the support was provided. ENL In ENL, for students who can speak, listen, read, and write in their home languages. The teacher can use some limited Spanish to support those students needing/having ability in this language. Resources can be used for aural input in other languages, as needed. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 81  Assessment: The outcome of this support is assessed by using both home language alternatives to English assessments when feasible, and notations on English language assessments that indicate that the home language was used in some way to help students learn what was taught. For all students learning through the medium of Spanish, the Home Language Arts (HLA) BOY/EOY assessments will be used to track student performance in Spanish. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. For school year 2018-19 the Bilingual Coordinator regularly meets with the Principal and Assistant Principal, and Teachers of ELLs, to articulate the plans and make any needed adjustments. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? PS 155 shares its building with a middle school. Resources are not shared across schools, other than the use of some common space. ELLs are not adversely affected, nor specifically benefited by the shared space. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). For school year 2018-19 there have not yet been a design of newcomer focused activities. Most newcomers are Kindergarten students who have some experience in the US, or were born in the US, so teachers acclimate them to school in more typical Kindergarten approaches in the classroom. For others, a plan is being developed. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? None. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? For school year 2017-18: a) The Second and Third Grade Dual language classes are One-Way model classes, due to the process of conversion that took place in year 2016-17. Kindergarten and Grade One are Two-Way Immersion model classes. All DL classes are One-World (Self-Contained). Grade Three is also ICT DL. The program is now 1 and 1/2 school years old. PK DL and Kindergarten recruitment is on-going for 2018-19, as well as identifying the teachers for those classes. English language learners and EP students are integrated for 95% of the school day; the only time they are not necessarily integrated is for small group Guided Reading instruction. b) Core content in the following areas is taught in both English and Spanish: Language Arts, Social Studies, Science, Math. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 82  c) The languages are separated for instruction by time. Each content area also has designated space in the room, in a mirror design. Grade Three ICT DL will be defined in terms of language allocation, when teachers who will provide the instruction, are identified. d) In 2016-17, teachers taught emergent literacy, sequentially. Next year's classes in those grade levels, will teach GR simultaneously. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? For school year 2018-19, there are several important initiatives: For all administrators, teachers, and pedagogical staff: Scaffolding and differentiation to teach ELLs through the medium of English. Co-teaching/station teaching strategies for content area/ENL teachers How to integrate language and content Culturally responsive teaching For teachers of ELLs in ENL/TBE/DL programs: Defining the attributes of programs for ELLs: Goals and implications for program design, and instruction Academic language: what it is, how to organize it to teach it to ELLs and others; including cognates For TBE/DL program teachers: Teaching the home language (TBE) Teaching for biliteracy (DL) Transitional methods (TBE) Differences between Spanish and English and how to use these for instruction and assessment (TBE/DL) For Non-pedagogical staff: Promoting the philosophy of Dual Language throughout the school: -using the target language with children -demonstrating ways that children's cultures and languages are valued -ensuring signage and school-wide environment is in Spanish and English, and follows the language allocation protocols for text and background colors. -the importance of multilingual signage and information for all families. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 83  According to the EPRG, "Each school must provide professional development to all teachers and administrators that specifically addresses the needs of English language learners. A minimum of fifteen percent (15%) of the required professional development hours for all teachers prescribed by CR Part 80 must be dedicated to language acquisition, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English language learners. For all bilingual and English as a new language teachers, a minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the required professional development hours must be dedicated to language acquisition in alignment with core content area instruction, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English language learners." For school year 2018-19: -to provide the "minimum of fifteen percent (15%) of the required professional development hours for all teachers prescribed by CR Part 80" the above agenda will be addressed through whole staff PD, and grade level/disciplinary group PD, using multiple providers. Documentation in the form of agendas and attendance lists will be collected and stored in a binder, by administration. Teachers will also be encouraged to attend PD offered outside the school, and some PD opportunities will be leveraged by administration by sending groups of staff to attend and then return to turn-key. Staff who attend PD outside of the building will follow the paperwork rules to request time to go, and return with an agenda, to document their participation. Copies will be kept in the administration PD binder. -to provide the "minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the required professional development hours"... "for all bilingual and English as a new language teachers"... "dedicated to language acquisition in alignment with core content area instruction, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English language learners," these teachers will be exposed to the general staff agenda mentioned in the paragraph above, as well as participate regular PD with the Bilingual Coordinator/Coach, who will meet with teachers in different groupings and cycles on Tuesday professional time. In addition, these teachers will be invited/sent to select outside of school PD that addresses the requirements. Documentation will be collected and stored in the same ways as described above. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? For school year 2018-19, in the Fall and the Spring, each teacher responsible for the ENL aspect of the instruction a student receives, will meet individually with parents to explain through data where the students are on the continuum of English and the home language, and what goals have been set in learning areas, for the student. Meeting invitations will be sent home and phone calls will be used to support. Logs of parent/teacher meetings for this purpose will be kept by teachers, with parent signatures. In addition, the administration, parent coordinator and Bilingual Coordinator will create a plan for parents of ELLs to come to the school to learn about how their children are learning in the programs in which they participate, to build their knowledge about the programs. Sign in sheets will be used to take attendance and store records. Finally, there will be coffee/tea and social events so that parents can become acquainted and develop informal support networks, and also to get to know teaching staff and others who see their children during the day. *For all of the above, teachers, administrators and the parent coordinator, as well as other staff, as needed, will use, as needed, translation and interpretation services, and see the language access coordinator for any resources they may need to facilitate communication. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 84  2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. For school year 2018-19, parent involvement will continue to take the form of monthly "Buen Provecho" meeting with Nora Montero, PC, as part of the wellness program, in which many in attendance are parents of ELLs (nearly 50% of the school is ELL), parents accompany classes on trips and some help in the classroom. Parents of ELLs take these roles often. Classroom cultural celebrations and whole school assembly programs are used to draw parents of ELLs into involvement. The physical education teacher also runs a morning fitness program for both children and family members and family members alone. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Not at this time. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 85 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Francesca Joseph, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 86  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: School DBN: Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Title Principal Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 SCEP-FL 87  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 04M155 School Name: William Paca Superintendent: A. Estrella The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. A questionaire was provided to parents where they indicated whether or not they felt that translation in their native language was needed. Many of the responses indicated that translation in their native language (Spanish) was very much needed. These surveys were then reviewed by the Principal and parent coordinator and kept on file in the Main Office. We also utilize the HLIS forms and ATS data which indicates the home language of the students. We have a growing population of children that speak a Mixtecan dialect at PS 155M however many of their parents speak Spanish and are teaching their children Spanish. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 88  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language Spanish and English 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. A Monthly calendar Parent- Teacher Conference letters Invitations to participate in after school programs Testing dates letters Report cards Invitations to parent meetings Reminders on school closed days 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 89  Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Meet the Teacher Night September Meet the Support Staff October 21, 2016 Parent Teacher conferences November 4, 2016 Monthly Parent Association Meetings every first Tuesday Middle School Enrollment Orientation October 7, 2016 Building Council Meeting with families. October 9, 2015 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Welcome poster will be located in the main entrance of the school. The Parents Bill of right will be send home at the beginning of the school year and copies will be made avialble upon registration. The Parents' guide to Language access is avialble in the main office. The Language ID Guide is avialble at the security desk and in the main office. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 90  Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Parents will fill out a survey. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 91 
