 05M200 School Name: P.S. 200- THE JAMES MCCUNE SMITH SCHOOL Principal: RENEE Y. BELTON 2018-19 SCEP-FL 1  School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Section 4: SCEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information James McCune Smith CS 200 05M200 310500010200 Pre K - 5 School Number (DBN): 2589 7 th Avenue, New York, New York 10039 212-491-6636 212-491-6925 Phone Number: Renée Y. Belton Fax: Rbelton2@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): Email Address: Renée Y. Belton Elizabeth Smith Marisa Crews Marisa Crews Cynthia Russell n/a n/a Lucia Sorita, The Leadership Program CBO Representative: Geographical District: 05 Superintendent’s Office Address: District Information DanikaRux Superintendent: 123MorningsideDrive Unit 2 Room 235 New York, New York 10027 drux@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 212-222-1395 Phone Number: 212-316-0451 Fax: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 3  Manhattan FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Field Support Center (FSC) Yuet Chu Executive Director: 333 Seventh Avenue, 8 th Floor, NY, NY 10001 ychu@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 212-470-0721 Phone Number: 917-339-1765 Fax: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the SCEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Renée Y. Belton Sheryl Pender Marisa Crews TinyaSmith-Campbell ShondraMarin n/a n/a Lucia Sorita Cynthia Frazier SoryRodriguez Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Rep./Leadership Program Member/Teacher Member/Teacher 2018-19 SCEP-FL 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Cynthia Russell Crystal Wilkerson Member/ Parent Member/ Parent n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 SCEP-FL 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) is a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. The process of developing and implementing the SCEP is aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding SCEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and SCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 7  In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement 2018-19 SCEP-FL 8  NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the SCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the SCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for SCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 9   Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 5: Build consensus around activities, strategies and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 6: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 7: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 10  Section 4: SCEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Our vision is to develop within each student, academic preparedness for effective communication and critical thinking as well as foster social responsibility through the appreciation of Arts and Humanities. Commitment to our vision will assure successful implementation of this mission to empower our students with the tools necessary to meet the educational challenges and college readiness. Staff and families are focused on empowering all students with the academic skills and rich civic and social experiences that will enable them to further their educational goals and become active, responsible, and positive contributing members of society. Students will develop important decision- making, critical thinking, and technological skills, and the ability to communicate effectively. All members of our school community will share accountability for creating a positive and supportive educational environment for achieving successful student outcomes. We are a diverse, collaborative school community dedicated to achieving high standards of academic excellence for all of our students through high quality, standards driven instruction, in a nurturing environment. Our mission is to develop within each student self respect, self discipline, and an understanding of their academic and social role to achieve success. Administrators, teachers, families, and students will nurture the understanding of social responsibility. Commitment to our vision and a true development of a family community will assure academic excellence to achieve and grow within and beyond our community. Our vision and mission is built on the premise that we are a community “Where the search for knowledge begins and never ends”. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. CS 200 serves over 453 students. We are located at 2589 Adam Clayton Powell Jr. Blvd. in Harlem, New York, the cultural hub of Dance, Music, and the arts. The school is a community of learners where all members, students, staff and families, are actively engaged in the educational process. The school is dedicated to achieving high standards of academic excellence for all our students through high quality, standards driven instruction, in the nurturing environment. Our attendance has increased by one percent which results in an 87.3% attendance rate. We currently have two 3K classes, three 4K classes, three classes on Kindergarten, 1st, 2nd, 3rd, and 4th grade and four 5th grade classes. Fifty-two percent (52%) of our students are female and forty-eight percent (48%) are male. We have a diverse population of students. Fifty eight percent (58%) of the students are Black/African American, Thirty eight percent (35%) are Hispanic/Latino, and Three percent (3%) are Asian, White or listed as “Other”. Eleven percent (11%) of our students are English Language Learners (ELLs). We have a Dual Language program that serves grades two through five and a Push in ENL program. We are currently awaiting the 2018 NYSESLAT results for our ENL students. Twenty six percent (26%)of our students have an Individual Education Plan (IEP). We have Self Contained 12:1:1 and ICT classes on grades K through 5. We also have a School Base Support team that consist of a Psychologist, Bilingual Social Worker, three Occupational Therapist, three Speech teachers (one bilingual and two monolingual), SETTS teacher, Physical Therapist, and a Family Worker. The majority of our students are from low income families, with one hundred percent qualifying for free lunch. Housing in the community reflects economic diversity. Homeless Shelters, Housing Projects and apartments for lower income residents surround cooperative development housing for the upper and middle-income residents. Many abandoned buildings continue to be renovated. Based upon the poverty index of the families in the community, CS 200 is classified as an 87.3% Title I School. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 11  Collaborative efforts include partnerships with neighborhood schools for the arts. This program exposes students to the fine arts We also partner with Chess in the Schools. This program provides opportunities for our students to take part in city wide and district chess competitions while teaching them the art of chess. We also collaborate with family outreach services for example; On site full service Harlem Hospital Clinic, Harlem Hospital Family Counseling Center, Harlem Hospital Adolescent Psychiatric Center, Parent/Child Program, Reality House, Graham Windham and Harlem Dowling. Our school also incorporates clubs and organizations such as Panther's Basketball Team (District 2009/2010 Champions), Track Team, Young Men of Distinction, and Elegant Young Ladies, Journalism Club, Debate Team, Science/STEM Club, Chess club, International Studies Club, and Dance Troop. The Young Men of Distinction (YMD) Etiquette Program teaches our young men through hands on authentic learning experiences. This program was developed to further enhance the inner and outer strength of young men. The Elegant Young Ladies (EYL) Etiquette Program was developed to further enhance the inner and outer beauty and strength of our young ladies. Both programs build self esteem while exposing the students to real world experiences. We have an Arts partnership with Studio In a School that both enriches and enhances the visual arts program at CS 200. We are in the 9th year of our partnership. Our 1st, 2nd, 3rd, 4th, and 5th grade student’s benefit from this visual arts program by that it assists in the development of literacy skills. We have two extension programs with Studio In a School. Art and Healthy Living and Art in Physical Health. Both programs integrate art and healthy living as the students learn about nutrition and physical health. We also have a Teaching Garden. This collaboration/partnership is with the American Heart Association and Citi Bank. The garden consists of herbs, fruits, and vegetables that the students, staff, and families cultivate and harvest. Ballet Tech has created opportunities in dance for our students. We have a state of the art dance studio funded by The Annenberg grant. Renaissance Learning, Innovative Education Program, Think Quest are some of the programs in which we utilize to provide academic support for our students. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. The Special population is our transient student population. This is a challenge for our school. Our school has families that represent eight shelters in our district. When our families receive permanent housing, they are relocated to other boroughs. This causes our students to be removed from our school during the school year. Some of our families choose to continue to attend our school and travel from the Bronx and some parts of Brooklyn because they do not want their children to be up rooted from their school. Also, the parents do not want their children to lose the services that we provide for them. Our students who travel are chronically late and absent which causes a lost in instructional time. We are in need of services and/or parent classes that will assist our families in obtaining training and guidance for having their children attend school regularly and on time. Our Students with disabilities (SWD) make up 26% of our student population. This percentage is above the city average. We staff three Speech teachers (One Bilingual), two Occupational Therapist, one Physical Therapist, one Bilingual Social Worker, a Bilingual and Monolingual Psychologist, and one Counselor to provide services to our students who qualify for related services. All of the related service providers are full time employees because of the heavy case loads. We also have 12:1:1 and Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ICT) classes for grades K through 5, 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 12  As of Element of the Frameworks for Great Schools that we made the most progress in is ensuring engaging, rigorous, and coherent curricula in all subjects, accessible for a variety of learners and aligned to Common Core Learning standards and/or content standards which resulted in our 3rd Grade in 2018, scoring below the New York City Average in ELA by -8% which was better than the 3rd Grade in 2017 where they scored -16%; 4th Grade in 2018, scoring below the New York City Average in ELA by -5% which was better than the 4th Grade students in 2017 where they scored -16% and 5th Grade in 2018, scoring below the New York City Average in ELA by -9% which was better than the 5th grade students in 2017 where they scored -14%. :The key areas of focus for this school year will be to monitor data and adjust curriculum to address individual student needs to continue to close the achievement gap. Our teachers will create units of study that are rich in critical thinking, collaboration, analysis, questioning, and real life applicability, which will result in students achievement in ELA. We will also incorporate Project Based Learning Units (PBL) in our curriculum for all grades. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 13  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 05M200 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 393 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual YES Dual Language YES Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 46 48 23 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 41 29 23 23 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 90.0% % Attendance Rate 89.8% % Reduced Lunch 12.2% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 2.0% 35.6% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 2.0% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 14.22 0% 2% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 30.3% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 75% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No No Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups SWD Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities N/A NO N/A YSH NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 67 67 87.2% 0.0% 27.2% 58.8% 0.8% 2.8% 4 5% 7 20.9% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No Yes YSH N/A N/A N/A NO YSH N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 14  Economically Disadvantaged N/A ALL STUDENTS N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 15  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3.3 1. Schools strengths We have aligned curricula to the Common Core Learning Standards and made strategic decisions to focus on phonics, instruction by using Fundations and Project Based Learning (PBL) so that all students are cognitively engaged. Our curriculum is planned and refined using activities and task to ensure that all learners, including Student with Disabilities (SWD's) and English Language Learners (ENL's), needs are addressed. 2. Priority Needs *As per our Quality Review 2017, indicator 2.2, While there are many common assessments administered, there is not yet consistency and alignment across the grades in how assessment data is used to adjust curricula and instruction. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 16  Ongoing checks for understanding across classrooms are inconsistently used to make effective, adjustments to meet student learning needs. *As per our PPO feedback 2018, Indicator 2.2, While there is evidence of clear expectations in some class rooms, we need to ensure that teachers' assessment practices are anchored in the practices of ongoing checks for understanding at different points of the lesson in all classrooms. Rubrics, checklists and clear expectations of the lesson should be visible to student and evident across all classrooms. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will increase student achievement by 30% growth in progress within their levels as per our ELA results in grades 4 and 5 as measured by spring 2019 ELA New York State assessments. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 17  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) The schedule will provide teachers with weekly common planning time in order to modify the curriculum and its Performance Based Assessment (PBA’s), rubric, checklist, and lesson expectations. All teachers Curriculum development in TC Writing Units, PBL, science, social studies, and Ready Gen. (After school and Saturday Clinics) All teachers All teachers To increase students’ outcome by providing weekly professional development sessions to further develop and improve instructional practices using resources that include the Common Core State Standards (CCSS), UDL ,RTI and Cognitive Rigor/Depth of Knowledge that will result in at least a 30% growth increase in students’ achievement in ELA across grade levels. Teachers will create skill based assessments, rubrics, and modify grading policies to ensure alignment to the state curricula, thus providing actionable feedback to student to ensure student achievement. Sept. 2018 thru June 2019 Sept. 2018 thru June 2019 Sept. 2018 thru June 2019 Coaches, Assistant Principal, and Principal Coaches, Assistant Principal, and Principal Grade leaders, coaches, and District 5 instructional coaches The coaches will provide bi monthly curriculum classes for SWD, ENL parents, and parents of students in need of interventions to support their children using I Ready, Engage NY, and MyOwn intervention programs. Parents/ Families Sept. 2018 thru June 2019 Coaches and Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. In September 2018, teachers and coaches will meet with families for grade specific workshops that focus on Project Based Learning (PBL) lessons, Rigorous Instruction, and the state standards. In February 2019, we will provide a additional workshops for new parents/guardians using Engage NY and I Ready programs. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 18  ● Supervisors and Coaches of CS 200 ● Grade Lead teachers. ● Teacher’s College Writer’s Project Lead Teachers and Lucy West; Metacogniton; Trained Teachers Per session and per diem funds will be used to reach this goal. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019 we will check in on whether or not we are on target to achieving a 30% increase in student achievement. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. State exams and teacher/coach bench mark assessments will be used to measure student progress. Teachers will utilize common grade level assessments, ELA and Math using skill based assessments, weekly assessment, and analyzes of student work to determine student progress towards goals and adjust curricula and instruction. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 19  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? 5.3 1. School Strengths At CS 200 we have a strong comprehensive social emotional support system for our students and families. Our guidance counselor provides mediation and guidance for our students and families. We have a social worker to provide counseling and assistance for our families. We have community based partnerships with Harlem Hospital Family Counseling Center, Harlem Hospital Adolescent Psychiatric Center, Parent/Child Program, Reality House, Graham Windham and Harlem Dowling. Our staff prides itself on being compassionate and caring. We have monthly character development themes to foster good character. Our students have a "Go to"person on staff when and if they need someone to talk to or if they are in need of crises intervention. 2. Priority Needs 2018-19 SCEP-FL 20  We must improve our pedagogy on how to better serve our students and families that have emotional deficiencies. Our school has had an increase of students who are in need of a more clinical instructional environment during the 2017/2018 school year we had an increase in initial referrals resulting in more than 15 new IEP cases, three resulting in D75 placements. We will seek out agencies that can provide our staff with workshops to enhance our skills to better serve students with emotional and personality deficiencies. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools –Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 there will be a decrease in incidents of students with social/emotional deficiencies by 10% as per the Online Occurrence Reports System (OOR's). 2018-19 SCEP-FL 21  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) 1. Research based instruction & Professional Development Teachers 9/201 8- 06/2019 Teachers ● Crises Intervention training ● Restorative Justice training/program 2. Strategies for SWD’s & ELL Students ● MyOwn, S.P.I.R.E., and Fundations Programs ● Restorative Circles by Guidance Counselor ● Sensory Centers/Corners for SWD Classrooms 3.Engaging Families ● Implementation of monthly parent workshops ● Monthly school wide activities to improve school climate and culture. Example : Attendance information workshop, Restorative Justice development workshops for families, and Parent Forums n/a 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Guidance Counselors School psychologist School Social Workers Guidance Counselor SETTS Teacher, OT and Speech teachers ESL Teacher Students 10/2018 - 06/2019 Parents Students School 10/2018 - 06/2019 Parent Coordinator Administration Coach Teachers Parents Leadership Program n/a n/a n/a 2018-19 SCEP-FL 22  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. The Guidance counselor, psychologist, IEP teacher, and principal will have a open house for families in October 2018. We will conduct a workshop around Supportive Environment by way of Restorative Circles and Response to Intervention programs (My Own and I Ready) for academic support and social development. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  After school and During school day we will provide training to staff for Crisis intervention training and Restorative Justice.  Per session for teachers and guidance counselor to facilitate training for teachers and families.  Per Diem will be allocated for substitute teacher coverage for trainings during the school day. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant X 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By June 2019, we will review our On Line Occurrence Reports to determine if there is a 10% reduction of school incidents and accidents during recess in regards to students with Functional Behavior (FBA) and Behavior Intervention Plans (BIP). Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Occurrence Report data, Crisis intervention reports, Teacher removals reports, and FBA's and BIP's,. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 23  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards x (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by SOP(s) Addressed using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. Schools Strengths We have strategically adopted DOE selected curricula to ensure that we are providing instruction aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards and integrating the shifts and Project Based Learning Units leading to all students having access in high level tasks as per our Winter PPO feedback. 2. Priority Needs Our next steps are to strengthen teacher practices so that they provide their students with the appropriate scaffold, differentiation, and access to the curricula to ensure that all learners understand and master challenging tasks. Support teachers in creating multiple access for all students by providing teacher support/development by way of weekly class visitations and professional development workshops lead by principal, assistant principal, coaches, and lead teachers. Part 2 – Annual Goal 2018-19 SCEP-FL 24  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% teachers will participate in weekly collaborative professional learning cycles around using student work to adjust lesson plans and unit plans in order to provide more rigorous tasks and opportunities for high levels of thinking and discourse across classrooms in all subject areas. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 25  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Research Based Programs K-5  Ready Gen  TC Writing Project Units  Go Math  Passport: Social Studies  Amplify Science Curriculum Strategies/Professional development needed  Weekly common planning  Monthly vertical common planning  Ongoing PD in all subject areas to support development of lesson presentation from multiple access points  Teachers will attend Professional development provided by CS 200 coaches, administration, and and grade leaders during team meetings Our literacy and math coaches will provide curriculum after school, Saturday clinics, and professional literature clubs to ensure effective development rigor. (Blooms & Webb’s DOK Realizing Rigor in the Mathematics Classroom & Rigor Is Not a four Letter Word.) Strategies for SWD and ENL students K-5  In order to support students with the curriculum and common core standards, there is a need to provide additional support to meet the new standards. After noon and/or Saturday academic academy for students Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Grade leaders, math/literacy coaches, assistant principal, borough and district support personnel for literacy, mathematics, social studies, and science. Sept. 2018 thru June 2019 Oct. 2018 thru June 2019 SWD teachers, ENL coordinator, and Response To Intervention Teachers Teacher/Parent/Family Collaborations  Parent coordinator and literacy coach host Parent Family Reading night Families of SWD and ENLs October 2018 thru May 2019 Teachers, Parent coordinator, ENL coordinator, math and literacy coaches, 2018-19 SCEP-FL 26  Provide parents with frequent reports on their children’s progress. Specifically, CS 200 will provide opportunities for families as follows: During September Open School Night, City Parent Teacher Conferences, Weekly and Monthly Family Engagement, Monthly teacher Progress reports, and Periodic Assessment Reports.  Provide information to parents of participating students in   their home language. Friday and Saturday ENL classes for families of ENL Student's SWD Family academic tutorial workshops which cover topics such as mathematics, phonemic awareness, and science content instruction. n/a and Response To Intervention Teachers n/a n/a n/a 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Teachers, administration, and coaches will provide grade specific family workshops in October, February, and April that focus on the current teacher created Project Based Learning Units and curriculum unit adjustments/modifications. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Teacher Per session and per diem   Common Time allotted daily / weekly to plan, disaggregated data, and analyze student work Supervisor Per session Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant X 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In October 2018, the principal, assistant principal, and coaches (Instructional team) will engage in progress monitoring to ensure that 100% of teacher teams received professional development as it pertains to data analyzes (curriculum units (adjustments/modifications), data usage (student work and benchmark assessments), and adjusting 2018-19 SCEP-FL 27  lesson plans that will result in rigorous tasks and opportunities for high levels of thinking and discourse across classrooms in all subject areas. In November 2018, the instructional team will monitor weekly grade level teacher team meetings led by teachers. The instructional team will observe team meeting protocols, student work sample analyzes, and curriculum unit and lesson plans adjustments. Instructional leaders will continue to have weekly professional development to support teacher teams with student work, unit and lesson analyzes. In February, the instructional team will adjust the professional development calendar as needed. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Team meeting artifacts, curriculum units, lesson plans, and student data results (weekly assessments , exit tickets, etc) Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 28  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. School Strengths As per the Spring Principal Performance Observation 2018, the principal uses the resources in support of the instructional goals and provides structured time for teachers to meet regularly resulting in increasing student outcomes. Teachers all engage in a variety of professional development activities that are aligned with the schools instructional goals. The principal has strategically targeted teachers to learn de-escalation strategies for students in crisis. Also, the principal has made hiring assignments to close literacy gaps among ENL's by building capacity through mentorships to improve instruction and engage students in challenging tasks. 2. Priority Needs As per the PPO 2018 and Quality Review results 2017, it is suggested that leadership create systems to strengthen teacher practices so that they consistently provide scaffold into the curricula to ensure that all learners are engaged in 2018-19 SCEP-FL 29  challenging tasks. Also, there's the need to develop teachers' capacity to select appropriate strategies that promote student engagement, effective use of questioning, and how to create intentional grouping. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART– Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, school leaders and coaches, will build teacher team capacity to engage in data inquiry so that all students are engaged in challenging tasks resulting in a 80% increase in teachers performance from Developing to Effective reflected in Danielson Domain 3b, 3c, and 3d in Advance. By February 2019 the administrative team will review teacher evaluations (Domain 3b, c and d) to track progress toward meeting goals. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 30  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) 2.4 Administrative staff and coaches will receive professional development to provide teacher teams with PD around facilitating effective data inquiry meetings. Administrative Team will receive professional development in regards to calibrating observations. Principal, Assistant Principal, Coaches Sept. 2018 thru May 2019 District PFL and Team Relay GSE Principal and Assistant Principal Sept. 2018 thru May 2019 District Talent Coach Principal and Assistant Principal’s will receive professional development to provide teachers with strategies to improve student engagement. Principal and Assistant Principal Sept. 2018 thru May 2018 District PFL and Team Administrative staff and coaches will provide teachers of SWD and ENL Students with PD around planning scaffolds to support their learning. Teachers Sept. 2018 thru May 2019 Relay GSE Instructional Team SWD District Liaison ENL District Liaison 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The principal will provide families with the opportunity to meet with the her and the assistant principal during the weekly parent engagement time to discuss concerns and academic expectations. Administration will provide academic and social emotional feedback as needed or requested depending on the individual student and family needs. The administrative team will meet with families in October 2018 during family grade level meetings to have an information session on how to create opportunities for families to volunteer time to support the school(as per the 59% of out of 133 parent responded, that they volunteer, in the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide Report). Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 31   Teacher Per session and per diem  Supervisor Per session Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant X 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In February 2019 the instructional team will convene to examine effectiveness teacher team's ability to use data to adjust lessons as evidenced by lesson plans adjustments and student assessment (informal and formal) results. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Teacher pedagogy Advance (Domain 3): Developing vs Effective ratings, Lesson Planning (Domain 1): Developing vs Effective ratings, and weekly student assessments/work products. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 32  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. X 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. School Strength As per the 2017 Quality Review, 2018 PPO, and 2017-2018 School Quality Guide report states that 94% of families say that at school their child is safe. Students, teachers, and parents alike reported that the school is a safe place for all. There is a respectful tone between teachers, students and staff. Students are known well and feel that they have an adult, or many, that they can trust. Students and staff alike know these trusted advisors in the school as a “go to person.” Students report that they could meet with their “go to person” whenever they needed to, whether to get something off of their chest or offer them guidance about building friendships, is something the students reported that the school does well. Teachers also articulated that they work together as a team and often provide one another with support. 2. Priority Needs The school needs to create partnerships with agencies or adopt programs to support social and emotional developmental health for students and and their families. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 33  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will partner with at least one agency or program to support social emotional development and preventive services for students and their families for a 30 % increase in teachers who agree or strongly agree that students are well behaved in class even when the teacher isn't watching in the Supportive Environment section of the School Quality Guide 2018/2019. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 34  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Provide three (October, February, and May) workshops for parents to learn how to understand their children’s social/emotional needs. All Parents/ Families October 2018 thru May 2019 Provide parents with weekly and/or bi monthly reports on their children’s academic and social/emotional progress. The school will also provide reports as follows: During September Open School Night, City Parent Teacher Conferences, Weekly and/or bi Monthly teacher Progress reports. We will also provide 2 behavior intervention workshops for parents to assist in their child’s behavior. (October and February). Provide services to families that address behavior modification specific to each students individual needs (self esteem, depression, domestic violence and divorce.) Other services that may be needed to ensure academic excellence; vision and hearing, immunization, physical evaluations, medication dispensing, and 504 medical referrals . Parents/ Families October 2018 thru May 2019 Parents/ Families Parents/ Families October 2018 thru Feb. 2019 Sept. 2018 thru May 2019 Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Teachers, Guidance Counselor, Parent Coordinator, Leadership Program facilitator (CBO) Teachers Teachers, Guidance Counselor, Psychologist Teachers, Guidance counselor, Related Service Providers, Harlem Hospital PA, and Community Based Organization’s (CBO) 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. The Leadership Program (CBO: 21st Century Grant) Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Per session for teachers and guidance counselor 2018-19 SCEP-FL 35   Supervisor Per Session Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant X 21st Century School Achievement Funding X C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019 we will provide students, parents, and staff with a survey as to School Culture with a 10% increase in satisfactory responses. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Family, Student and Teacher Surveys Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 36  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) After school, during the school day, and Saturday Academic Academy. After school, during the school day, and Saturday Academic Academy. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Fundations, I Ready, Imagine Learning, Great Leaps, S.P.I.R.E. and Renaissance Reading Program. Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Small group instruction (Push in/Pull out) One to one instruction Go Math Tier III intervention, I Ready, and Great Leaps. Small group instruction (Push in/Pull out) One to one instruction Science Weekly Lab Lessons, Amplify science remedial resources, My Own, and STEM after school Club Small group instruction (Push in/Pull out) Friday STEM Academy during and the school day. One to one instruction Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) All students performing below the median scale score between a level 2/partially proficient and a Level 3/proficient on a grade 3-8 English language arts (ELA) or mathematics state assessment. All students performing below the median scale score between a level 2/partially proficient and a Level 3/proficient on a grade 3-8 English language arts (ELA) or mathematics state assessment. All students performing below the median scale score between a level 2/partially proficient and a Level 3/proficient on a grade 3-8 English language arts (ELA) or mathematics state assessment. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 37  Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Project Based Learning (PBL) Units of study, Renaissance non- fiction reading program, My Own, Journalism Club, and International Club. Mediation groups, peer to peer mediation, counseling, bullying prevention programs and Restorative Justice Program. All students performing below the median scale score between a level 2/partially proficient and a Level 3/proficient on a grade 3-8 English language arts (ELA) or mathematics state assessment. Students who visit the guidance suite for crisis intervention, SAVE room three times within a month, students who have recently had a change in living arrangements (death in family, divorce, homeless, etc.) Small group instruction (Push in/Pull out) After school, during the school day, and Friday's. One to one instruction Individual student, family, and small group counseling. After school and during the school day. Class Restorative circle meetings. Town Hall grade weekly meetings. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 38  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 117 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. We plan to have a meeting with parents of Students In Temporary Housing in October to discuss the importance of attendance, communication (phone numbers and contacts), and school support service partners. We will also provide school supplies and uniforms to the families. Uniforms, School Supplies, Cultural trips (theatre, museums, etc) Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). n/a 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 39  n/a 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. n/a 2018-19 SCEP-FL 40  Section 8: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. We promote lifelong learning and the development of all staff. Many professional development opportunities are available to new and experienced teachers and teaching assistants (paraprofessionals). These activities are designed to improve the quality of classroom instruction; enable individuals to grow professionally; introduce practitioners to the practical applications of research-validated strategies; and help teachers meet their license and salary differentials. Some of these activities are school-based while others are Citywide and District specific. We provide math PD for teaches around Lucy West mathematical reasoning and discourse, Teachers College Writing Project, Data Inquiry, Project Based Learning, Guided Reading, and Lesson Planning and curriculum development. New teachers enter the teaching profession facing many challenges. We have a mentoring program that is aligned with the NYC Department of Education where the primary goal of effective mentoring is to put systems in place that acknowledge these challenges and simultaneously support new teachers to quickly develop their skills and expertise to become effective practitioners who have a positive impact on student achievement in their very first year of teaching. We also participate in a mentoring program by New Teacher Mentoring Project where the mentor, mentee, and principal receive professional development specific to coaching and development of new teachers, teachers with less than 3 years experience, and/or new teachers to NYCDOE. The United Federation of Teachers (UFT) union representatives also provide information session for teachers and para professionals to ensure that they are working toward satisfying the required levels and qualifications, and professional development hours to maintain and satisfy their license requirements. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Ongoing professional development for all pedagogues and administration will take place during school, after school, weekends, and summer sessions. These professional development activities will focus on teacher effectiveness to improve instruction so that students will meet State Standards and academic achievement. Our teachers will receive professional development around Math metacognition and discourse, Teacher's College Writing project, and Fundations. Paraprofessionals will receive professional development from our Manhattan Support Center and United 2018-19 SCEP-FL 41  Federation of Teachers (UFT) professional development office. Administration and coaches will receive professional development via District Principal Facilitator Leader (PFL) and Relay GSE program. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. n/a 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). n/a Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). We have two full time 3 K classes and three full time Pre k classes. We use comprehensive thematic literacy and math programs to prepare them for pre k and kindergarten. CS 200 will utilize The New York State 3k and Pre kindergarten Foundation for the Curriculum . This carefully developed early learning expectation is linked to K-12 standards. This framework focuses on the learning and development of the whole child. The 3K and Pre K program has established early learning standards – what children should know and be able to do before pre k and kindergarten entry. The New York State Pre kindergarten Foundation for the Common Core is organized into five broad developmental and interrelated domains: Approaches to Learning; Physical Development and Health; Social and Emotional Development, Communication, Language, and Literacy; and Cognition and Knowledge of the World. We will collaborate with CBOs of early childhood schools in the area to ensure early intervention services for our incoming pre k students. CS 200 will conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, social and emotional development, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, ENL strategies, and accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home. In May, we invite families to tour our Pre k and Kindergarten classrooms. We also set aside time during the day for 3k and Pre K teachers to spend time in the Pre k and Kindergarten classrooms to acclimate the students to the routines and flow of the day of Pre k and Kindergarten students. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments 2018-19 SCEP-FL 42  Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. CS 200’s Professional development (PD) committee meet monthly. The team examines unit and lesson modifications, analyze and create assessments and end of unit PBL projects rubric. This committee consists of administrators, coaches, a general education teacher, and students with special needs teacher, Grade leaders, an English as a new Language (ENL) specialist, Students With Disabilities (SWD) teacher, and Early Childhood specialist. Our grade level teacher teams meet weekly to look at student work, curriculum units, and lesson plans to create rubrics, check list, exit slips and end of week assessments. Our Manhattan Borough Early Childhood curriculum support liaison provides our 3K and Pre K teachers with monthly grade level and individual Professional Development in regards to 3 k and Pre K assessments. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (SCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) x x x x x n/a Column B Section Reference(s) 5b,c,d,e 5a,b,c,d 5a,b,c,d 5a 5a,c n/a Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Title I Part A (Basic) Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal 253,045 16,979 85,813 122,065 12,366 0 2018-19 SCEP-FL 43  Tax Levy (FSF) Local 2,404,151 x 5a,b,c,d,e 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/SCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the 2018-19 SCEP-FL 44  participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG or SIF funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 45  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. The James McCune Smith CS200, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students The James McCune Smith CS 200 will support parents and families of Title I students by: ●providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; ●providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ●providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 46  ●sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ●providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ●actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ●support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ●maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ●conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ●provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g. ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 47  ●host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Elementary and Secondary Act (ESSA); ●schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ●translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ●conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● Holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● Hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● Establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● Encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● Developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● Providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) The James McCune Smith CS200, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will 2018-19 SCEP-FL 48  share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● Using academic learning time efficiently; ● Respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● Implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● Offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● Providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Elementary and Secondary (ESSA) Act; I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● Conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● Convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● Arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● Respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● Providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● Involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 49  ● Providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● Ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● Ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● Notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● Arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● Planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences, Family literacy, STEM; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● Creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● Assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● Sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● Supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● Ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● Advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Elementary Secondary Education Ac (ESSA) and Title I programs; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 50  II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● Monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● Ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● Check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● Set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● Promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● Encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● Volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● Participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● Communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● Respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● Become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● Participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● Take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● Share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities 2018-19 SCEP-FL 51  ● Attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● Complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● Follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● Show respect for myself, other people and property; ● Try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● Always try my best to learn. Addendum: Community School Partnerships Directions: The Community School (CS) strategy is directly aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. Community Schools bring schools and community partners together and integrate academics, health, youth development, and family engagement to provide students with the tools and opportunities they need to succeed. The Core Services in Community Schools are Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness. Part 1 – Community School Partnerships Goal(s) How is the CS strategy integrated into academic instruction at your school, and what impact has it had on student academic outcomes? We have a collaboration with Community Schools Leadership program. The Leadership program provides an after school program where the students participate in academic remedial and enrichment programs. The Leadership program partners with CS 200 to provide Saturday ESL and academic intervention classes for 100 students in grades 2 through 5. The partnership and grant funding have contributed to an improvement in our ELA results:  3rd Grade in 2018, scored below the New York City Average in ELA by: -8% iles which was better than the 3rd Grade in 2017 -16% iles and better than the 3rd Grade in 2016 -13% iles  4th Grade in 2018, scored below the New York City Average in ELA by: -5% iles which was better than these students did in 2017 -16% iles Change from 2016 11% iles  5th Grade in 2018, scored below the New York City Average in ELA by: -9% iles which was better than these students did in 2017 2018-19 SCEP-FL 52  in 4th Grade, they were below the City ELA Average by: -14% iles Change from 2017 5% iles Indicate the summative goal(s) of the Community School for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. By June 2019 we hope to increased our attendance from 87.3 % to 92% by creating an Arts enrichment after school and Saturday program for 250 SWD, ELL, and general ed students grades k - 5. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Community School Annual Goal(s): How will achieving your Community School Goal(s)--in Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness--support your academic goals for students? By increasing our attendance percentages our students will benefit from more instructional time which will result in student academic achievement as measured by the ELA and Math state exams. Part 2 – Community School Partnerships Core Services Action Plan Part 2a. Identify the Community-based Organization (CBO) partnerships that you will develop in ELT, Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness, their target student population(s), and scope of the services provided. As well as supporting schools’ supportive environment and attendance work, CBOs should be helping to support your school’s instructional focus. CBO Partnership Leadership Part 3 – Budget and Resource Alignment Target Population K-5th grade SWD, ELL, and general education students Scope of Service SY18-19 SMART Goal Sports and Arts enrichment and Academic Intervention and enrichment 30% increase in state exam results for all students who attend the program. Part 3a. Indicate resources your Community Partnership will leverage to achieve your summative SMART goal(s) and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We will provide tennis, basket ball, soccer, double dutch, fashion arts, dance, fashion, and academic courses in math, reading, STEM, and writing Monday through Saturday. We will employee trainers through the Leadership program to provide instruction for our sports and arts enrichment program and we will hire teachers, per session, to provide academic remedial and enrichment classes.. Part 3b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 53  Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside X 21st Century SIG Grant School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 3c. Describe how the school will partner with the Lead CBO to do the following: 1. Community Schools are expected to partner with a community-based partner organization (CBO) and together with members of the School Leadership Team, hire a Community School Director. The Director will lead implementation of the asset and needs assessment process, and other critically important coordinating activities. Indicate how you will leverage this aspect of the work. Community Schools are expected to personalize the needs of all students, through strategic programming and services, as determined by the asset and needs assessment, and must also offer Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and mental health programming. In completing this section, ensure that you think about how: (1) the right services are provided to the right students and families at the right time; and (2) how you will seamlessly coordinate services with instructional programming happening throughout and outside of the school day. Indicate how you will implement this work, and describe other programming you anticipate to be in place to strengthen this initiative. Community Schools are expected to emerge as Partnership Schools, which are places where parents and families feel welcome, actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. Monthly meetings and Community School Forums engaging families and community stakeholders will be a critical part of this family engagement strategy. Describe how you will implement this aspect of the work. Community School Principals are expected to meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. Data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter - and training will be available for schools to use. Indicate how you will implement this aspect of the work. 2. 3. 4. The 21St Century grant Leadership Director will work with the parent coordinator, principal and assistant principal to schedule all programs. Also, all parties mentioned will collaborate to design all programs. We will provide after school and Saturday enrichment programs in Basketball, Soccer, Tennis, Fashion Arts, Double Dutch, Dance, and Drumming. Our academic academy will consist of academic intervention, enrichment, and ELL programs. We will provide ESL classes for our families in our Friday morning and Saturday Parent ELL Academy. We will meet weekly to plan daily calendar's and programs for our students and their families. Our SLT team will collaborate with the Community Schools team to ensure that the work is implemented. Part 4 – Community School Partnerships Oversight Part 4a. Key Staff and Partners 1. Name and describe the scope of involvement of all community partners working in the school (include partners supporting ELT, counseling, enrichment, etc.) 2. Name the members of your Community School Team and how meetings will be organized and structured to engage all stakeholders and be focused on results. 3. Explain data strategies including the use of the data sorter, and steps that the school will take to ensure that the appropriate interventions are provided to the right students 2018-19 SCEP-FL 54  The members of the Community School Team are, The Principal, the Leadership Director, the parent coordinator, the guidance counselor, the assistant principal, the ENL teacher/coordinator, two classroom teachers, and two parent representative. Part 4b. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the Community School program. We will need staff for our academic and enrichment programs that are experienced in the area in which they will serve the students and families. We need skilled soccer, basketball, tennis, and double Dutch coaches. We will also need a music teacher that specializes in drumming. Part 4c. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. We will begin our enrichment program the first week of October. Our academic and Saturday academy will begin October 21, 2018 and end June 2019. Part 4d. Mental Health Work Plan Separate from this S/CEP, schools will complete a Mental Health Work Plan that will become an addendum to this document. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 55  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): K 6 1 7 2 8 3 9 4 10 5 11 12 2018-19 SCEP-FL 56  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: supplemented Rationale: The ENL Academy program is designed to help students’ English language skills in the identified components of literacy (reading and writing) and to provide support in the area of mathematics, including the language skills and math skills involved. These areas were identified as a result of an analysis of the spring 2018 NYSESLAT and the spring New York State ELA and Math exam results, with the help of the ELL Data Analysis tool. Students will receive individualized instruction for writing and reading comprehension in the content areas, aligned with the Common Core Standards. The program will improve students’ English language arts skills through differentiated instruction and strategies. ENL students will develop the ability to listen, speak, read, and write in English. The students will also improve their vocabulary and language needed to be successful in the content area of mathematics and will be provided support in the content area of math. English will be the language of instruction, with the students’ native languages used for support and peers helping each other for translation and support. Picture dictionaries, bilingual glossaries, and visuals will be placed in the classroom for support with vocabulary. Subgroups and grade levels of students to be served: Approximately 30 students in grades 2-5 will participate in the ELL Academy program. The program will include students with the English language proficiency levels of Entering, Emerging, Transitioning, and Expanding according to the spring 2018 NYSESLAT. The students include the ELL subgroups of newcomer ENLs, developing ELLs and ELLs with disabilities. These students were chosen based on their spring 2018 NYSESLAT and NY State ELA and Math exam results (for those in fourth and fifth grade) so that they may be able to achieve the next level on the NYSESLAT and improve their achievement of the New York State ELA and Math exams. The students will receive instruction in two classes: one bridge 4rd/5th grade class and one bridge 2nd/3rd grade class. There will be approximately 15 students in each class. Schedule and duration: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 57  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The ENL Academy program began October 18, 2018 and will run through May 2019 for a total of 82 weekday sessions and 27 Saturday sessions. The instructional hours are 3:15 to 5:15 pm on Tuesday, 2:40 to 4:30 pm on Wednesday and Thursday, and 9:00 am to 11:00 am on Saturday. (Note: CS 200 is a conceptually consolidated school and funding will be supplemented from other sources (Leadership Program thur our 21st Century Grant). During the week, students will engage in small group instruction, as well as instruction delivered through the online programs English in a Flash, iReady, and myOn. On Saturdays, the students will engage in small group instruction, as well as instruction delivered through the online programs English in a Flash, iReady, and myOn. After instruction ends, they will then be able to participate in enrichment clubs offered through the 21st Century Program. Language of Instruction: English will be the language of instruction, with the students’ native languages used for support and peers helping each other for translation and support. Picture dictionaries, bilingual glossaries, and visuals will be placed in the classroom for support with vocabulary. # and types of certified teachers: Instruction will be provided by 2 teachers. One teacher is ENL certified and the other holds a bilingual certification. These teachers will be working in the ENL Academy both during the week and on Saturdays . In addition, a special education teacher (paid with funding outside of this program) will be available to support ELLs with disabilities during the weekday sessions. The administrator on site will be provided at no cost to the program as there is another program on site at the times of the ENL Academy. Further, CS 200 is a conceptually consolidated school and, therefore, will support this program with other school funding sources. Types of materials: The program will use New York Coach Supporting the Standards for ELA and Mathematics instruction. In ELA, this program focuses on reading comprehension skills in order to help students reach Common Core standards in English. The program builds foundational skills to help students access grade-level texts in English. The math program focuses on skills and supports students in using English for thinking and speaking about mathematical concepts and skills in mathematical discourse. In addition, the New York Coach Practice exams will be used to prepare the students for the types of language demands they will encounter on the state ELA and Math exams. The students will use i-Ready, a diagnostic tool for reading and mathematics that identifies student needs and provides targeted instruction, as well as ongoing progress monitoring. In the area of reading, i-Ready will support students in phonological awareness, phonics, high-frequency words, vocabulary, and comprehending both literature and non-fiction 2018-19 SCEP-FL 58  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information texts. The program also provides targeted math lessons at an individual level. The students will also be using “MyOn” for access to a leveled digital library. These computer based learning programs are motivating for students to come to the Saturday sessions as many of our students do not have access to computers at home. To further support students during the weekday sessions, an additional teacher (paid with funding outside of the scope of this program) will be working with individual students using Great Leaps, a reading intervention program. We will use both formal and informal assessment tools provided by the i-Ready program, along with informal/teacher designed assessment tools. Frequent observations and conferences with the students will also play an important part of assessment. Individual conferences and small group activities with the students will provide continuous assessment that will determine the growth and deficiencies of each student. In this way, the teachers will closely monitor each student and meet their individual needs. The school will be using other funding sources to complement the cost of the program. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Rationale: The Manhattan Field Support Center will provide Professional Development on best practices for supporting ELLs in the classroom to our ENL teacher who will turnkey information for the other teachers. In addition, teachers will receive professional development from "MyOn" and "iReady" in regards to these web-based programs and how teachers can use these programs to support our ELLs in the ENL Academy, both weekday and Saturdays. Session: Rigorous Instruction, Collaborative Teachers, Effective School LeadershipDates: 9/21, 10/24, 12/07, 1/15, 3/07 Time: 8:30 AM - 2:30 PM Session Participants: ENL CoordinatorProvided by: Pedro De La Cruz and the ELL team (Manhattan FSC) Session: "MyOn" for ELLs Date: October 29, 2018 Time: 1 hour and a half (2:30 - 4:00) Session Participants: ENL teacher, content area teachers, bilingual/dual language teachers, classroom teachersProvided by: "myOn" representative 2018-19 SCEP-FL 59  Part C: Professional Development Session: i-Ready for ELLs Date: November 5, 2018 Time: 9:00 am - 12 pm Session Participants: ENL teacher, content area teachers, bilingual/dual language teachers, classroom teachersProvided by: i-Ready representative Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: School Messenger Instruction in English will be provided to parents through a partnership with the 21st Century program. Parents will learn to read, write, listen, and speak in English. This program will service approximately 25 parents of ELL students. The program begins on October 20, 2018 and will continue for the duration of the school year. The classes meet on Saturdays from 9:00 am to 12:00 pm.Parents of ELL students will be invited via letter, in-person outreach, and telephone calls. In addition, the ELL Coordinator and the Literacy and Mathematics Coaches will provide learning sessions to parents. The first session will be November 22, 2018 and will cover the Common Core Standards and the New Language Progressions. Parents of ELLs will be invited to these sessions via letters, phone calls using our Messenger system in the languages of the parents, and in-person outreach. A bilingual member of staff will be available for translation. In addition, the free Translation and Interpretation services will be utilized for parents of other languages. We will be creating a cohort of parents/guardians for our Family Learning Excursions. This group of 10 to 15 parents, including parents of ELLs and English proficient studens, will take a field trip with the goal of experiencing what New York City has to offer families. This trip will help to engage parents of ELLs in the larger school community and create bridges between Enlgish and non-English speaking families. The trip will also encourage parent participation in the school community. By engaging parents in the school community, the education of the students will be positively impacted. Possible trips include to a museum or to a performance. The trip will be lead by the Literacy Coach and the ENL Coordinator/Teacher. Parents of ELLs will be invited to these sessions via letters, phone calls using our Messenger system in the languages of the parents, and in-person outreach. A bilingual member of staff will be available for translation. In addition, the free Translation and Interpretation services will be utilized for parents of other languages. This trip will be funded by a combination of Title III and other available funding. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 60 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 2018-19 SCEP-FL 61  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 05 School Name James McCune Smith Community School Borough Manhattan School Number 200 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Renee Y. Belton Coach Zelvena Cummings ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Abigail Rubin/ ENL Teacher Teacher/Subject Area Guillermin Montano/ DL Teacher/Subject Area Sory Rodriguez/DL Related-Service Provider Carrie Satchell/SETTs Superintendent Danaka Rux Assistant Principal Charles Anuolam Coach Coronnie Crocker School Counselor n/a Parent Marisa Crews Parent Coordinator Garry Fields Field Support Center Staff Member Mary Norwood Other (Name and Title) n/a C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 3 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] D. Student Demographics 2018-19 SCEP-FL 62  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 399 Total number of ELLs 46 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 11.53% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown Program TBE Lang. Spanish TBE TBE DL Spanish School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) over 15 years 2004-2005 K 0 0 1 0 0 2 0 0 3 0 1 4 0 1 0 0 DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 1 0 1 5 1 1 2 6 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 10 0 0 0 11 0 0 0 12 0 0 0 Tot # 1 0 0 3 0 0 4 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? At C.S. 200, we use running records to support a Fountas and Pinnell leveling system, as well as other teacher-designed assessment tools to assess the early literacy skills of our ELLs, including in Spanish for Spanish speakers. Estrellita is used to assess the Spanish phonics level of beginning readers in Spanish. We also use STAR Early Literacy Assessment in English from Renaissance Learning and the iReady program provides on-line diagnostics and support in English. The computer based program myOn provides a literacy formative assessment in English or Spanish. TCRWP is used as a formative writing assessment. Furthermore, we use teacher created assessments, including content specific assessments, exit slips, and progress 2018-19 SCEP-FL 63  monitoring checklists. In the content area of math, students take the Prerequisite Skills Inventory to provide information about any review or intervention students may need. They also take a Beginning-of-Year Test to establish on-grade level skills that students may already understand. Quick Checks are a part of every Go Math chapters and lesson to determine if students need intervention before or during any chapter. Students also complete Mid-Chapter Checkpoints in order to monitor progress. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? CS 200 has Fountas and Pinnell kits in English and Spanish. We have the technology to support the Renaissance and iReady online programs. Time is set aside for these assessments and schedules are adjusted for the required personnel. The data collected from formative assessments informs teacher instruction and differentiation practices. Moreover, it can inform the school's instructional plan directly through our ongoing grade-level common planning meetings. The teachers meet during common prep periods, and professional learning sessions on or off site in order to revise and modify their instructional plans according to the data. The instructional plans consist of curriculum maps, unit plans, and differentiated (whole group, small group, and individualized) lesson plans. Coaches are also available to view lessons and provide supports to teachers. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The teachers administered iReady diagnostic assessments, NYC ELA and Math Performance Tasks, and NYS ELA Common Core Assessments. In math, students take end of chapter tests, a middle-of-year test, and end-of-year test. The NYSESLAT provides information as to the English language growth of the ELLs during the year. The results of the spring NYSESLAT act as a baseline in the fall. For example, if a student scored at the transitioning level in the spring, in the fall that student is scheduled for ENL classes based on that score and has the goal of improving their English skills and, therefore, their NYSESLAT level in the following spring. The Periodic Assessmenet Home Language Arts (HLA) Spanish Performance Assessment task is given to students (including those who are English proficient) in the dual language and transitional bilingual programs. This information will be used to assess progress and areas of need in Spanish. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? We have the technology to support the iReady online program. Time is set aside for these assessments and schedules are adjusted for the required personnel. The teachers meet in grade and multi-leveled inquiry groups during professional learning sessions. The teachers collect, analyze, and share the outcome of all assessment data. The information gathered from the sessions are used to develop varied interventions, such as but not limited to: teacher assigned online iReady tasks for students, flexible strategy and guided reading groups, Great Leap individualized instruction, myOn reading support, and Saturday and Afterschool academic sessions in the ELL Academy. The students are given opportunities via these structures to revisit literacy concepts and skills that they were deficient in order to demonstrate a better understanding of the concepts and skills. The Go Math program includes RTI, Reteach, and Enrichment supports. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] ELLs are provided instruction within the RTI framework. English language development is provided at the Tier 1 instructional level. Students move into Tier 2 and 3 as needed for more targeted and intensive academic support. This extra support can occur in the classroom or in separate settings with targeted instruction. the data that is used to guide instruction within the RTI framework include iReady Diagnostic Assessments in literacy and math, Fountas and Pinnell levels, beginning of the year NYC Performance tasks, individual NYSESLAT modality results, HLA Spanish Performance Assessment results for students with a home language of Spanish in the dual language and TBE classes, as well as the results of teacher created assessments. Additional data can be found in the EDAT tool regarding years of service, attendance, etc. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 64  CS 200 uses data from the NYSESLAT, the NYS ELA exam, the NYS Math exam. The HLA Spanish Performance Assessment is used to assess the Spanish language learning of students (including those who are English proficient) in the Dual Language and TBE programs. The EDAT is used to provide information regarding the specific needs of students regarding content and language modalities, as well as other risk factors, such as attendance and numbers of years of service. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? The ENL Coordinator prints the RLAT and REXH (Exam History Report) and disseminates them to teachers at the beginning of the year. In addition, teachers receive and discuss the data found in the ELL Data Analysis Tool, including the exam results and the warning indicators pertaining to individual students. The ENL teacher, dual language and bilingual teachers, and the assistant principal overseeing the ELL department, meet occasionally throughout the year in order to discuss ELL policy and instruction, amongst other ELL related topics. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. In our ENL program, students with different home languages are provided with instruction in English in order to promote their English language acquisition. English is the common language among the students; however, the home language of students is used when possible to support their learning while emphasizing language acquisition. Ms. Rubin, the ENL teacher, speaks some Spanish. In addition, students with the same home language act as “language buddies” to support each other. Furthermore, we have some home language books, dictionaries, and materials where possible and can use on-line home language supports. The ENL program includes both stand-alone ENL and integrated ENL. Stand-alone ENL aims to develop English language skills to support students in the academic content areas. Integrated ENL develops students' language skills through the content areas. Integrated ENL is delivered by the ENL teacher, Ms. Rubin (ESL certified), and a certified content area teacher. Both stand-alone ENL and integrated ENL include content area matter and English language instruction using ENL methodologies. The amount of time that each student receives instruction through stand-alone ENL and/or integrated ENL is determined by NYSESLAT or NYSITELL scores with the amount of time the student receives stand-alone ENL decreasing as the student's English proficiency as demonstrated on the NYSESLAT (on NYSITELL for new arrivals) increases. The ENL program groups its students somewhat homogeneously in that the groupings are between two contiguous grades and an attempt is made to group students with approximately similar language proficiency levels. However, there is a span of language proficiency levels in each group and, in the case of integrated ENL, students will also be able to work with English proficient students who can serve as a language model. For example, there is a integrated ENL group that contains students in grades 1 and 2, with Entering, Emerging, Transitioning, and Expanding level proficiencies as per the NYSESLAT. During stand-alone ENL instruction, the group meets with the Entering, Emerging and Transitioning level students. ENL is taught through academic content. Teachers utilize group discussions, presentations, one-to-one direct instruction and small group instruction. Furthermore, tasks are modified based on the levels, needs, and interests of the students. b. TBE program. If applicable. In our Transitional Bilingual Education (TBE) program, instruction is provided in two languages: the language spoken at home, in this case Spanish, and English. In our ICT TBE program, as students develop their English proficiency, the time allocated to learning in the home language shifts to mostly learning in English until the student is ready to enter 2018-19 SCEP-FL 65  an English-only mainstream program. In the Entering stages of English language development, 75% of instructional time takes place in the students' home language, Spanish, and 25% in English. As the student develops fluency in English, the amount of instructional time in English increases. At the Emerging level, instruction is given in Spanish 60% of the time and 40% of the time in English. At the Transitioning level, instruction is given in Spanish 50% of the time and in English 50% of the time. At the Expanding level, instruction in Spanish is given 25% of the time and instruction in English is 75% of the time. Instruction is given to help each ELL attain proficiency in English and to help each ELL meet or exceed Common Core Learning Standards. Our ELLs are taught using a blend of HLA, ENL, and ELA in order to provide these students with a grade appropriate curriculum that is common core aligned. Instruction in the HLA helps to develop appreciation for the students’ history and culture. ELLs receive the mandated minutes of stand-alone and integrated ENL for their specific language proficiency level and language development needs. Students receive 180 minutes of Home Language Arts per week. The number of minutes the students receive in bilingual content area subjects varies as to the students' English proficiency levels, from 2 bilingual content area subjects for Entering and Emerging students to a minimum of 1 bilingual content area subject for Transitioning and Expanding students. For Entering students, grade-level instruction in the content areas is provided in the students' home language so that the student maintains academic progress while developing English proficiency. For students at other proficiency levels, content area instruction - language arts, mathematics, science, and social studies - is taught in the home language and in English using ESL strategies. Students in the TBE program are grouped in a class that bridges grades and contains heterogeneous English proficiency levels. Just as in the ENL classes, within a TBE class, assessment data is used to group students based on their levels in each content area taught. ENL is taught through academic content. Teachers utilize group discussions, presentations, one-to-one direct instruction and small group instruction. Furthermore, tasks are modified based on the levels, needs, and interests of the students. c. DL program. If applicable. In our Dual Language Program, students are taught using the Roller-Coaster Model where students are taught in one language in the morning and the other language in the afternoon. The language of the afternoon is then used the following morning, and so on. The goal is for students to develop proficiency in their home language and to develop proficiency in the new language as well. Students also develop positive cross-cultural attitudes, behaviors, and skills that will help them function in a global society. Students learn with and from each other and serve as linguistic role models for each other with the goal of becoming bilingual. Students in the Dual Language program are given instruction in a grade-level appropriate curriculum to help them meet or exceed Common Core Language Standards. The students in our Dual Language program are also expected to comprehend, speak, read, and write in both languages, English and Spanish, upon their completion of our Dual Language program. The ELL students in the program receive the mandated minutes of stand-alone ENL and integrated ENL as required by their NYSESLAT score and English proficiency level. DL programs are self-contained and grouped as a class that contains heterogeneous English proficiency levels. Just as in the TBE and ENL classes, within a Dual Language class, assessment data is used to group students based on their levels in each content area taught. ENL is taught through academic content. Teachers utilize group discussions, presentations, one-to-one direct instruction and small group instruction. Furthermore, tasks are modified based on the levels, needs, and interests of the students. Currently, the fifth grade dual language class is 50% ELL. The third and fourth grade class is comprised of approximately two thirds ELLs. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? The Dual Language program is taught 50% in English and 50% in Spanish using the roller coaster model. ELL students receive their integrated ENL instruction during English language content area instruction (ELA, Math, Science, or Social Studies). Stand-alone ENL instruction takes place during the ELA and/or skill building instructional times. ELA is differentiated for ELLs using ESL methodologies. Students at the Entering level of English proficiency receive 180 minutes of stand-alone ENL and 180 minutes of integrated ENL for a total of 360 minutes per week. At the Emerging level of English proficiency, students receive 90 minutes of stand-alone ENL and 180 minutes of integrated ENL. In addition, they have 90 minutes of ENL that may 2018-19 SCEP-FL 66  be either a stand-alone or integrated for a total of 360 minutes per week. Transitioning level students receive 90 minutes of integrated ENL and 90 additional minutes of either stand-alone or integrated ENL for a total of 180 minutes per week. How flexible minutes for students at the Emerging and Transitioning level are delivered will take into consideration the students’ academic and language needs. Students at the Expanding level receive 90 minutes of integrated ENL per week. Teachers in this program use the Estrellita Phonics program in Spanish, Spanish language libraries, the ReadyGen Biliteracy Pathway for literacy, Go Math materials in Spanish, and TC Writing is taught in English and Spanish. In addition, ELLs use the English in a Flash program to develop vocabulary proficiency and the Hampton-Brown Phonics Street Program to target the phonics needs of students in the lower grades. In the beginning of the school year the ENL Coordinator provides teachers with information on student’s levels and time allocations. The teacher uses that information, in addition to classroom data from different sources (benchmarks, formal and informal assessments, classroom observations, Running Records, i-Ready, Renaissance, etc.), to modify lessons and activities that will ensure that students are receiving the mandated number of instructional minutes. The dual language teachers are certifiedwith bilingual extensions.In the Transitional Bilingual program, the language of instruction transitions from the home language (Spanish) to English depending on the students English proficiency (based on the NYSESLAT/NYSITELL scores) and the intellectual and linguistic demands of specific subject matter. For students in the Entering and Emerging levels, students receive a minimum of bilingual instruction in 2 content areas. Transitioning and Expanding level students receive a minimum of bilingual instruction in 1 content area. Students receive integrated ENL during content area (ELA, Math, Science, and Social Studies) instruction taught in English. The students receive stand-alone ENL during ELA and skill building time. Students at the Entering level of English proficiency receive 180 minutes of stand-alone ENL and 180 minutes of integrated ENL for a total of 360 minutes per week. At the Emerging level of English proficiency, students receive 90 minutes of stand-alone ENL and 180 minutes of integrated ENL. In addition, they have 90 minutes of ENL that may be either a stand-alone or integrated for a total of 360 minutes per week. Transitioning level students receive 90 minutes of integrated ENL and 90 additional minutes of either stand-alone or integrated ENL for a total of 180 minutes per week. How flexible minutes for students at the Emerging and Transitioning level are delivered will take into consideration the students’ academic and language needs. Students at the Expanding level receive 90 minutes of integrated ENL per week. ELA is taught using ESL methodologies. The students also receive 180 minutes of HLA a week. Teachers in this program use the Estrellita Phonics program in Spanish, Spanish language libraries, the ReadyGen Biliteracy Pathway for literacy, Go Math materials in Spanish, and TC Writing is taught in English and Spanish. In addition, ELLs use the English in a Flash program to develop vocabulary proficiency and the Hampton-Brown Phonics Street Program to target the phonics needs of students. As with the Dual Language classes, in the beginning of the school year the ENL Coordinator provides teachers with information on student’s levels and time allocations. The teacher uses that information, in addition to classroom data from different sources (benchmarks, formal and informal assessments, classroom observations, Running Records, i-Ready, Renaissance, etc.), to modify lessons and activities that will ensure that students are receiving the mandated number of instructional minutes. The TBE program is an ICT class with a Spanish speaking special education teacher and a teacher with a bilingual extension. Students in the ENL program receive the required amount of minutes in both stand-alone and integrated ENL. The ENL teacher delivers stand-alone ENL to support the students English language development. The students receive core content area instruction using ESL methodologies and English language development instruction through integrated ENL delivered in a grade-level classroom. The content area through which integrated ENL instruction is delivered varies. Instructional schedules in grade-level classrooms alternate between teaching Math and ELA in the morning. Therefore, depending on the schedule, the ENL teacher may deliver instruction through a different content area (Math, ELA, Social Studies, or Science) thus providing students' language development and support in the different content areas. The ENL teacher and classroom teachers share lesson ideas and meet to discuss the ELL students' needs as well as the curriculum. The ENL teacher periodically meets with teachers in a grade during common planning periods. Students at the Entering level of English proficiency receive 180 minutes of stand-alone ENL and 180 minutes of integrated ENL for a total of 360 minutes per week. At the Emerging level of English proficiency, students receive 90 minutes of stand-alone ENL and 180 minutes of integrated ENL. In addition, they have 90 minutes of ENL that may be either a stand-alone or integrated for a total of 360 minutes per week. Transitioning level students receive 90 minutes of integrated ENL and 90 additional minutes of either stand-alone or integrated ENL for a total of 180 minutes per week. How flexible minutes for students at the Emerging and Transitioning level are delivered will take into consideration the students’ academic and language needs. Students at the Expanding level receive 90 minutes of integrated ENL per week. In the ENL program, the teacher uses the ReadyGen program 2018-19 SCEP-FL 67  for literacy and TC Writing for ENL instruction, focusing on the scaffold strategies for ELLs, the Hampton-Brown Phonics Street Program to target the phonics needs of newcomers, the Go Math ELL piece to support ELLs in their needed math vocabulary and language development. Spotlight on English is used to support language instruction. The ENL program also provides home language materials when available to support the student. In addition, ELLs use the English in a Flash program to develop vocabulary proficiency. These students do not receive home language arts. The program is taught by an ESL certified teacher, common branch teachers, and in some cases, special education teachers. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. C.S. 200 utilizes the city recommended ReadyGen for literacy, TC Writing, and Go Math curricula aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards. This includes the ReadyGen Biliteracy Pathway and Go Math materials in Spanish. Social studies and science are taught through Project Based Learning (PBL). Social Studies is also integrated with literacy. There is a science cluster teacher in the science lab. Content is taught using ESL methodologies to support the learning of the students. These methodologies include but are not limited to images, videos, graphic organizers, class discussions, sentence frames, home language support, and Total Physical Response. In the example of TPR, this method is used with Entering level ELLs to build vocabulary in English, such as verbs and adverbs. This and other strategies help students learn content no matter what language is being used at the time of instruction. As in the SIOP method, teachers plan for a language learning objective as well as a content learning objective in their lessons. QTEL strategies are used to help increase opportunities for the participation of ELLs in the classroom. Students are grouped heterogeneously or homogeneously depending on the particular lesson. These strategies are used to support ELLs in the learning of academic content while they develop academic language. Lessons and activites are designed to engage students in all four of the modalities of speaking, listening, reading, and writing. The DL program is designed so that 50% of all content instruction is delivered in English through the roller coaster system, utilizing ESL methodologies, and the other 50% in Spanish. In TBE, instruction in the content areas is delivered in the home language using the Entering: 75% HL, 25% English; Emerging: 60% HL, 40% English; Transitioning: 50% HL, 50% English; Expanding: 25% HL, 75% English model; moreover, they use ESL methodologies to teach all other content delivered in English. In both the DL and TBE programs, ReadyGen and the ReadyGen Biliteracy Pathway are used for literacy, GoMath in English and Spanish is used for math. In the ENL program, specific content areas are taught in English using ESL methodologies, with home language support where possible. Students are supported by the ENL teacher in Project Based Learning, which involves all content areas,as well as specific content lessons in the grade-level classrooms of the students using ESL methodologies during integrated ENL instruction. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? We ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home language through state exams, in-house assessments, and teacher observations. Within the first 10 days of school, Spanish-speaking students who have been identified as ELLs are administered the Spanish LAB. These results can be used to help teachers guide instruction. In the ENL program, books are available in Spanish, French, and Arabic. Same language peers are available and sometimes strategically used to support the learning of students. In addition, myOn and GoMath are available in Spanish. Both myOn and GoMath assess and provided data to teachers on students' ability in their home language. Many students in the ENL program are not able to read in their home language. However, the classroom culture is such that their knowledge of their home language, as well as their cultures, is valued. Teachers in the TBE and Dual Language programs use running records and benchmark assessments to evaluate a students’ home language ability. For example, the Estrellita Spanish Language Phonics program has both initial and end of the year assessments, as well as diagnostic assessments that are used to inform instruction. In addition, students receiving education in their home language who are also in testing grades (the Dual Language and TBE programs) take the HLA Spanish Performance Assessment task and those results are used to help plan and guide instruction. Furthermore, the myOn reading program allows for identified students to be assessed in Spanish. As for assessing ELLs in content, students are provided assessments in their home language or provided with oral translation when appropriate. Students also have access to language glossaries when those glossaries are available in their home language. Furthermore, GoMath assessments are available in Spanish. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 68  5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status (a) Students who have been identified as having an interrupted formal education (SIFE) are provided with targeted instruction in listening, speaking, reading, and writing. SIFE students participate in the school curriculum with additional support and materials. Teachers use differentiation to tailor instruction based on individual student needs. If needed, students are taught the foundations of literacy while providing the student access to academic concepts. Teachers may use explicit direct instruction, one-on-one instruction, and small groups for these students. SIFE students are offered services targeted to their needs by certified ESL, bilingual, dual language and classroom teachers with training and experience in working with these students. SIFE students use the English in a Flash program to develop vocabulary proficiency. Oxford Content Picture dictionaries are available in all classes. In the ENL program, the teacher uses the ReadyGen curriculum for literacy and TC Writing in ENL instruction, focusing on the scaffold strategies for ELLs, Spotlight on English is used to support language instruction, the Hampton-Brown Phonics Street Program to target the phonics needs of SIFE students and new arrivals, the Go Math RTI piece to support ELLs in their needed math vocabulary and language development, and various other supports such as iReady and myOn on-line tools. The ENL program also provides home language materials when available to support the student. Students in the dual language and bilingual classrooms are provided with support in their home language to address the gaps in their home language education and to support their learning of English. In addition to the ReadyGen and Go Math materials in English, teachers in these programs use the Estrellita Phonics program in Spanish, Spanish language libraries, the ReadyGen Biliteracy Pathway, Go Math materials in Spanish, and TC Writing is taught in English and Spanish. ELLs who are identified as SIFE also receive a variety of intervention programs designed to meet their needs, including small-group, targeted instruction supplemented by Promethean Boards, which many classrooms are equipped with, and instruction within the Response to Intervention Framework (RTI). These students are provided with content area instruction targeted to address their learning gaps as identified by assessments, including the Spanish LAB, HLA Spanish Performance Assessment, the NYC Performance Task, iReady, GoMath, and teacher designed assessments. In order to address the socio-emotional needs of these students, teachers work to create a positive and supportive environment for them in the school and in the classroom. These students may need the support of a same language buddy not only of for language support, but also in learning school behaviors and culture. It is also important for teachers to recognize and value the knowledge and experiences that the student already possesses. (b) Newcomers participate in the school curriculum with additional support and materials. Newcomers in the TBE setting will continue to receive the majority (75 or 60%) of instruction in Spanish while they are acquiring English. The ratio of Spanish to English instruction will decrease according to their English proficiency levels. Moreover, they will continue to be provided with instruction such as scaffold reading in English to develop reading and writing skills. Students in the dual language and bilingual classrooms are provided with support in their home language to address the gaps in their home language education and to support their learning of English. Teachers in these programs use the Estrellita Phonics program in Spanish, Spanish language libraries, the ReadyGen Biliteracy Pathway, Go Math materials in Spanish, and TC Writing is taught in English and Spanish. Newcomers in a monolingual setting will continue to receive ENL services, with the number of mandated instructional minutes according to their levels of English proficiency. In the ENL classroom, the teacher uses the ReadyGen program for literacy and TC Writing in ENL instruction, focusing on the scaffold strategies for ELLs, Spotlight on English is used to support language instruction, the Hampton-Brown Phonics Street Program to target the phonics needs of newcomers, the Go Math ELL piece to support ELLs in their needed math vocabulary and language development. The ENL program also provides home language materials when available to support the student. In addition, ELLs in all programs use the English in a Flash program to develop vocabulary proficiency, myOn to develop literacy in English and Spanish, and iReady for differentiated instruction in reading and math. In all three programs, teachers use differentiated to tailor instruction based on individual student needs. If needed, students are taught the foundations of literacy while providing the student access to academic concepts. Teachers may use 2018-19 SCEP-FL 69  explicit direct instruction and one-on-one grouping of students. Oxford Content Picture Dictionaries are available as support in all classrooms. As with SIFE students, teachers must address the socio-emotional needs of these students by creating a positive and supportive environment for them in the school and in the classroom. These students benefit from the support of a same language buddy, not only of for language support, but also in learning school behaviors and culture. It is also important for teachers to recognize and value the knowledge and experiences that the student already possesses, including providing materials and opportunities to use their home language. Newly enrolled ELLs are partnered with a language buddy, (a student speaking the same language), to assist them in transitioning into our school. We have an International Student Club and members make themselves available to support newly arrived ELLs as they transition into the new school. (c.) In the case of developing ELLs who have been receiving services from 4 to 6 years, the NYSESLAT, as well as other state exams and in-house assessments, will be used to identify specific areas of weakness and the students will be provided with targeted instruction in those areas. Teachers use differentiated instruction to tailor instruction based on individual student needs. These students get a variety of intervention programs designed to meet their needs, including small-group, targeted instruction supplemented by Promethean Boards and instruction within the Response to Intervention Framework (RTI). ELL students participate in the school curriculum with additional support and materials. They are provided with targeted instruction in listening, speaking, reading, and writing. Teachers use differentiated instruction to tailor instruction based on individual student needs, using assessments and classroom observations to guide them. These students use sentence and paragraph frames, graphic organizers, and other supports. ELLs use the English in a Flash program to develop vocabulary proficiency and their literacy skills are evaluated and targeted instruction designed through the Renaissance Learning Program. The myOn program develops literacy in English and Spanish and the iReady program provides differentiated instruction that develops math and reading. In the ENL program, the teacher uses the ReadyGen curriculum for literacy and TC Writing in ENL instruction, focusing on the scaffold strategies for ELLs, Spotlight on English is used to support language instruction, the Hampton-Brown Phonics Street Program to target the phonics needs of these students, the Go Math RTI piece to support ELLs in their needed math vocabulary and language development. The ENL program also provides native language materials when available and necessary to support the student. Students in the dual language and bilingual classrooms are provided with support in their native language to address the gaps in their native language education and to support their learning of English. Teachers in these programs use the Estrellita Phonics program in Spanish, Spanish language libraries, the ReadyGen Biliteracy Pathway, Go Math materials in Spanish, and TC Writing is taught in English and Spanish. As for socio-emotional support, these students are beginning to become the same language buddies for students with more limited English. This is a motivating factor that encourages the student by placing value in what they do know as they continue to develop their English language skills. (d.) For long term ELLs, those having completed 6 years of services, the NYSESLAT, other state exams, and in-house assessments will be used to identify specific areas of weakness and the students will be provided with targeted instruction in those areas. As well, information from the ELL Data Analysis Tool will be used in help understand any other factors impacting these students' learning. Teachers use differentiated instruction to tailor instruction based on individual student needs. These students get a variety of intervention programs designed to meet their needs, including small-group, targeted instruction supplemented by Promethean Boards, which most classrooms are equipped with, and instruction within the Response to Intervention Framework (RTI). Long term ELL students are provided with targeted instruction in listening, speaking, reading, and writing. Teachers use differentiated instruction to tailor instruction based on individual student needs, using assessments and classroom observations to guide them. These students continue to use graphic organizers, sentence and paragraph frames where necessary. In the ENL program, the ReadyGen curriculum for literacy and TC Writing in ENL instruction, focusing on the scaffold strategies for ELLs, Spotlight on English is used to support language instruction, the Hampton-Brown Phonics Street Program to target the phonics needs of these students, the Go Math RTI piece to support ELLs in their needed math vocabulary and language development. As mentioned for other subgroups, the myOn program develops literacy in English and Spanish and iReady provides differentiated instruction in math and reading. The ENL classroom also provides home language materials when available and necessary to support the student. Students in the dual language and bilingual classrooms are provided with support in their home language to address the gaps in their home language education and to support their learning of 2018-19 SCEP-FL 70  English. Teachers in these programs use the Estrellita Phonics program in Spanish, Spanish language libraries, the ReadyGen Biliteracy Pathway, Go Math materials in Spanish, and TC Writing in English and Spanish. In order to address the socio-emotional support these students may need, they are encouraged to act as same language buddies and as mentors for new arrivals and students with more limited English proficiency. This values what they have learned and recognizes their progress as a way to encourage their continued learning. e. Those students reaching proficiency on the NYSESLAT will continue to receive transitional support for two years with 90 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA or other content area. These Former ELLs continue to receive extended time on all assessments. As it pertains to the state math exams, we continue to offer the option to take the exam in their home language. We invite them to continue enrollment in our Dual Language classes on the English Proficient registers. In all three programs, these students are provided with high-level and challenging activities. They are provided continued support as necessary in the areas of reading comprehension, analyzing questions or problems, and formulating answers. Teachers continue to support these students in developing their vocabulary. These students continue to act as same language buddies as a way of recognizing their language achievement and as a way of providing the needed language support for students with more limited English proficiency. These students reinforce their own learning as they are able to discuss concepts with more limited English proficient, as well as English proficient peers. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Special Education teachers understand the double needs of their ELL-SWD students, i.e., the deficits related to the student’s particular disability as well as their needs related to English acquisition. After careful review and consideration of each IEP goal, Special Educators determine the special education strategy or the ENL strategy that can assist the student to reach the IEP goal while facilitating their use and understanding of English. Strategies might include: repeated presentation, drill and review of key concepts, visual models, visual organizers, distraction free environments, peer mentoring, etc. Teachers of ELL-SWDs support these students’ access to grade-level materials and academic content with the use of special education and ENL strategies, such as scaffolding. The SETTS teacher uses the SPIRE program for phonics and decoding intervention for students who receive her services. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? As with all students with disabilities, the full continuum of special education services is considered for each student. Once the student is placed into the Least Restrictive Environment (LRE) that will meet his/her special needs, the special education teacher makes the modifications and accommodations needed to address disability related needs as well as English acquisition needs as described in #6 above. All curricular choices are based on the individual student’s IEP and mandated amount of English instruction. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Targeted Intervention programs: ELLs benefit from many intervention programs designed to meet their needs, including small-group, targeted instruction supplemented by Promethean Boards and instruction within the Response to Intervention Framework (RTI). ELA: In addition to the targeted ELA instruction offered in the after school programs mentioned above, we use the Renaissance Learning Program to evaluate literacy skills of students and design instructional plans. ELLs also use the English in a Flash component of the Renaissance program to help develop vocabulary in English. The iReady program provides on-line diagnostics and support in English. The myOn on-line program consists of readers and progress monitoring which provide leveled literacy opportunities in English and Spanish. Great Leaps Intervention Program is used with students individually. The literacy coach offers on-going support thought individual and common grade planning meetings. The Ready Up! Intervention 2018-19 SCEP-FL 71  program is also used for targeted support. The Hampton-Brown Phonics Street is used to teach phonics and phonemic awareness in English. Math: We use the city’s Go Math curriculum, which is available in Spanish in the Dual Language and Bilingual classrooms. Some teachers use the Great Leaps program to support students individually. The math coach provides on-going support during individual and common grade planning meetings. Students also use the iReady online instructional program. Social Studies: The social studies program adheres to the NY State Common Core Standards and the Scope and Sequence. It follows an integrated multi-interdisciplinary model that addresses both ELA and social studies. Social Studies is also taught within Project Based Learning. Instruction uses various methods, including the four modalities, video, art and various media, to teach social studies to ELLs. Science: The science program uses the Foss Curriculum, which provides Spanish language and ENL support. We have a science lab that students visit with their classes to conduct various experiments with a science cluster teacher. Science is also taught within Project Based Learning. Science, math, and social studies books in Spanish are in the bilingual and dual language classroom libraries and available in the school to support students’ whose native language is Spanish. In addition, the ENL, bilingual and dual language classrooms teach English language vocabulary and skills through the content areas of social studies, math, and science. All classrooms have Oxford Content Picture Dictionaries and students are provided with language glossaries as needed. Furthermore, the ENL classroom and utilizes Vocabulary Links materials for vocabulary support across the content areas. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Based on the assessment data, the instructional teams realized the need for a uniform comprehensive researched based literacy language development program beginning with the 2017-2018 school year. The program must focus on the five pillars of reading. We will be utilizing Fundations. CS 200 will also add a Universal Literacy Coach to support students in grades K to 2. In addition, we will be using Project Based Learning (PBL) in order to provide more real life experiences for students with the goal of deepening their knowledge. PBLs will be planned to include cross cultural learning experiences, including a study of Africa in grade 3 in which families will be invited to participate. For example, families can come in to teach students about the meaning of different African hair wraps, about family structure, and about their cultures. Trips will include cultural visits, such as to museums and restaurants. PBL will be used in grades K to 5 for a minimum of one learning cycle. For the others learning cycles, teachers will write their own curriculum using EngageNY, ReadyGen, and Go Math for support. We also plan to have additional professional learning sessions (onsite/offsite) geared toward strategic best teaching practices for ELLs. We also plan to have additional professional learning sessions (onsite/offsite) geared toward strategic best teaching practices for ELLs. Furthermore, we have purchased additional Oxford Picture Dictionaries to be used to support the ELLs in all content areas. Finally, we have purchased Promethean boards so that all of our classrooms will be able to use this technology to support our students. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs are specifically targeted to receive all benefits available in our school including small-group, targeted-instruction supplemented by Promethean Boards, which most classrooms are equipped with, and instruction within the Response to Intervention Framework (RTI). iPads and notebook computers are also available in order to supplement instruction. CS 200 also has the Leadership Program after school where the students participate in, among other things, fashion and arts, soccer, tennis, doubledutch, basketball, drumming, dance, visual and creative arts. The ELL Academy provides further targeted instruction to support the language needs of these students after school and on Saturdays. In this program, ELLs are offered services targeted to their needs by certified ESL teachers and classroom teachers with training and experience in working with these students. As an incentive for participation and for further development, students in the Saturday program will also be 2018-19 SCEP-FL 72  able to attend enrichment clubs on Saturday through the Leadership Program. There are also Winter Break and Spring Break Academies to provide support as students prepare to take state exams.Additionally, we have invested in rich instructional material with our ELL students’ success in mind, such as: the ReadyGen and Go Math supports for ELLs; the Hampton-Brown Phonics Street Kit, a complete, systematic phonics instruction program; myOn, which combines technology and literacy in English and Spanish; iReady, which provides differentiated targeted instruction in reading and math; and English in a Flash, part of Renaissance Learning Program, among others. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Ready Gen in English and the Ready Gen Biliteracy Pathway, including the Scaffolding Handbooks and online resources, are used as instructional materials in literacy. Ready Up! Intervention is used to provide additional support to ELLs. Vocabulary support is given to ELLs in the ENL program with Vocabulary Links. In addition, the Hampton-Brown Phonics Street program is used with lower-grade and ELLs who are beginning readers. The ENL teacher has also received some training in Orton-Gillingham and uses it to support the ELLs. Teachers College is used to teach writing. Go Math ENL supports are used to teach math, as are the supports available in Spanish. NYC Social Studies curriculum resources are used to teach social studies. Great Leaps is used by some teachers to provide one-on-one intervention in math and literacy. Spotlight on English is used to support language instruction in the ENL program. As mentioned above, many classrooms are equipped with Promethean Boards in order to provide our students with a variety of rich learning experiences. All classrooms have document readers. Teachers also have access to projectors. Moreover, we have computers in classrooms that can be used to for students to engage in rich and interactive educational activities. We also have a class set of iPads and notebook computers available for teachers to borrow. In addition, students have access to English in a Flash and Accelerated Reader, both part of the technology-based Renaissance Learning program. Other online materials used to support ELLs include myOn (leveled readers in English/Spanish) with ongoing progress monitoring and online resources, the iReady Instructional Program (ELA/Math), and the Ready CCLS Online Toolkit. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? The Dual Language program is designed to provide 50% of the instruction in the home language. HLA instruction is delivered using Spanish language materials to support the ReadyGen curriculum. As in the dual language program, HLA is delivered through ReadyGen Biliteracy Pathway Spanish language materials to support the ReadyGen curriculum in the TBE model. The TC Writing is also taught in Spanish in both programs. Moreover, a literacy block is in place, with intensive reading/writing activities. Students receive native language support according to their specific instructional needs. Also, the DL and TBE programs use Estrellita, a complete Spanish-language phonics/literacy-building program. The online program myOn is available to students in Spanish. Go Math is available in Spanish, as are some components of the Foss science program. The classes have Spanish language libraries that include books across the content areas. In the ENL program, teachers also provide home language support as needed. The teacher communicates in the student’s home language, when possible; in order to make any clarifications, explain expectations, etc. Moreover, ENL and classroom teachers also provide support by grouping or pairing students of the same language background, especially with newly arriving students who need more support in their language. This assists students in understanding content taught in class and enables them to respond in their home language if needed. Home language and English picture dictionaries and picture books and other reading materials are also available in Spanish and in other languages where possible. As mentioned above, the ENL and classroom teachers have access to the math, science, and library materials in Spanish. Teachers aim to provide students with a multicultural and safe environment that supports each student’s culture, language, and individual development. In order to do so, teachers use strategies that can be modified to meet the individual needs of the students. These strategies include, but are not limited to, singing songs, playing games, and reading in the home language. Additionally, it is critical that the families of students are welcomed and respected. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All students receive age and grade-level appropriate instruction and support. Teachers differentiate instruction in small groups as needed to provide appropriate support to students. Students are grouped within the ENL program by English levels 2018-19 SCEP-FL 73  according to the NYSITELL and NYSESLAT, however grade levels and age are always considered. Furthermore, all ELLs receive the appropriate grade level curriculum through ReadyGen, Go Math, science and social studies curricula. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? N/A 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Before the beginning of the school year, newly enrolled ELLs meet the ENL teacher, the Parent Coordinator, the Assistant Principal in charge of the ELL department, and various other school staff in order for the students and families to know who their resources are at school and in order to make them feel welcome. Newly enrolled ELLs are partnered with a language buddy, (a student speaking the same language), to assist them in transitioning into our school. We have an International Student Club and members make themselves available to support newly arrived ELLs as they transition into the new school. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? N/A Language electives are not offered. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? a) Currently, the fifth grade dual language class is 50% ELL. The third and fourth grade class is comprised of approximately two thirds ELLs. Our Dual Language program uses a self-contained, roller coaster model. Further, instruction follows a 50/50 model with half of the day in English and the other half of the day in Spanish. English proficient students and ELLs both learn using this model with students required to use the language being used for instruction at the time. English proficient students and ELLs are fully integrated; however, teachers do differentiate instruction as needed and group students homogeneously as well as heterogeneously, depending on what is most appropriate for the content area she/he is teaching or activity the students are engaging in. b) All content instruction is delivered in both languages, English and Spanish, depending on the day. Guidance is provided as needed and it is based on the students’ levels, needs, and amount of support needed. c) The Dual Language classes are self-contained with one teacher delivering instruction in both languages using the roller coaster model. Teachers alert students to the use of the different languages using various methods. For example, a notice is posted on the door with the language that is being used in the classroom and within the classroom the color blue or black is used for English and the color red for work in Spanish. However, if a student needs support in his/her native language the teacher can work with him/her independently to make sure the student can complete the task. d) Both languages are taught simultaneously, using the roller coaster model. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 74  Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? All school ELL personnel are required to attend at least 3 professional developments specifically for working with ELLs during the school year. These personnel are provided with the professional development to meet the mandated 50% of total hours of ELL training to familiarize them with ESL methodologies and strategies. This training also enhances their appreciation for the students' home languages and cultures and the staff's ability to provide appropriate instructional and support services. The assistant principals, paraprofessionals and parent coordinator, as well as other staff, participate in training provided by the Department of Education's Office of English Language Learners. In addition, we have on-going in-house PD. Sign-in sheets, agendas, and copies of training handouts are retained for future reference. Professional development is offered to teaches of ELLs in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards. These PD's are offered by the OELL, District 5, and in-house PD. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. All personnel, including those who work with ELLs, are constantly attending professional development provided by school coaches, assistant principals, and the Department of Education's Office of ELLs. Sign-in sheets, agendas, and copies of training handouts are retained for future reference. In addition, the coaches, the ENL teacher, and the AP in charge of the ELL department provide in-house pd to teachers and staff. In this way, all teachers receive 15% ELL-specific professional development. The ENL, TBE, and DL program teachers receive 50% ELL-specific professional development through professional development with the Department of Education's Office of ELLs and the literacy and math coaches. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? For potential ELLs that pre-register in the spring, we offer a spring parent orientation in order to welcome them and their parents and to explain the three different program options available should it be determined that their child is eligible for services based on the NYSITELL exam. Parents of new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year are also welcomed and provided information at individual meetings and parent orientations. Teachers meet with parents or guardians of ELLs at least once a year, in addition to parent-teacher conferences, initial parent orientations, quarterly progress meetings, to discuss the goals of the student's program, the student's progress in language development, NYSESLAT/NYSITELL results, and language development needs in the content areas. If the student is in a bilingual or dual language program, their progress in the home language will also be discussed. The student's classroom teacher, as well as ENL teacher if not in the TBE or Dual Language program, should be present in addition to any other relevant staff involved in the student's education. If an interpreter is needed, the DOE's over-the-phone translation services will be used. These meetings can take place during the school's parent engagement time, currently Tuesdays from 2:20 pm until 3:15, or individually scheduled with the teacher(s) and parents or guardians. If parents are unable to attend in person, a conference call is made between the parent or guardian, ENL teacher, and any other teacher. Interpretation is provided when necessary. Records of these meetings are kept by the teachers and a copy is periodically updated in the ELL Critical Documents Binder. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. There are many ways that parents are involved at C.S. 200. We have an active PTA. Workshops and classes are offered to parents. For example, last year a series of workshops were offered to parents by Ms. Cummings (Math Coach), Ms. Crocker 2018-19 SCEP-FL 75  (Literacy Coach), and Ms. Rubin (ENL Teacher). This Parent Roadmap to Success Series included topics such as Introduction to the Common Core Standards and School Wide Curriculum Supports, Math: Thinking Through the Problem, and Becoming Familiar with the NYSESLAT. Multilingual staff is always available at each of these events to help translate. Information about these nights is sent home to parents in their languages. Parent volunteers are available for some events and at other meetings for translation services. Translators are available in the building or through the Department of Education translation services on the night of Parent – Teacher conferences. In addition, the school attempts to reach out to families of diverse cultural backgrounds through special events. For example, there is a Hispanic Heritage Month Luncheon at which families are invited to celebrate Latino culture. There is also an International Student Club which hopes to involve members’ parents in club activities. Furthermore, we instituted Family Learning Excursions as an opportunity to bring together the ELL and non-ELL families. This past year we took families to see the off-Broadway show Stomp. We hope to expand these excursions to include museums, restaurants, and other performances. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. CS 200 offers the following programs to all students, including ELLs in all subgroups: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 76 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Renee Y. Belton, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 77  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: James McCune Smith CS 200 School DBN: 05M200 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Renee Y. Belton Title Principal Charles Anuolam Assistant Principal Garry Fields Parent Coordinator Abigail Rubin ENL/Bilingual Teacher Marisa Crews Parent Guillermin Montano/ DL Teacher/Subject Area Sory Rodriguez/DL Teacher/Subject Area Zelvena Cummings Coronnie Crocker Coach Coach Trista Stewart School Counselor Danaka Rux Mary Norwood Carrie Satchell/SETTS n/a n/a Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member District Support Liaison Other Related Service Provider Other n/a Other n/a Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 09/28/17 09/28/17 09/28/17 09/28/17 09/28/17 09/28/17 09/28/17 09/28/17 09/28/17 09/28/17 09/28/17 09/28/17 09/28/17 n/a n/a 2018-19 SCEP-FL 78  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 05M200 School Name: CS200 Superintendent: DanikaRux The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Sheryl Garry Martha Charles Rubin Pender Fields Serrano Anuolam Abigail Pupil Secretary Parent Coordinator School Aide Assistant Principal ENL Coordinator No No No No Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Parents of all newly admitted students receive a Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS) that must be completed. Our ENL teacher/coordinator, Abigail Rubin, ENL licensed and certified, is able to help parents, including Spanish-Speaking parents, complete the HLIS appropriately. The ENL teacher conducts an oral interview with all parents of newly admitted students in which the home language and the English ability of the student is discussed; we are then able to help parents accurately record their oral interpretation and written translation 2018-19 SCEP-FL 79  needs directly on the HLIS for our future reference. In general, we provide written translations school documents in at least one language, Spanish. We further confirm parents’ written translation and oral interpretation needs with parents of English Language Learners through our group or individual parent orientation sessions, when we assist them in completing the Parent Survey and Selection Form, when parents are able to verify with us the language used at home and communicate to us their specific needs. In addition, the on-going personal communication between faculty/staff and parents further corroborates and completes our needs assessment. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral English Arabic French Spanish 331 9 3 60 82.13 330 2.23 0.74 14.89 9 1 63 81.89 2.23 0.25 15.63 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Principal's News letter NYS Testing dates Monthly Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Translation service (Manhattan Support Center) In School translation service Web Based translation and software 2018-19 SCEP-FL 80  SLT and PA parent notifications Parent Coordinator Calendar Monthly Parent Teacher Conferences Announcements October 2018 January 2019 March 2019 May 2019 After school program information and monthly calendar Monthly Translation service (Manhattan Support Center) In School translation service Web Based translation and software Translation service (Manhattan Support Center) In School translation service Web Based translation and software Translation service (Manhattan Support Center) In School translation service Web Based translation and software 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to  Parent Teacher Conferences       Attendance meetings and International Luncheon: Family Night telephone conferences: Fall 2018 and Spring 2019    October 2018  November 2018     On going throughout the February 2019 2018/2019 school year Family Night September 2018 provide interpretation service(s)? Over-the-phone interpretation is used through the Translation and Interpretation Unit. Additional interpretation needs are met through staff or, if necessary, by using funds to hire interpreters. School staff is provided with the phone number for the over-the-phone interpretation, as well as a list of bilingual staff and the languages they speak. Over-the-phone interpretation is used through the Translation and 2018-19 SCEP-FL 81  Curriculum Night: October 2018 5 th grade articulation meeting October 2018 Interpretation Unit. Additional interpretation needs are met through staff or, if necessary, by using funds to hire interpreters. School staff is provided with the phone number for the over-the-phone interpretation, as well as a list of bilingual staff and the languages they speak. Over-the-phone interpretation is used through the Translation and Interpretation Unit. Additional interpretation needs are met through staff or, if necessary, by using funds to hire interpreters. School staff is provided with the phone number for the over-the-phone interpretation, as well as a list of bilingual staff and the languages they speak. Over-the-phone interpretation is used through the Translation and Interpretation Unit. Additional interpretation needs are met through staff or, if necessary, by using funds to hire interpreters. School staff is provided with the phone number for the over-the-phone interpretation, as well as a list of bilingual staff and the languages they speak. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. We use the school messenger system for emergency announcements. We also provide letters in the languages that are represented in our school to communicate emergency incidents/events that may have occurred. Over-the-phone interpretaion may be used to reach parents as well. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure 2018-19 SCEP-FL 82  Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. We will have a Staff meeting the 1st day we return for the 2018/2019 school year. At the meeting we will discuss the A-663 Regulation. We will provide copies of the regulation for all staff members. In January, we will have a refresher meeting with the staff to reacquaint them with the regulation. School staff is provided with the phone number for the over-the-phone interpretation, as well as a list of bilingual staff and the languages they speak. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) We will make literature and documents available for families in the main office. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? We will utilize a parent survey to gather feedback from parents on the quality and availability of services mid year and make adjustments if and when needed. These surveys are available in multiple languages through the Translation and Interpretation Unit intranet page. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 83 
