 03M241 School Name: STEM INSTITUTE OF MANHATTAN Principal: MARCIA HENDRICKS 2018-19 SCEP-P 1  School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Section 4: SCEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Section 7: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 8: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 9: Title I Program Information Section 10: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 SCEP-P 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information STEM Institute of Manhattan 03M241 310300010241 K-5 School Number (DBN): 240 West 113 th Street, New York, N.Y. 10026 212-678-2898 212-678-2975 Phone Number: Marcia Hendricks Fax: mhendri@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 03 Superintendent’s Office Address: Marcia Hendricks Email Address: Christine Joseph-Olebunne Fran Haynes Kathy Edmond Debbie Patterson N/A N/A District Information Ilene Altschul Superintendent: 154 West 93 rd Street ialtsch@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 212-678-5857 Phone Number: 212-222-7816 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 SCEP-P 3  Manhattan FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Yuet Chu Executive Director: 333 Seventh Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10001 YChu@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 646-470-0721 Phone Number: 917-339-1765 Fax: 2018-19 SCEP-P 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the SCEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Marcia Hendricks Christine Joseph-Olebunne Fran Haynes Magdalena Garcia N/A N/A N/A Kathy Edmond Julia McClain Geralde Vaserman Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ UFTTeacher Member/UFTParaprofessional Member/ UFTTeacher 2018-19 SCEP-P 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Debbie Patterson Rosa Heredia Terri Stevenson Magdelena Garcia N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 SCEP-P 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) is a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. The process of developing and implementing the SCEP is aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding SCEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and SCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 SCEP-P 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: 2018-19 SCEP-P 8  Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the SCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the SCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for SCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you 2018-19 SCEP-P 9  monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 5: Build consensus around activities, strategies and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 6: Step 6: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 7: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 SCEP-P 10  Section 4: SCEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? STEM’s mission is to have students develop research, communication and collaboration skills needed for college and career through inquiry and discussion with a focus on science, technology, engineering and math. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. STEM Institute of Manhattan is a K-5 school with 139 students. The student attendance rate for 2017-2018 was 92 %. The school is located on the second floor of a building shared with two charter schools. Students utilize scientific knowledge in the engineering lab through invention and design. The fully equipped computer lab provides resources for students to experience programming and the most recent advances in technology. All students develop a portfolio that includes Common Core aligned STEM projects which integrate science, social studies and literacy. This portfolio is shared with parents during Student-Led Conferences in the spring. The Friends of the Children of New York provide social-emotional support for students and students are continually using technology to support learning through Mathletics and MyOn. A partnership with The Leadership Program and LEAP provides students with arts instruction leading to a full production by year’s end. In order to further close the achievement gap, teachers collaborate in structured inquiry teams on a weekly basis. Teachers analyze data and student work and discuss best practices to move student achievement. Teachers have taken on many other leadership roles such as professional learning facilitators and committee chairs. Across classrooms, students are engaged in evidence based discussions in all subject areas. In addition to engaging in engineering projects in the STEM lab, students are developing a portfolio of STEM projects completed in each classroom incorporating college and career ready standards. In addition to utilizing technology throughout the school day, students are developing coding and programming projects in the technology lab. The school leader and instructional coach support teachers with actionable feedback using both informal and formal observation data and data from regular walkthroughs. The school continues to implement PBIS to reinforce positive behavior expectations. To engage students in school management and organization, select students in grades 3-5 are participating in a group of STEM student leaders. The group will meet regularly with the principal and lead the charge for community and school involvement. To further support the social-emotional development of students, the school has partnered with Kids at Hope to provide a structure for training staff members to encourage student success. Parents and community members are invited in to the school on a weekly basis for health and education workshops. The school staff will provide monthly parent workshops to further engage parents in every aspect of school life. These workshops will provide parents with tools for supporting their children at home. Additionally, parents will be invited to utilize those strategies learned in the workshops for monthly Family Fun days where they are invited into the classrooms. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. 2018-19 SCEP-P 11  The school population comprises 49.26% Black, 40.44% Hispanic, 5.15% White and 2.12% Asian. The student body includes 18.38% English Language Learners from homes where their primary language is one other than English and 35.29% special education students. 94% of students are eligible for free or reduced price lunch. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. One of the most difficult challenges facing STEM is its co-location with two charter schools; one being a middle/high school. The presence of children up to age eighteen sharing the halls and common areas with elementary school students discourages parents from the community from enrolling their small children. Therefore, the student enrollment continues to fluctuate and efforts to attract new students are often thwarted by the age differences of the students on the campus. An area of focus continues to be student recruitment. According to the School Quality Guide, the score for the Strong Family and Community Ties increased by .80. This year's efforts will continue to build stronger family and community collaborations as well as increasing the other elements on The Framework for Great Schools as the scores for all other elements(collaborative teachers, rigorous instruction, effective school leadership and trust) decreased. One of the key areas of focus this year is to support teachers through providing feedback using the Danielson framework and the analysis of learning outcomes. In addition, developing coherent instructional practices that engage all students and meet individual needs through multiple entry points and differentiated tasks is a key areas of focus. 2018-19 SCEP-P 12  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 03M241 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 134 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 22 22 8 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 17 12 8 8 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 93.0% % Attendance Rate 92.5% % Reduced Lunch 17.2% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 1.5% 32.8% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 9.0% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 3.99 0% 10% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 27.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 76% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 17 17 8 91.9% 0.0% 33.6% 53.7% 3.0% 1.5% 0 0% 10.4 23.2% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YSH N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 SCEP-P 13  2018-19 SCEP-P 14  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed X X X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on the Mathematics NYCPT, 56% of students scored in the 1st and 2nd quartile at the end of the school year. This is an increase from the 1% at the beginning of the year, and a significant increase from the 46% scoring in the 1st and 2nd quartile at the end of the 2016-2017 school year. However, including the 2nd percentile as part of the scale included students scoring below proficiency. PPO visits found little evidence that that academic tasks consistently incorporated high-level questioning and are planned to challenge all students. Additionally, teachers need to emphasize high-order thinking skills and encourage mathematical discussion. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 SCEP-P 15  By June 2019, 30% of students will score in the 1st quartile with an average score at or above 60% as measured by the Mathematics NYCPT. 2018-19 SCEP-P 16  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teachers will identify quarterly goals for individual students and create intervention plans for increasing student achievement in mathematics. Students in grades K-2 will receive explicit instruction on skills to develop number sense. Teachers will identify mathematics "power standards" aligned with Engage NY to assess and monitor the acquisition of pre-requisite skills and priority standards in addition to re-organizing curriculum. Teachers will use assessment data to identify trends and gaps in achievement. Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Grade K-5 students, Teachers of grades K-5 Grade K-2 students, Teachers of grades K-2 Grade k-5 students, Teachers of grades K-5 Grade K-5 students, Teachers of grades K-5 9/2018-6/2019 9/2018-6/2019 9/2018-5/2019 Principal, AIS Teachers,Instructional Coach Classroom Teachers Principal, Instructional Coach, Early Childhood Classroom Teachers Principal, Instructional Coach, Teacher Teams 10/2018-6/2019 Principal, Instructional Coach, Classroom Teachers Teachers will administer progress monitoring assessments for RTI students. Grade K-5 RTI students 9/2017-6/2018 RTI Teachers, SIT Teachers will utilize a school-wide referral process developed for identifying and monitoring students in need of Tier 3 Intervention. Grade K-5 Students Students will receive targeted intervention based on the Response to Intervention plan. Grade K-5 students Collaborative teacher teams will meet weekly to analyze student work and identify next steps. Teachers are working together as their shared goal is to improve student achievement and to prepare them for college and career. Grade K-5 students, Teachers of grades K-5 10/2018-5/2019 10/2018-5/2019 9/2017-6/2018 SIT, RTI Teachers, Instructional Coach Principal, SIT, RTI Teachers Vertical Teacher Teams, Principal, Instructional Coach Parents will participate in workshops to understand how to assist students in meeting the Common Core Learning Standards and preparing students for college and career. Parents and Guardians 9/2018-6/2019 Principal, Instructional Coach, Parent Coordinator Teachers will attend professional learning sessions on modification of instruction, developing rigorous tasks and engaging students in effective discussion and assessment. Instructional Staff 9/2018-6/2019 Principal, Instructional Coach Students will use Mathletics to practice foundational skills and build math fluency. 1-5 Students 9/2018-6/2019 Classroom Teachers Teachers will use Mastery Connect to monitor standards mastery and modify student groupings and curriculum. 2018-19 SCEP-P 17 Instructional Coach, Teachers Grade K-5 students, 9/2018-6/2019  Teacher will attend professional development sessions, participate in inter-visitations and meet with Instructional Coach and Principal to review mathematics data and develop strategic plans for instruction. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Teachers of grades K-5 Teachers of grades K-5 9/2018-6/2019 Instructional Coach, Special Education Liaison, MFSC, Principal How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will participate in monthly workshops that focus on how to help students at home, on-line resources that support student achievement and understanding practical strategies to understand and achieve mastery of common core standards. The Principal, {Parent Coordinator and PTA President will develop the year's parent workshop schedule in August 2018. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Use of teacher teams for inquiry, data analysis and curriculum planning.  Engaging in Citywide PD, Professional learning sessions in school, teacher team meetings, and common prep time once a week to foster collaboration.  Use of Engage NY to develop rigorous tasks and assessments  Use of NYCPT and Mastery Connect for formative and summative assessments  Per-diem funds to cover teachers for professional learning sessions Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 30% of students in K-5 will have met will score in the 1st quartile as measured by the mid-year Mathematics NYCPT. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Mathematics NYCPT Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 18  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. X X X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? The School Quality Guide indicates that the school received a score of 3.00 on the Classroom Behavior component which is 7% below the district average and 6% below the city average. The school has developed partnerships with The Leadership Program, Community Mediation Services and E3 Sports to support students in social/emotional development. The collaboration with Kids at Hope ensures a focus on a positive culture and students are taught positive behavior expectations with a positive behavior intervention system. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools –Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. The school's Behavioral Referral Team will develop a coherent ladder of referral to be used by staff to de-escalate behaviors and address students in crisis resulting in 75% positive responses on the classroom behavior component of the Framework for Great Schools by June, 2019. 2018-19 SCEP-P 19  2018-19 SCEP-P 20  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). The PBIS and Kids at Hope team will provide professional development to assess and refine social-emotional support structures All Teachers 9/2018-6/2019 The staff will continue to teach positive expectations for the school and develop additional classroom lessons to teach expectations. All Staff Members The Behavioral Referral Team will analyze OORS data to develop targeted plans to address trends and patterns of negative behavior. Targeted Students Students will be rewarded for exhibiting positive behaviors. All School Staff, Students 9/2018-6/2019 9/2018-6/2019 9/2018-6/2019 Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Principal, PBIS Team, Kids at Hope Team, Teachers PBIS Team, Principal Behavioral Referral Team All School Staff, Students Review and revise clear ladder of referral for discipline and create a document to be used by all staff that includes space for anecdotal and intervention data. Teachers, Students, Parents 9/2018-9/2019 Behavioral Referral Team, Teachers Parents will receive notice of explanation for positive expectations and return acknowledgement of support. Provide training for parents to support PBIS and Kids at Hope at home. Parents Parents 9/2018-10/2019 10/2018-6/2019 Hold school-wide kick-off event for teachers, staff and parents Teachers, Staff, Parents 9/2018-10-2019 PBIS Team, Parent Coordinator PBIS Team, Parent Coordinator, PTA President All School Staff, Students, Principal, Assistant Principal Tier II and Tier III intervention plans will be implemented for high-need students Students unresponsive to intervention will have BIP's developed, reviewed and revised based on data collection. Teachers, Students, Parents Teachers, Students, Parents 10/2018-6/2019 PBIS Team, Guidance Counselor, Teachers 9/2018-6/2019 Teachers, SIT, Guidance Counselor 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will receive a description of behavioral expectations, rewards and consequences in September. In October, January and April, parents will attend a workshop developed by the Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselor, PBIS 2018-19 SCEP-P 21  Team Chairperson and Kids at Hope Team Chair and facilitated by representatives from these teams to discuss and develop strategies for supporting students in social/emotional health. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Use of PBIS and Kids at Hope team to attend regular meetings to lead school-wide initiative ● Engaging in school professional learning for at least three sessions to review and revise lesson plans and initiatives ● Use of PBIS live notebook for resources for professional learning.  Use of Parent Coordinator and Guidance Counselor to develop parent training agendas and secure facilitators. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, teachers will have utilized the ladder of referral to reduce office referrals to 5 per class as reported by school referral forms. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. School discipline referral forms Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 22  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. SOP(s) Addressed X X X 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. For the 2017-2018 school year, teachers were engaged in structured teacher teams on a weekly basis enabling them to share instructional practices and analyze data in grade bands but walkthroughs and lesson plans indicate that there was inconsistent use of formative assessment and modification of groupings and instruction. Strengthening instructional practices to increase achievement, especially in writing, was a focus for the 2017-2018 school year. Data indicated that 59% of students had a score of proficient on the EOY performance task scoring in the 1st or 2nd quartile. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teachers will meet weekly and work collaboratively to look at student work and/or analyze student data and develop teaching strategies resulting in 30% of students scoring in the 1st quartile with an average score of at or above 60% as measured by the end of year NYCPT assessments. 2018-19 SCEP-P 23  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teachers will utilize Teacher's College Writing Project and writing pacing calendar to deliver writing lessons Schedule all K-5 teachers for two common planning periods per week. Establish inquiry protocol for common planning. Teachers will use protocols to analyze student work and student data on a weekly basis. Teacher teams will submit weekly agendas and minutes that include the analysis of student work and instructional next steps. Parents will participate in workshops to understand strategies identified through inquiry to assist students in meeting the Common Core Learning Standards and preparing students for college and career. Teachers will attend professional learning sessions on inquiry protocol, the writer's workshop and norming writing assessments. Students will take beginning, middle and and end of the year performance assessments. Teachers, Students Teachers Teachers, Students Teachers, Students Teachers Parents Teachers Students 9/2018-6/2019 9/2018-6/2019 9/2018-6/2019 9/2018-6/2019 9/2018-6/2019 9/2018-6/2019 9/2018-6/2019 9/2018-6/2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Instructional Coach, Principal Principal Principal, Instructional Coach Teachers, Principal, Instructional Coach Teachers, Principal, Instructional Coach Principal, Parent Coordinator Instructional Coach, Principal, TCWRP Teachers, Instructional Coach How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The school will invite parents in four times a year for school-wide parent-teacher meetings. In addition, the school is open for parent engagement on Tuesday afternoons. Each teacher will send home monthly newsletters with information for parents to support students at home. The Community Associate will input all families' contact information into the Remind system through which there can be reciprocal communication between the school and families. Parents use this system to provide teachers with pertinent information about their student(s). Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 SCEP-P 24  ● Use of teacher teams to develop common language and best practices among teachers. ● Use of Parent Coordinator to schedule parent workshops ● Use of schedule to allow weekly common planning periods for classroom teachers Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will be a 30% increase of students meeting proficiency benchmarks on mid-year performance tasks as compared to the beginning of the year. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Citywide baseline performance tasks Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 25  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). X X X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on 2017-2018 Advance data, the average component rating for 3C: Engaging Students in Learning was 2.41. The development of teachers is supported with formative observations, walkthroughs and feedback sessions. The Instructional Coach provides further support through in-class modeling, targeted professional development and "lunch and learns". PPO feedback indicates that there has been a shift in teachers' practice with providing instruction through strategic grouping however, teachers inconsistently ensure that all learners are engaged in appropriately engaging tasks. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART– Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 SCEP-P 26 By June 2019, teachers' observation component average will increase from 2.41 to 2.75 in indicator 3C: Engaging Students in Learning as measured by Advance observations. 2018-19 SCEP-P 27  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Teachers will participate in professional learning with a focus on the utilization of formative and summative assessment to modify instruction and meet the needs of all students. All Teachers 9/2018-6/2019 Principal, Instructional Coach Teachers will be observed in cycles scheduled throughout the year. All Teachers 9/2018-6/2019 Principal Teachers will participate in professional learning in and out of school. All Teachers 9/2018-6/2019 Principal, Instructional Coach Teachers will be given timely, actionable feedback following each observation. The feedback will provide short term goals for improving best practices which may include collaborative lesson planning, inter-visitation, team teaching and/or utilizing DOE resources. Teachers will meet to review observation and student data to establish goals for all students including ELL’s and SWD and the effectiveness of instructional strategies. Teachers will engage parents in conversations regarding data collected during classroom instruction utilizing questioning as assessment. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement All Teachers 9/2018-6/2019 Principal All Teachers 10/2018-Principal Parents 6/2019 9/2018-6/2019 Teachers How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will have opportunities to engage in school life through volunteer programs such as class parents, PTA events, Read Alouds and trip parents. Additionally, the PTA Executive Board is providing opportunities for parents to volunteer remotely. The Parent Coordinator will survey parents to determine needs for parent development and develop a calendar of monthly meetings to meet those needs. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Use of teacher teams, peers and administrator to develop common language and best practices among teachers. 2018-19 SCEP-P 28  ● The Danielson Framework and Advance for teacher evaluation. ● DOE learning opportunities ● Engaging in in school professional learning, teacher team meetings, at least two periods of common prep time to allow for common planning. ● Parent Engagement periods Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, all teachers will be evaluated using the Danielson framework. They will have received specific, actionable feedback for component 3C on 50% of their total number of evaluations. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Danielson Framework Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 29  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. X X X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The school has utilized the Remind notification system for reciprocal communication between the school and families. Additionally, The scores for strong family-community ties on the School Quality Guide increased from 2.21 in 2017 to 3.01 in 2018 however, only 69% of families say that they had an opportunity to volunteer time to support their school. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 50% of families would have participated in at least 4 family/school events with an average of 25% of families volunteering for at least one family/school event as evidenced by attendance rosters. 2018-19 SCEP-P 30  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Survey parents to determine their needs as it relates to supporting the school and their students. Teachers provide parents with assessment profiles 3 times a year with individual student data and intervention plans delineated. Schedule parent meetings, workshops and activities for parents to attend throughout the day. Parents Parents Parents 9/2018-6/2019 11/2018-5/2019 9/2018-6/2019 Schedule monthly "Family Fun Days" and invite parents to practice strategies presented in workshops in the classrooms. Parents 9/2018-6/2019 Distribute instructional support materials to all families delineating grade level standards and strategies. Parents 9/2018-6/2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Parent Coordinator, PTA President Teachers Principal, Parent Coordinator, PTA Executive Board Principal, Instructional Coach, Parent Coordinator, PTA President, Teachers Parent Coordinator If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. NA Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Staff members to facilitate parent workshops ● Parent coordinator to organize workshops and regularly communicate with parents ● Community Associate to develop relationships with community agencies Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA P/F Set-aside 21st Century C4E 2018-19 SCEP-P 31  Title I 1003(a) Title III PTA Funded SIG Grant School Achievement Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 50% of parents would have participated in at least 2 meetings and/or events between September and January as evidenced by attendance rosters with 25% of parents indicating that they will volunteer for at least one school event. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Attendance Rosters Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 32  Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Program Description Directions: Expanded Learning Time activities are directly aligned to the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, Rigorous Instruction, Supportive Environment, and Strong Family and Community Ties. ELT provides enriching educational experiences that happen outside of the traditional school day and blend skill acquisition, relationship-building and fun to foster academic and social-emotional growth. Summer learning, afterschool programming, and extended-day ELT models, when well-implemented, play a critical role in supporting students in all grades and ensuring that they graduate from high school, college and career ready. SED requires that Priority schools offer a minimum of 200 additional student contact hours as Expanded Learning Time in addition to the current mandated length of 900 hours of instruction per year (25 hours per week) in grades K-6 and 990 hours of instruction per year (27.5 hours per week) in grades 7-12. Effective ELT models will blend school staff with community partners, and will provide a balanced curriculum that can include ELA, Math, STEM, arts, physical activity, and leadership development. Complete the sections on this page to demonstrate how the school will meet these requirements. Part 1 – ELT Program Goal(s) Describe the summative goal(s) of the ELT program for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. By June 2019 the ELT program will have provided support to students in order for them to produce at least 4 authentic tasks that incorporate writing, reading and the arts with at least 50% of students receiving an average score of at least 2 on the citywide baseline performance task rubric for 3 out of 4 of the completed writing component. Part 2 – ELT Program Type Is the ELT program voluntary or compulsory? X Voluntary Compulsory If the ELT program is voluntary, indicate how you will actively encourage the participation of all students, with the goal of serving at least 50% of students. The ELT program will incorporate visual and performance arts instruction and culminating projects and performances. Parents will receive flyers and phone calls to encourage student participation. Part 3 – ELT Program Description The ELT program will be offered to all students eligible for Academic Intervention Services (AIS), with the goal of serving a minimum of fifty percent of AIS-eligible students. Describe how the school will meet the following SED requirements for an ELT program in a Priority School:  Integrate academics, enrichment, and skill development through hands-on experiences that make learning relevant and engaging.  Offer a range of activities that capture student interest and strengthen student engagement in learning so as to promote higher attendance, reduce risk for retention or drop out, and increase the likelihood of graduation.  Actively address the unique learning needs and interests of all types of students, especially those who may benefit from approaches and experiences not offered in the traditional classroom setting.  Contain components designed to improve student academic, social, and emotional outcomes, including opportunities for enrichment programs such as in music and art.  Ensure instruction in any core academic subject offered in the program will be delivered under the supervision of a teacher who is NYS certified in that particular content area.  Engage in outreach activities made to families. The school will design an ELT program that meets the needs and interests of all students. The activities will be problem and project based, infusing the STEM focus of the school and incorporating the arts and sports. Students will have opportunities to utilize technology to explore their stated interests. 2018-19 SCEP-P 33  Students will receive targeted academic tutoring in small groups of no more than 10. Additionally, students will engage structured classes in visual and performing arts and organized sports. Multiple data sources will used to identify students' strengths, needs, interests in order to schedule a variety of activities. Families will be kept informed through newsletters, workshops, PA meetings and family nights. Part 4 – ELT Program Implementation and Oversight Part 4a. Who will implement the ELT program? Who will oversee the program? 1. Indicate the key personnel that will be responsible for implementing and overseeing the ELT program, including school-based staff and any high-quality community partners that will be involved. If applicable, describe the scope of involvement of all community partners and how the joint ELT program is structured. 2. 3. Explain how you will evaluate the program to assess impact on student achievement. The Principal will coordinate the ELT program. The instructional staff will meet bi-weekly to set expectations, monitor progress, discuss concerns, and make revisions to the program with a focus . Impact on student learning will be monitored by reviewing student products. Part 4b. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. September 2018 - June 2019 Part 5 – ELT Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the ELT program.  Use of teachers for extended day instruction  Use of per session for professional development  Use of The Leadership Program to provide arts instruction Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support the ELT Program. Note: If the program is funded by 21st Century Community Center Learning Funds, it must be offered in conjunction with a high quality, high capacity community partner. 21st Century Title I 1003(a) Tax Levy Title III Title I SWP PTA Funded Title I TA SIG Grant P/F Set-aside C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 6 – ELT Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will be a 10% increase of enrolled students who score a level 2 on citywide baseline performance task rubric on at least two completed writing products. Part 6b. Indicate the instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2018-19 SCEP-P 34  Citywide baseline performance task rubric Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 35  Section 7: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) K-3 rd grade students at least two levels below grade benchmark on Fountas and Pinnell Running Record Assessment Grade 4-5 students who scored 1 or 2 on NYS Common Core Assessment Students who score below 65% on Go Math unit assessments and those identified for strategy lessons based on identified needs Services based on identified needs during formative assessment. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Guided Reading, Fundations, Leveled Literacy Intervention, Learning.com, Great Leaps, Elements of Reading lessons based on identified needs Small group and/or one-to-one instruction by the classroom and/orRTI teacher in 5 week cycles. Services are provided during and after the school day. Small group instruction delivered by classroom teacher during math periods Individualized programming provided by Think Central, Interactive Math Mat, Dino Math Tracks, Learning.com Differentiated instruction based on students’ needs. Technology/Engineering instruction utilizing the STEM Magnet curriculum to individualized instruction. Small group and/or one to one instruction by the classroom teacher as well as on flexible duration as needed. Services are provided during and after the school day. Small group instruction provided by classroom teacher during the science Services are provided during the school day, during the science periods. period. Technology/Engineering STEM Magnet curriculum to individualize instruction 2018-19 SCEP-P 36 Differentiated instruction based on Small group instruction provided by the Services are provided during the school day during the social studies periods. Services are provided during the school day Social Studies Services based on identified needs during formative assessment. At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Students who exhibit patterns of difficulties in their social-emotional development STEM Magnet curriculum and the needs Individual or group counseling classroom teacher during the social studies period based on the STEM Magnet curriculum Guidance Counselor provides services for students on individual basis and forms groups based on commonalities. Guidance counselor also plans and conducts school wide prevention activities in topics related to the needs of the students, programs such as “respect for all”, Character education, etc. School nurse also provides training for the staff on the proper use of the “ EPI pen. For students in their classes who have been identified as allergic to certain food items. At risk 2018-19 SCEP-P 37  counseling services provides on-going support. 2018-19 SCEP-P 38  Section 8: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 14 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population.      Students are provided with school uniforms, book bags and school supplies. Students are provided with full fare metro cards or bussing. Students are given free vision and dental screening, Students are provided with "At Hope" counseling services for social-emotional support. Students are provided with health and hygiene products. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 SCEP-P 39  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 SCEP-P 40  Section 9: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). The Principal, teachers and paraprofessionals will attend professional development provided by the DOE. Teachers will turn-key instructional strategies during weekly professional learning sessions. Consultants will provide professional development as needs are identified. Additionally, teachers will engage in professional learning on a weekly basis facilitated by the Principal and Instructional Coach. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. - 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). - Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) 2018-19 SCEP-P 41  Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). The kindergarten teachers, Principal, and Parent Coordinator, meet with all parents and students who are entering Kindergarten for the upcoming school year. The parents are given a tour of the school by a Student Ambassador and the Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselor, Social Worker and teachers ( if available). Parent survey will be presented to the incoming parents, surveying their needs with regard to determine the planning of workshops. Parents are informed on the prerequisite skills needed to enter kindergarten, the transition to kindergarten from a day care setting, and the new Common Core Learning standards. The IEP teacher meets with all incoming Special Education parents during registration to ensure that services will be provided from the first day of school 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Classroom teachers will devise a task for each writing unit of study to be able to assess all students’ strengths and weaknesses with the Math and ELA CCLS. The teachers will continue to use the “Workshop Model” for ELA and Math lessons based on individual student needs. We will also use the Mathematics Performance assessments in October 2017, January 2018 and March 2018 to monitor student progress and use the data to drive classroom instruction. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (SCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) X - - X - Column B Section Reference(s) 5A,5B,5C,5D,5E - - 5A,5B,5C,5D,5E - Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Title I Part A (Basic) Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal 64,276.00 - - 96,458.00 0 2018-19 SCEP-P 42  Title III, Immigrant Federal Tax Levy (FSF) Local 0 892,995.00 - X - 5A,5B,5C,5D,5E 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/SCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the 2018-19 SCEP-P 43  participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 SCEP-P 44  Section 10: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. STEM Institute of Manhattan, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary School(ESSA) Act, is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students STEM Institute of Manhattan will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 2018-19 SCEP-P 45  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Framework for Great Schools, Quality Review Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 2018-19 SCEP-P 46  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Elementary and Secondary School Act; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing monthly class newsletters and web publications designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) STEM Institute of Manhattan , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA) Act, is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will 2018-19 SCEP-P 47  share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA) Act; I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 2018-19 SCEP-P 48  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Elementary and Secondary School Act Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 2018-19 SCEP-P 49  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; 2018-19 SCEP-P 50  ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 SCEP-P 51  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 03 School Name STEM Institute of Manhattan Borough Manhattan School Number 241 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Marcia Hendricks Coach Adrienne Reininga ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Maryun Thame Teacher/Subject Area type here Teacher/Subject Area type here Related-Service Provider type here Superintendent Ilene Altschul Assistant Principal Coach School Counselor Rebecca Dreisinger Parent type here Parent Coordinator Michelle Perez Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 136 2018-19 SCEP-P 52 Total number of ELLs 25 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 18.38%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 0 1 2 4 3 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Fountas and Pinnell and Ready Gen are used assess the early literacy skills of our ELLs. After analyzing the data which also includes NYSITELL and most recent NYSESLAT scores, we identified the primary skills for our instructional focus. These comprehension, and decoding skills and targets of measurement are shared with classroom teachers and cluster teachers to inform their instructional practice. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Weekly common planning grade team meetings with the classroom teachers and AIS providers are opportunities that afford progress monitoring after data review. We also discuss data in a weekly Instructional cabinet meeting involving other stakeholders such as the Data coach and SETSS specialists. 2018-19 SCEP-P 53  3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Besides the Baseline ELL Assessment administered during the beginning and middle of the year, we also administer the NYS ELA and Math performance tasks in their home language where available for eligible ELLs/MLLs. We also use the data from structured guided reading cycles which provide progress reports and highlight areas of need. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Students in need of Tier 3 interventions are referred to the SIT where data and Tier 1 and 2 interventions are reviewed to determine the need for further interventions. The RTI teacher will provide intervention as needed in 5 week cycles. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] P.S. 241 uses data to guide instruction within the RTI framework. It is important to note that the performance of struggling ELL students is measured against their langauge acquisition level. First, the RTI teams assesses the suitability of general instruction within the classroom.Teachers whose instruction does not meet the needs of ELLS, are offered professional help in forms of professional development. If however, there is a strong evidence of rigorous and targeted instructions within the classroom setting, and ELL students continue to struggle, they are referred for six week AIS services. At the beginning of this process students are evaluated using the Brigance assessment. At the end of the five week intervention, students will again be evaluated in order to assess the progress students made during the six week program. If after the six week period of time, students do not make adequate progress, the RTI will apply Tier 3 interventions. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The scores for majority of students taking NYSESLAT reveal that students tend to score high on the speaking and listening sections. However, the writing and reading part of the NYSESLAT and LAB-R is where students falter. Those results are driving force for the ENL instruction where teachers realize that students need extra support in reading comprehension and writing assignments. As a result we are currently focused on writing and reading writing across curriculum. Thus, we have implemented a an effective small group reading instruction where everyday and in small groups students enhance their reading skills. Those skills are also addressed during our extended day activities and Saturday Academy Program. The students who show little growth in those areas are provided further support through AIS services in Math and ELA. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Teachers meet regularly for common planning where ELL student data is discussed and modifications to instruction is made. The Instructional Cabinet, which includes the SETTS and RTI Teacher, meets weekly to review school-wide data and make instructional decisions. Furthermore, the ENL Teacher provides targeted professional development sessions to support teachers in adjusting programs and curriculum for ELL students. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). 2018-19 SCEP-P 54  a. Freestanding ENL program. The model for ENL at PS 241 consists of both integrated and stand-alone instruction. Integrated ENL takes place according to grade level and language proficiency. The ENL teacher and classroom teacher co-teach during ELA and other content areas according to the CR 154.2 mandates. Freestanding ENL groups are homgeneous according to NYSESLAT proficiency levels. b. TBE program. If applicable. Not applicable c. DL program. If applicable. Not applicable 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? To provide students with the mandated number of minutes, the ENL teacher co-teaches into the Entering and Emerging students' classrooms for 180 minutes of ENL instruction and pulls these same students out for standalone ENL for 180 minutes. The ENL teacher co-teaches 90 minutes of ELA in the classrooms of Transitioning students and they receive 90 minutes of ENL instruction integrated with other content areas. Advanced and Commanding students receive 180 and 90 minutes respectively of integrated ENL in math, social studies and/or science. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Both models use a variety of instructional approaches in order to make the contents comprehensible and to enrich the vocabulary development. For entering, emerging and transitioning students teachers utilize a variety of manipulatives and visual aids. During group activities, entering and emerging students are also paired up with expanding students who willingly help beginning ELLs. Graphic organizers are widely used in ELA blocks and also in science. Our staff is also focused on providing explicit phonics and word study instruction which facilitates the comprehension of texts. Content material is also made more comprehensible to students due to our school-wide use of technology such as computers and smartboards which provide an interactive and fun approach to content areas covered in class. Additionally, our staff including the Engineering teacher, the parent coordinator as well one several paraprofessionals are bilingual. The school uses them as a resource in addressing students' academic and emotional needs. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? We use the Spanish LAB to initially assess Spanish speaking students. Summative assessments in students' home languages are used where available. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status SIFE students will be initially placed with the entering ELLs in grade appropriate classes and receive intervention services from an ENL teacher for a total of 360 minutes a week. We make sure that social, emotional, and cultural needs of SIFE students are addressed. The ENL teacher focuses mainly on literacy and numeracy skills of those students. In doing so, we use developmentally and age appropriate , linguistically enriching and culturally relevant materials. These students will also be given an individual program of Tier I intervention provided by the classroom teacher.The instruction for those students will be differentiated based on their proficiency levels and formal and informal assessments. Upon further assessments those students will be placed in grade appropriate settings according to their individual needs. Classrooms will be equipped with the Award Reading program as well as Imagine Learning computer program that is design to support the needs of ELL students. 2018-19 SCEP-P 55  B. Newcomers are encouraged to participate in all classroom activities by means of non verbal communication. An emphasis will be placed on the development of the Basic Communication skills. A TPR ( Total Physical Response) approach will also be widely used. In P.S 241 we will also rely on the use of realia, visual aids, repetition and graphic organizers. Mainstream classroom teacher will place newcomers into groups with other more advanced students to enhance langauge acquistion of all levels based on research as Vygotsky's zone of proximal development. All ELLs will also be actively using a computer-based literacy program such as Imagine Learning. In many instances the school's bilingual pedagogues work with beginning students to make sure that students understand the rules and codes of behavior in the school. C. ELL students in school from 4-6 years are receiving academically rigorous instruction focusing on Academic Language Development. Those students need various ENL strategies and vocabulary development. Small group instruction will will be a key instructional method for this group. In addition, this group of students will receive RTI, extended day and Title 3 instruction D. DOES NOT APPLY e. Former ELL's receive grade level, CCLS based instruction with support from the ENL teacher for 90 minutes of integrated instruction with the classroom teacher. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? P.S 241 focuses on using grade appropriate materials. Thus, in K-2 language instruction focuses on literacy development and number concepts. The employment of many visuals and manipulatives (Bingo games, Alphabet Match Me game) engage and provide sensory stimulation to students assuring the necessary learning. P.S 241 uses a variety of instructional materials in order to deliver the best possible instruction for ELL students.In the mainstream classroom students learn by using the Ready Gen program for ELA, and Go Math for mathematics. Modern Curriculum Press Materials for phonics are used across the grades. Thus level A is used to enhance Phonic instruction in grade 1 and, level B would be used for second grade, etc. Phonics instruction in early grades (K-2) which is crucial for the development of students' reading skills is additionally developed by using of FUNDATIONS and Wilson's program. In the ENL classroom the teacher uses Month by Month Phonics and the Leveled Literacy Intervention reading materials which includes a variety of fiction and non fiction reading materials. Our rich libraries are also available on varying levels and the on-line resource, Reading A-Z, provides students with access to academic content on varying levels in their home languages. For science, the school uses the FOSS program which is rich in manipulatives and live experiments. Since we have become a STEM school, we are focused on the project based learning that integrates the three branches of STEM: science technology, engineering and mathematics. As a result we are creating projects and designs that reflects students' deeper understanding of scientific, technological and mathematical concepts. Third through fifth graders receive literacy instruction through rigorous Ready Gen program. Students in upper grades receive instruction through teacher designed units. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? ELL-SWD students are discussed and monitored by the IEP and ENL teachers. After regular assessment, the ENL teacher will determine which students are prepared for mainstreaming and in which subject areas. The ENL teacher and IEP teacher will consult with the SIT to determine how students could be scheduled to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. STEM Institute of Manhattan has an push-in/pull out program based on the levels of the students. ELL students are involved in the academic intervention program where they receive targeted intervention programs for Reading and Mathematics. All students receive individual attention to meet their needs. In order to enhance ENL instruction, P.S 241 bought a highly 2018-19 SCEP-P 56  regarded computer based programs for all students; Reading A-Z and MyON. Reading A-Z provides students with leveled reading in English and other home languages and both programs monitors student fluency and comprehension to adjust materials to meet the individual needs of each student. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Mainstream teachers meet regularly during common planning sessions in order design and plan necessary modifications for ELL students in order to enable students to meet Common Core Standards. The school will also continue two of the arts programs: The Leadership Program and Broadway Junior. Both of those programs help ENL students to express themselves artistically. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? P.S 241 is not planning discontinuation of any of the programs. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELL students receive access that parallels that of all students at P.S. 241. ELL students are offered participation in the after school program which supplements regular academic instruction and provides opportunities for artistic expression. This has been found to be particularly supportive of ELL English language development as they excel during these extra curricular activities. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. P.S 241 uses a variety of instructional materials in order to deliver the best possible instruction to its ELL students. In the mainstream classroom students learn by using the Ready Gen Program for ELA. Additinally, the ENL teacher uses the Month by Month phonics and Fundations which focuses on the development of academic foundational skills. All classes are also using a web based program MyON and Reading A-Z which enhances reading an vocabulary instruction through interactive games and activities. The school uses the Common Core aligned program for Mathematics-GO Math. For Science the school uses the FOSS program which is rich in manipulatives as well as live experiments which enhance students' understanding of scientific concepts. In all the above mentioned instructional blocks the teachers strive to use a variety of manipulatives, graphic organizers and hands on activities in order to provide necessary visual and organizational tools fo ELL's. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? The ENL Classroom is equipped with a variety resources in students' home languages. Apart from resources such as classroom visuals and bilingual dictionaries, students are encouraged to use their native language whenever they feel comfortable. Entering and Emerging speakers are paired up with bilingual students who when when necessary hep to translate important concepts. The ENL teacher also utilizes a set of bilingual books which students can read during independent reading. P.S 241 has also embraced the technological tools such as online dictionaries which offer a quick and visual representation of vocabulary. Through direction in students' native language. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. The ENL teacher has a schedule that accommodates all of the requirements corresponding to the NYSESLAT levels, ages and grade levels of ELL's. All PS 241 teachers utilize visual aids, graphic organizers and Total Physical Response techniques to support ELL's. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? P.S 241 uses a variety of instructional materials in order to deliver the best possible instruction to its ELL students. In the mainstream classroom students learn by using the Ready Gen Program for ELA. Additinally, the ENL teacher uses the Month by Month Phonics Program which focuses on the development of foundational skills. All classes are also using a web based program Imagine Learning which enhances reading an vocabulary instruction through interactive games and activities. The school uses the Common Core aligned program for Mathematics-GO Math. For Science the school uses the FOSS program 2018-19 SCEP-P 57  which is rich in manipulatives as well as live experiments which enhance students' understanding of scientific concepts. In all the above mentioned instructional blocks the teachers strive to use a variety of manipulatives, graphic organizers and hands on activities in order to provide necessary visual and organizational tools fo ELL's. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). In an effort to assist newly enrolled ELLs in our school the administration provides an orientation session to familiarize the students with the rules and procedures of the school. A session like that also provides a chance for the ENL teacher to meet the new ELLS and their families. Expanding and Commanding ELL students are utilized to welcome beginning students to the school and lead tours for families. Additionally, fifth grade teachers who have ENL students in their classrooms are supported in their efforts to prepare the students for the transition into a new school. Families of incoming students will be "buddied" with existing families to provide support. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Not applicable 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Dual language is not offered at this time. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? STEM Institute of Manhattan provides extensive Professional Development to our ENL teacher. We provide a school mentor and our Borough Field Office will work on a continuous basis with the ENL teacher. Training for our teachers is done on site/off-site and through the DOE. Additionally, 10% of professional development hours focusing on ENL techniques and methodology. Our certified ENL teacher will attend PD sessions from our Borough Support Office. Opportunities for off site professional Development as those offered by the Division of English Language Learners and Student Support (DELLSS) are given to our teachers to fulfill this mandated Professional Development. Training for our teachers is done on site/ off-site and through the DOE. Additionally, General Education Teachers receive 15% of all professional development hours focusing on ENL techniques and methodology. Our certified ENL teacher attends PD sessions from our Borough Support Office which provides necessary support in running ELL documentation, and in issues of compliance. We also provide weekly professional development on Mondays which addresses Common Core standards and ENL methodologies. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. The support offered to our ELL students as they transition from elementary to middle school consists of informational advisory sessions with the ENL teacher and classroom teachers about their Reading/Math levels from NYS exams, information from the NYSESLAT exams along with student goals. Additionally, teachers of transition grades are participating in ELA inquiry team 2018-19 SCEP-P 58  which allows them to address skills that students have difficulty with. During Chancellor's Day the entire staff which includes the Principal, ENL teacher/ coordinator, Common Branch teachers, subject area teachers, paraprofessionals, special education teachers, psychologists, occupational therapists, speech therapists, guidance counselor participate in professional development to address students' needs. Training for our teachers is done on site/ off-site and through the DOE. Additionally, General Education Teachers receive 15% of all professional development hours focusing on ENL techniques and methodology. Our certified ENL teacher attends PD sessions from our Borough Support Office which provides necessary support in running ELL documentation, and in issues of compliance. We also provide weekly professional development on Mondays which address Common Core standards and ELL methodologies. We keep records of those meetings by providing a sign-in sheet which also enables us to trace teachers' attendance. Opportunities for off-site professional Development as those offered by the Division of English Language Learners and Student Support (DELLSS) are given to our teachers to fulfill this mandated Professional Development. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? During Tuesday afternoon's parent engagement times, the ENL teacher conducts annual meetings with parents or guardians of English language learners to discuss goals, language proficiency results and language development in all content areas. Bilingual staff members provide interpretation and translation as needed. The DOE Translation Office is used for parent meetings that require interpretation in languages not spoken by staff members. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. The parents of the our ELL students are offered ENL training workshops to support their children as they academically grow and acquire the language. Parents are given the opportunity to attend DOE presentations and correspondence is sent home in Spanish, other languages can be translated upon request. Parents are also encouraged to committees such as Parent Teacher Association and the School Leadership Team. They are also encouraged to participate in school activities such as field trips, shows and assemblies. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. No additional information 2018-19 SCEP-P 59 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Marcia Hendricks, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 SCEP-P 60  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: 241 School DBN: 03M241 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Marcia Hendricks Title Principal Assistant Principal Michelle Perez Parent Coordinator Maryun Thame ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Disheena Bratton/SETSS Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Adrienne Reininga Coach Coach Rebecca Dreisinger School Counselor Ilene Altschul Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 SCEP-P 61  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 03M241 School Name: PS 241 STEM Institute of Manhattan Superintendent: Ilene Altschul The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. PS 241 UTLIZES INFORMATION FROM SEVERAL REPORTS TO DETERMINE THE LANGUAGE NEEDS OF THE PARENT COMMUNITY. THE HOME LANGUAGE SURVEY SERVES AS A BASIS FOR DETERMINING THE LANGUAGE OF PREFRENCE FOR INCOMING STUDENTS. THE UETR REPORT ALSO INFORMS THE SCHOOL OF STUDENT ETHNICITY AND SERVES AS A BASIS FOR DETERMINING THE LANGUAGE NEEDS OF OUR COMMUNITY. THE PARENT COORDINATOR AND THE COMMUNITY ASSOCIATE ARE ALSO INVOLVED IN REVIEWING THE EMERGENCY CONTACT INFORMATION PROVIDED BY PARENTS TO DETERMINE ANY LANGUAGE NEEDS. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2018-19 SCEP-P 62 Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language An overwhelmingly large percentage of our Ell parents have indicated a preferrence for official communication in English, There is however a small group of Spanish parents for whom their home language is preferred. Bengali and French have also been expressed as preferrences for parents. 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families PS 241 DISSEMINATES VARIOUS DOCUMENTS THROUGHOUT THE YEAR THAT REQUIRE TRANSLATION. THESE INCLUDE THE PARENT HANDBOOK, CALENDARS, AND ALL NEWSLETTERS AND ANNOUNCEMENTS. How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to WE HAVE SEVERAL FACE TO FACE MEETINGS THROUGHOUT THE YEAR, provide interpretation service(s)? 2018-19 SCEP-P 63  BEGINNING WITH CURRICULUM NIGHT IN SEPTEMBER AND PARENT TEACHER CONFERENCES IN NOVEMBER, MARCH AND MAY. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) PS 241 will use the templates and translated documents provided on the DOE website to notify parents of their linguistic rights.We also have all items from checklist above posted in a conspicuous location so that they are visible to all parents. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? PS 241 will distribute a survey to all ELL parents to gather feedback from parents on the quality and availability of language services provided. 2018-19 SCEP-P 64 
