 03M307 School Name: URBAN ASSEMBLY SCHOOL FOR MEDIA STUDIES, THE Principal: BRIDGET MUSCARELLA 2018-19 SCEP-FL 1  School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Section 4: SCEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Urban Assembly Media High School 03M307 310300011307 9-12 122 Amsterdam 212-501-1110 School Number (DBN): 2125800156 Phone Number: Baldwin Pena Fax: Email Address: bpena3@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Affinity Schools CUNY/UA Geographical District: Superintendent’s Office Address: Bridget Muscarella Daniel Trinidad Edith Flores Baldwin Pena NA Christopher Munoz YadryMonsanto NA District Information Fred Walsh Superintendent: 333 7 th Avenue fwalsh@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 212-356-3739 Phone Number: Fax: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 3  Affinity Field Support Center FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Field Support Center (FSC) Alexandra Anormeliza Executive Director: 131 Livingston Street - 6th Floor Brooklyn NY 11201 aanorma@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-935-5618 Phone Number: Fax: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the SCEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Bridget Muscarella Daniel Trinidad Edith Flores ShakimaSmith Christian Munoz YadryMonsanto n/a Baldwin Pena *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/Parent Member/ Teacher 2018-19 SCEP-FL 5  N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/Parent Member/ Member/ Teacher Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 SCEP-FL 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) is a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. The process of developing and implementing the SCEP is aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding SCEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and SCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 7  In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement 2018-19 SCEP-FL 8  NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the SCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the SCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for SCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 9   Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 5: Build consensus around activities, strategies and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 6: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 7: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 10  1. What is your school’s mission statement? Mission Section 4: SCEP Overview UAM is a school that is focused on bringing out the best in all students’ thinking so that they are able to achieve at high levels. UAM graduates are able to respond to the world by making choices that maximize positive outcomes for themselves and others. UAM is focused on students becoming better critical thinkers not just acquiring more knowledge. As a result, our students are able to respond productively in novel situations. UAM students are able to: solve problems; access, analyze and evaluate information and messages from a range of media; make decisions; and express their thinking verbally and in writing. As a result, UAM students are prepared to perform well in college, career and life and to be proactive members of their communities. Vision Instruction To accomplish this UAM provides all students with access to challenging courses, infuses media to engage students, and makes learning relevant to them. Across the curriculum, students are encouraged to challenge assumptions, make connections to their world, and engage in critical conversations on provoking topics. In all subject areas students:  Read texts to infer, interpret, and draw conclusions;  Analyze and evaluate complex messages from a range of media   Resolve conflicting views encountered in source documents;  Support arguments with evidence; Solve complex problems and answer complex questions with no obvious answers. Success at UAM is not simply about getting the right answer or even solving a problem, but also about being able to provide a rationale and explain the underlying thinking. We believe that by explaining ourselves to others we come to better understand our choices and rationales and that by having our ideas challenged by others our understanding is improved. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Urban Assembly Media High School (UAM) is a small school located on the Martin Luther King, Jr. Campus. The school was founded in 2004 and has had nine graduating classes. Although located on the upper west side behind Lincoln Center, the school predominately serves students from Upper 2018-19 SCEP-FL 11  Manhattan and the Bronx. Students have a responsibility to question and challenge viewpoints they encounter in order to sharpen their own understanding. Across subject areas students are given ample time to read, write and speak so that they can deepen their thinking about and understanding of the topics they are studying. By developing authentic literacy, students are prepared for the academic challenges of college and beyond. UAM teachers support high-level student thinking in their classrooms by:  Establishing the purpose and rationale for the topics being studied  Developing provocative questions about the topics of study  Creating time and space for student thinking   Building classrooms that value student ideas Facilitating discussions amongst students Classrooms where students are thinking may be quiet or they may be noisy, but the volume is always intentional. Teachers are constantly considering how they can help students think more deeply about the topics in class. Systems for Growth and Development In the classroom, students are encouraged to see mistakes as opportunities for learning. Teachers give feedback and make time for students to reflect on their own work with the goal of getting better. In order to design instruction that makes students better critical thinkers, teachers are meticulous in their planning of learning experiences. They are constantly refining and revising their instruction so that it pushes student thinking. To do this they work with other teachers to give and get feedback on their instruction, with the purpose of getting better. We believe that as teachers get smarter about designing instruction and better at implementing it their students will get smarter. The potential for growth is endless, so it is the responsibility of all teachers to work continuously to get better so that their students get smarter. Social Emotional Learning UAM’s environment supports students sharing their thinking without fear or hesitation. Students are invited to challenge the thinking of others without judging the individual. Students are taught to engage in academic argument but to diffuse personal and social conflict. Through advisory, advisors form nurturing relationships with their advisees in order to foster resilience and improve students ability to make constructive choices about personal behavior and social interactions. Students will not always succeed on their first attempt, but what is more important is that they learn and gain wisdom from their experiences and try again, with the understanding that they will be more successful as a result of this effort. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. The majority of students entering the school in 9th grade are below grade level as measured by New York State ELA and Math exams as well as the Degrees of Reading Power (DRP) assessment administered by UAM three times a year. However, there are also students who 2018-19 SCEP-FL 12  enter UAM on grade level and above, as measured by the same assessments. To increase the diversity of the student profile, nearly 20% of UAM students have IEPs, over 10% are overage and over 10% are English Language Learners. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Over the past three years UAM has put considerable effort into developing and implementing a Social Emotional Learning (SEL) curriculum to address the school's supportive environment. This has resulted in a significant decrease in suspensions, an increase in credit accumulation and increased the numbers of students in 9th and 10th grade with 90+% attendance. In the area of rigorous instruction UAM focused on increasing opportunities for students to discuss meaningful content in their courses. This has resulted in improved teacher practice in 3b: Using Questioning and Discussion and improved passing rates on the ELA CC, Algebra CC and Social Studies Regents exams. As well as increased the numbers of students demonstrating college readiness on both the ELA and Algebra CC Regents exams. This year we will be building off of our SEL work in advisory to address strong family and community ties. This will focus on developing the capacity of advisors to clearly communicate the strengths and needs of their advisees so that they are able to work with parents to support their children in making better choices that will lead to improved performance and increased opportunities. Additionally, we will build off of the SEL work to continue to address the school's supportive environment so that advisors are able to work with their advisees to improve their academic performance as measured by their GPA. In the area ofcollaborative teachers teacher teams will be working together using Looking at Student Work protocols so that they improve their feedback and identify instructional supports, scaffolds and extensions that will move students to the next level. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 13  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 03M307 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 397 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 8 2 10 8 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 7 4 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 85.0% % Attendance Rate 79.8% % Reduced Lunch 7.1% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.8% 58.2% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 2.3% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 0% 20% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 80% 22% 77.1% 0.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No No Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups ED Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A YSH N/A N/A NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient N/A NO N/A N/A No N/A 110 106 84.3% 5.3% 15.4% 34.3% 2.5% 2.8% 0 72% 3.6 N/A N/A 80% 66% 78.5% 15% N/A No Yes N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 14  Economically Disadvantaged YES ALL STUDENTS YES 2018-19 SCEP-FL 15  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed n/a x n/a x Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Needs:  College Readiness dropped from 11.5% in 2016-17 to % in 2017-18; as reported on the NYC School Quality Guide In 2017-18 14% of seniors completed college preparatory courses; as reported on the NYC School Quality Guide   58% of students responded positively to the statement, "In most or all of their classes they are challenged," (Q5a) on the NYC School Survey  On both the Algebra and ELA CC exams SWDs and ELLs performed at lower levels that their general education counterparts Strengths:  Quality Review 2015-16 and 2017-18 area for celebration 1.1 Curriculum: Well-Developed, "Rigorous habits and higher-order skills are emphasized in curricula and academic tasks. Curricula and academic tasks are planned and refined using student work and data." 2018-19 SCEP-FL 16   Student performance on the Algebra CC exams improved from 2014-15 to 2015-16: 40% (61 of 167) of students met college readiness (70+ on CC) benchmark vs 1% (1 of 56) in 2014-15 Student performance on the ELA CC exams improved from 2014-15 to 2015-16: 50% (53 of 106) of students met college readiness (75+ on CC) benchmark vs 20% (15 of 74) in 2014-15 Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teachers will improve students' responsible decision making as evidenced by an increase of students enrolled in college preparatory courses from 36% of students to 50% of students (Algebra II, Chemistry, AP Literature, AP Language, AP Environmental, AP US, and Physics). 2018-19 SCEP-FL 17  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) AP for All Laying the Foundation Professional Learning. NMSI's Laying the Foundation Program equips educators with the content knowledge and instruction know-how they need to set high classroom expectations and shift students to advanced levels of thinking and learning as early as grade 3 all the way to high school ELA, S.S, Math and Science Teachers August 2018 NMSI and NYCDOE Vertical Team Goal Development using Learning to Improve structures each vertical team reviews data to identify a specific area for improvement ELA, Math, SS and Science Teachers September 2018 - June 2019 Vertical Team Leaders Vertical Team Professional Learning Communities vertical team develop action plans for attaining their identified goals with clearly identified measures of success ELA, Math, SS and Science Teachers October 2018 - June 2019 Vertical Team Leaders Student Progress monitoring  Baseline assessments administered and reviewed (September 2018)  Progress Reports (October 2018, December 2018, February 2019, April 2019): reviewed by advisors and Guidance Counselors   Development of action plans to support struggling students (October 2018, December 2018, February 2019, April 2019) Family Outreach to students needing additional support (October 2018, December 2018, February 2019, April 2019)  ELL and SWD student supports reviewed to ensure efficacy (October 2018, December 2018, February 2019, April 2019) All Teachers September 2018 - June 2019 Guidance Counselors; ESL teacher; IEP coordinator Instructional Rounds: During Instructional Rounds a group of educators visit a number of classrooms to collect low-inference data in relation to a Problem of Practice. The data gathered is less about individual teachers and more about what is happening in classrooms across the school. This year, our Problem of Practice is: All Teachers Once a month (October 2018-May 2019) Vertical Team Leaders 2018-19 SCEP-FL 18  Designing coherent instruction where learning activities are student centered, support high-cognitive activity Critiquing use of protocol/routines using the lens of 1e in order to determine evidence of higher order thinking, student autonomy (voice/choice) and alignment of activity to intended learning outcomes. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The school's CEP goals will be shared with families during the fall mailing. Each quarter data (both school and individual) related to the progress towards CEP goals will be shared with students and families. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Funding for: two Peer Collaborative Teachers (ELA and ESL); two Teacher Leaders (SS and Science) to lead the teacher team meetings; Time for Teacher Leader Meetings (2hrs/week) to plan PD sessions; Funding for out of school time meetings (per session); Funding for coverage for Teacher Leaders and teachers for whole school Instructional Rounds Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Mid-point benchmark is student performance on Regents and AP aligned final exams in January Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 19  1st semester final exams Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 20  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. SOP(s) Addressed n/a x n/a x Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Needs:  63% of students responded that, in most or all of their classes at their school, most students feel it is important to come to school every day. (Q6f) on the NYC School Survey  38% of 12th graders in 2017-18 had attendance below 80% as reported on ATS  Numbers of students with attendance of 90+% in 9th grade decreased from 75% in 2016-17 to 60% in 2017-18 as reported on ATS Strengths  94% of students in grades 9-12 agreed or strongly agreed that adults at their school (including teachers, administrators, counselors, and the principal) encourage them to continue to their education after high school. (Q10a) on the NYC School Survey  Numbers of students with attendance of 90+% in 10th grade increased from 49% 2015-16 to 64% 2016-17 2018-19 SCEP-FL 21  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools –Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the school will support the development of students' growth in responsible decision making as evidenced by the percentage of students with attendance over 90% increasing by 5%, from 45%-50%. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 22  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) School Connect Leads develop professional development plan for advisors to implement Resilient Scholars Program so that advisors are able to lead their advisories in developing: Advisors Weekly August 2018 - June 2019 School Connect Lead Teachers Social Awareness Self Awareness Self Management     Relationships  Responsible Decision Making Monitoring student attendance Guidance Counselors Advisors identify "attendance focus students", advisory attendance competition Advisors Weekly September 2018– June 2019 September 2018 - June 2019 Director of Guidance School Connect Lead Teachers Communication plans with families 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Advisors and Guidance Counselors Wednesdays September 2018 - June 2019 School Connect Lead Teachers & Director of Guidance How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Advisors will communicate with families based on individual preference (phone, email, text, etc.) to keep families apprised of individual student performance in relation to identified goals Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 23  Funding for School Connect Lead Teacher; Restorative Training for advisors; Release time for School Connect Leads for planning, site visits, conferences, etc.; Professional Development time is dedicated to family outreach in support of attendance initiative. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February, 2019, there will be a 10% decrease in chronically absent students, from 55% to 45%. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Student attendance as measured by ATS and the New Visions Heat Map. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 24  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. SOP(s) Addressed x x n/a 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. n/a 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Needs:  2016-17 Quality Review 1.2 Pedagogy rated Proficient, however, "although most lessons contained multiple entry points and extension opportunities, this was not effectively implemented in all classes."  2016-17 Quality Review 2.2 Assessment rated Proficient, "A review of students’ work products reveals that most teachers provide feedback to students. However, the quality of the feedback is not always meaningful across the vast majority of the classrooms." Strengths:  2016-17 Quality Review 4.2 Teacher Teams and Leadership Development rated Well-Developed with the following impact cited, "Collaborative team work has resulted in schoolwide instructional coherence and increased student achievement coupled with shared improvements in teacher practice and mastery of goals for groups of students." 2018-19 SCEP-FL 25   100% of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that they would recommend their school to other teachers as a place to work. on the NYC School Survey  Graduation rate for 2017-18 and 2016-17 was 77% from 72% in 2015-16 Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teachers will collaborate in teams to craft targeted feedback and supports to students in order to foster students' growth in responsible decision making as evidenced by a closing of the credit accumulation gap between the lowest third and general population by 3% in each grade. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 26  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teacher Leader planning for Looking at Student work team meetings Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Teacher Leaders September 2018 - June 2019 Principal and Instructional Coaches Teacher Team Meetings, Looking at Student work Teachers September 2018 - June 2019 Principal, Vertical Team Leaders, Instructional Coaches Norming Teacher Leaders on Danielson Rubric, specifically in the areas of 1e: Designing Coherent Instruction Teacher Leaders December 2018 Principal, Instructional Coaches Norming Teachers on Danielson Rubric specifically in the area of 1e: Designing Coherent Instruction Teachers January Instructional Coach Instructional Rounds led by Teacher leaders with a focus on 1e: Designing Coherent Instruction Teachers 2019 October 2018 - May 2019 Teacher Leaders 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Quarterly communication with parents about school progress towards CEP goals. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Teacher Leader Meetings; funding for Teacher Leader Meetings; Instructional Coaches; coverage as needed for teachers to observe one another Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA P/F Set-aside 21st Century C4E 2018-19 SCEP-FL 27  Title I 1003(a) Title III PTA Funded SIG Grant School Achievement Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Mid-point benchmark is % of students with GPA of 85+% in first semester Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. STARS Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 28  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). SOP(s) Addressed x n/a x n/a Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Needs:  2016-17 Quality Review 1.2 Pedagogy Proficient, "however, some teachers are not yet implementing activities to address the instructional needs of all learners and strong ownership by some students was not evident in classrooms."  58% of students say they are challenged in their classes. - 2017-2018-School Quality Guide  58% of students say that teachers ask difficult questions on tests. - 2017-2018-School Quality Guide Strengths:  2016-17 Quality Review 1.3 Leveraging Resources Well-Developed  2016-17 Quality Review 4.2 Teacher Teams and Leadership Development Well-Developed 2018-19 SCEP-FL 29  2016-17 Quality Review 4.1 Teacher Support and Supervision Well-Developed Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART– Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, school leaders will provide teachers with meaningful learning opportunities to support planning coherent instruction resulting in teacher's overall OR 3c/3d ratings improving by an average gain of .1 point. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 30  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff)  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). PCTs and Teacher Leaders calibrate ratings of 1e Teacher Leaders September 2018 - October 2018 Principal, Instructional Coaches PCTs and Teacher Leaders lead instructional rounds Teachers October, January, March, May PCTs and Teacher Leaders PCTs and Teacher Leaders lead Team Meetings to debrief feedback from instructional rounds and develop next steps Teachers November/December, February, April Teacher Leaders PCTs and Teacher Leaders research resources, experiences and supports to address next steps identified through instructional rounds and team meetings Teacher Leaders November - May Principal, Instructional Coaches 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Quarterly communication with parents about school progress towards CEP goals. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Time for Teacher Leader meetings; funding for teacher leaders; Time for Teacher Team meetings; Instructional Coaches Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other 2018-19 SCEP-FL 31  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Mid-point benchmark January 2019 ratings on 1e: Designing Coherent Instruction Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance, Danielson Framework Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 32  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. SOP(s) Addressed x x n/a n/a Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Need:  23% of Parents completion rate of 2017-2018 School Survey  84% of parents/guardians responded that since the beginning of the school year, they have seen their child's projects, artwork, homework, tests or quizzes sometimes or often. (Q4c) on the NYC School Survey  63% of families say that they have had the opportunity to volunteer time to support their school. (Q4a) on the NYC School Survey Strengths:  94% of parents/guardians agreed or strongly agreed that teachers and parents/guardians think of each others as partners in educating children. (Q2a) on the NYC School Survey  91% of parents/guardians agreed or strongly agreed that staff at their school work hard to build trusting relationships with parents/guardians like them. (Q1g) on the NYC School Survey 2018-19 SCEP-FL 33  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the school will improve two-way communication between the school and families, as evidenced by an increase in completion of the NYC School Survey from 23% to 50%. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 34  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Advisor and Parent Coordinator outreach to families to establish relationships Families Advisors, Parent Coordinator September 2018- October 2019 Revision and update of school website to reflect upcoming community events and opportunities to volunteer Families August 2018 Parent coordinator Consistently logging ongoing, 2-way communication with families in their preferable mode of communication Families Outreach for attendance and conducting Advisor-Parent conferences Families Progress Report Mailings/School Update Mailings parents and Partnership coordinator Advisors and Parent Coordinator Advisors and Parent Coordinator minimum x1/month September 2018- June 20189 November 2018, March 2019 October, December, March, May Guidance Counselors, Parent Coordinator 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. N/A Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Time for outreach and meetings, translation for non-English speaking parents, technology for outreach google voice, Skedula, remind 2018-19 SCEP-FL 35  Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, the school will support students and families in understanding the importance of coming to school every day as evidenced by the percentage of students with attendance over 90% increasing by 5%, from 50% to 55%. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. attendance logs, ATS, Dexpro Data Portal Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 36  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Degrees of Reading Power (DRP) Assessment, performance on ELA MoSL and ELA Regents 8th Grade Math Assessment, Integrated Algebra and Common Core Algebra Exams Students scoring in the lowest third on mid-term regents aligned exams Students scoring in the lowest third on mid-term regents aligned exams Attendance, Suspensions, teacher referrals/anecdotals(Skedula) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Independent reading with teacher conferences Fueledlearn bop Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Small Group When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During the day Small group During the day vocabulary development, multiple choice testing strategies vocabulary development, multiple choice testing strategies group and one-to-one counseling Small Group After School Small Group After School small group and one-to-one During the day 2018-19 SCEP-FL 37  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 36 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. We supply students with basic school supplies as well as clothing and hygiene products. We coordinate with the with the office of Youth Development to ensure that students get the maximum services offered by the DOE. In coordination with the STH specialist for the district we organize after school activities for students. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 38  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 39  Section 8: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. UAM is committed to recruiting and hiring highly qualified teachers who share the school’s beliefs about student learning and are interested in joining our professional learning community. Recruitment of Candidates Candidates are recruited using the following: ● NYCDOE New Teacher Finder ● NYCDOE Open Market ● Urban Assembly Network ● New York City Teaching Fellows ● Teach for America ● Universities including but not limited to: Teacher’s College, Fordham University, CUNY, SUNY Review of Candidates ● A panel of subject area teachers along with the Assistant Principal or Principal review the resumes of candidates and select candidates for interview Interview of Candidates Each candidate is interviewed using the following steps: 1. Step 1: Phone Interview of candidate by representative of hiring panel 2018-19 SCEP-FL 40  2. Step 2: Demo Lesson 3. Step 3: Debrief of demo lesson Certification and Qualification Review ● Names of potential hires are forward to network hiring manager to review certification and qualification Mentoring Teachers in their first year of teaching are assigned a mentor. Mentors are available to meet with mentees to plan lessons, provide developmental feedback from classroom visits and review student work. They ssist new teachers in developing student facing materials and communicating with families. Professional Development Teachers are provided with professional development in their teams around developing rigorous instruction that engages students, analyzing student work and supporting SWDs and ELLs. Individual Coaching As needed teachers are provided with individual coaching from an instructional coach or peer. This coaching may be a short cycle to address one specific practice or may be longer term to provide support to a developing teacher. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Our professional development opportunities include: ● Vertical/Content Team Meetings Weekly for 1hour and 15 minutes: These meetings are led by Teacher leaders who develop the agendas for the meetings in collaboration with instructional coaches and the principals. They are guided by: student assessment results (Regents, DRP, teacher made), teacher ratings, data collected during instructional rounds and other classroom visits. Meetings include opportunities for new strategies to be introduced and for teachers to get feedback on plans for incorporating these strategies as well as opportunities for teachers to look at student work together. ● Teacher Leader Meetings weekly for 2 hours: During these meetings TLs meet together or individually with instructional coaches to plan professional development for their teams. The topics of these meetings are determined by the school's focus on developing teachers pedagogy in the areas of 3b and 3d. ● PDs for Special Education teachers, ESL teachers Teacher Leaders and content specific monthly through Urban Assembly network: In collaboration with the Urban Assembly individual teachers are able to participate in professional development on topics including but not limited to: Teacher Leadership, Social Emotional Learning in the 2018-19 SCEP-FL 41  classroom, College Counseling, Career Explorationrs and content specific monthly through Urban Assembly network: In collaboration with the Urban Assembly individual teachers are able to participate in professional development on topics including but not limited to: Teacher Leadership, Social Emotional Learning in the classroom, College Counseling, Career Exploration ● Leadership and Teamwork sessions 2 - 3 times a year with the Leadership Project Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. n/a 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). n/a Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). n/a 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teacher Leaders meet to review the results of the previous years' assessments. They review the assessment options that are available to the school through the DOE, UA network, out-side organizations and school based teacher made assessments. They then identify the assessments that will provide the most useful information about our students' understanding and skill. Once the assessments have been selected, an assessment calendar is created. The calendar includes dates for assessments as well as dates for analysis of results in teacher teams, plan for communicating results to students and families and dates for structured student reflection on assessment results and feedback. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 42  4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (SCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Title I Part A (Basic) Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 194,582.00 0 62,663.00 0 12,366.00 0 2,614,678.00 x n/a x n/a x n/a x Column B Section Reference(s) 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E n/a 5B, 5C n/a n/a n/a 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used 2018-19 SCEP-FL 43  conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/SCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 44  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. UAM , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA) Act, is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. UAM will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 45  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 46  ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA) Act; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 47 School-Parent Compact (SPC)  UAM , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA) Act, is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA) Act; Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 48  ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 49  ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Elementary and Secondary School Act Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 50  Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 51  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 03 School Name Urban Assembly Media High School Borough Manhattan School Number 307 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Cordelia Veve Coach type here ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Camille Freund Teacher/Subject Area Baldwin Pena/ Attendance Teach Teacher/Subject Area type here Related-Service Provider type here Superintendent Fred Walsh Assistant Principal Coach type here School Counselor Deborah Delshad Parent Sophia Crooks Parent Coordinator Amalia Sanchez Field Support Center Staff Member Jocelyn Santana Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 2018-19 SCEP-FL 52  D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 403 Total number of ELLs 29 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 7.20% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 2 4 3 Lang. n/a Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? 1. UAM uses the DRP to assess the literacy skills of our ELLs. Results indicate that our ELL students have wide ranging needs with regards to their literacy development. Some of our ELLs test at a pre-primer level while others test at a high school level. About 25% of our ELLs reading levels are in the lower elementary level (2-4th grade), 25% in upper elementary/middle school (5th - 7th grade), 25% in Middle to Upper Middle school (6th - 8th grade) and 25% at the high school level. This has led to the leveled reading groups so that students literacy skill instruction can be targeted. It has also led us to continue the book group which utilizes group reading so that students learn from one another. UAM in collaboration with all vertical team 2018-19 SCEP-FL 53  leaders and network coaches, uses the gathered data to group students and offer specific programs to accommodate the learner needs. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? The DRP is administered three times a year; October, February, and April. This allows the school to see growth or continued challenges our students face. The results are reviewed in teachers weekly meetings and the data is used to determine how to best support our students. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The ENL teacher analyzes the growth on the NYSESLAT scores and evaluates the success in the ELLs' core classes as well. Effective ENL instruction should be seen in the NYSESLAT scores as well as in all core classes that rely on authentic literacy skills. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Once the data has been gathered, it is analyzed by the ENL teacher, guidance and administration to address the best way to support the students needs. The LA team discusses which changes in a students schedule as well as supports would be best support that student. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] UAM is a 9-12 high school- Not Applicable. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. 2. Most of our students are advanced or proficient in listening and speaking. The majority of our students are intermediate in reading and writing. Therefore, we believe that literacy development across the content areas is critical. To this end our literacy class serves as a starting point for teachers to gain familiarity with their students' literacy skills and then use what they learn to shape their curriculum. Reading, writing and vocabulary development are an explicit part of all content areas. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Subject teams meet weekly to discuss students and analyze data. There are also weekly, staff-wide, meetings where teachers discuss students needs and how to best support that student. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. UAM's FreeStanding ENL program allows students to have language acquisition support in their ELA classes, other content classes, as well as self-contained ENL classes. All classes and supports are tailored to the students needs. The co-taught ELA/ENL classes are heterogeneous by ENL level, and homogeneous by grade. Other co-taught ENL/Content (like Earth Science, Algreba, or US History) classes are heterogeneous by level and sometimes by 2018-19 SCEP-FL 54  grade. (For example: a US History class will have all 11 th grade students, with mixed levels of ELLs, while an Earth Science class may have 9-12 th grade students, as well as a mixed level of ELLs.) Students who score Enterting, Emerging or Transitioning on the most recent NYSESLAT will also receive a self-contained ENL class that is heterogeneous by grade, but homogeneous by proficiency level. Students also receive additional instruction through a self-contained ENL advisory and school-wide literacy classes as needed. b. TBE program. If applicable. Not applicable. c. DL program. If applicable. Not applicable. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? ENL Teacher Camille Freund and ATS Coordinator Ramona Wooden collaborate to generate an ATS report to determine the proficiency level of all eligible ELLs. Ms. Freund then works with Guidance Counselors Denise De Jesus and Debbie Delsahd to create schedules that ensure all students get mandated minutes for co-taught ENL/ELA, co-taught Content/ENL and self-contained ENL. (See Above) 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Using a SIOP model, the ENL teacher designs instruction with ENL and Common Core Standards that support English langauge acquisition and facilitates acquisition of content. The ENL teacher makes use of a variety of best practices including, but not limited to, modeling (specifically: teacher “think alouds” while completing an example task, working to do a task together and sharing examples of student work to show what a completed piece should look like and to collaboratively develop rubrics), Bridging (specifically: activating prior knowledge through the use of anticipation guides, class discussion, etc.) Contextualization of concepts and vocabulary and Schema Building (specifically using content area relevant graphic organizers for class lectures and note-taking). ENL teacher, Camille Freund, is proficient in French and Spanish, and frequently translates, and models in those languages. Some additional supplemental materials include native language texts, vocabulary word banks, common core aligned performance tasks. Students are also provided bilingual dictionaries and the Regents Glossaries available on the DOE website. Additionally, students are provided with small group instruction based on their needs. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? When students' performance on assessments do not meet expectations or their understanding they may be offered assessments in their native language. The ENL teacher carefully assesses students' understanding of English and provides necessary supplemental aids. Additionally, students are provided with bilingual dictionaries. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Newcomers and Long Term ELLs are provided with instruction based on their needs ranging from smaller class size for content area classes to additional Regents Review co-taught by an ENL and content area teacher. All classes are taught in English. Our ENL teacher conducts professional development sessions with teachers beginning in September, working with them to ensure their familiarity with ENL methodologies for each of the sub-groups and supports their implementation. Students continue to receive additional time on assessments. SIFE students and newcomers have additional time to complete assessments. In 2018-19 SCEP-FL 55  addition, SIFE students are administered modified exams and additional scaffolding on tasks. Students from 4-6 years are also given additional time and minimal scaffolding as based on need. Students 6 years plus receive minimal scaffolds on an as needed basis. The focus for Long Term ELLs is on literacy. UAM uses the DRP data to accommodate students based on literacy needs. Former ELLs (for up to two years after testing out) are provided the same testing accommodations on informal and formal exams. Former ELLs are also provided with co-taught content and ELA classes. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Content area teachers develop content and language objectives for their lessons based on the SIOP model. In all content areas the development of academic vocabulary is a focus for both ELLs and native English speakers. This development is furthered in students’ literacy classes through their independent reading, written response and conferencing with teachers. For ELL-SWDs, the school uses the formula of wordbanks to scaffolding the acquisition needs of these students, where these students also have pull-out sessions to work on strategic academic vocabulary. Formative assessment is used throughout the content areas to ascertain students’ comprehension of both content and language objective. Instruction is differentiated for the ELL subgroups through their placement in their ENL class and their placement in content area classes. Newcomers and SIFE students are placed in small advisories and receive support in acclimating to the school culture. Whenever possible they are placed in smaller class sizes for their content area classes and provided with supplementary texts that support their access to the content. Across the content areas, teachers focus on the development of vocabulary through the identification of critical content vocabulary. As needed, students might receive tutoring for specified content areas. In terms of materials that UAM uses for its students, we use various reading books, English dictionaries and bilingual dictionaries (Spanish, French), and Rosetta Stone as interactive media programs to engage students in instruction and in reading, verbal and writing comprehension. Those ELL students preparing to take the ELA exam are provided with testing support in their ENL class. Practice test scores are reviewed and analyzed by the ELA team to identify student instructional needs and additional supplemental courses and tutoring are provided as need. ELLs receiving 4-6 years of service and long term ELLs continue to get ENL services as mandated by their proficiency level. Students in this group, who are not meeting standards may be placed in smaller class size or receive pull-out tutoring. Additional supportive services for these students include but are not limited to: tutoring on test-taking strategies, smaller class size and literacy classes. Materials for the ELLs in the 4-6 years of service and long-term ELLs also have materials that target their learning: grade/age-appropriate reading materials, scaffolded programs in Rosetta Stone for this group of students, and targeted literacy reading. ELL-SWDs are supported by either Self-Contained classes, or ICT models. The school instructional team also looks at the student levels of performance in both English acquisition and in their learning strategies, and pull-out students according to their level to provide additional teaching support. The ELL-SWDs are supported by the schoolwide instructional philosophy of being fully inclusive; as a result, the ELL-SWDs will receive extra classroom support from their teachers if/when needed. The ENL teacher works closely with the Beginning students across grade levels in depth toward building vocabulary banks. The ENL teacher is fluent in French, being the native language of the cohort of beginner students this year (2013-14), so the differentiated learning takes place across grade levels over the Beginner group of students. Depending on individual student need, students are provided with these additional supportive services. UAM is a fully inclusive school, dedicated to providing differentiated instruction across the content areas. Differentiation is further enhanced by the use of media in classrooms so that students receive information through a variety of mediums. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? All ELLs are fully integrated into classes and have access to after school clubs, tutoring and regents review. All students with disabilities, including ELL-SWDs, are programmed in the least restrictive environment. This is accomplished through flexible programming; allowing students to move up and down in core content courses, be programmed for classes with a smaller class size, be programmed for team teaching classes and be programmed for supplemental literacy classes at their reading level. ATS and SESIS assist in providing student class eligibility information. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 56  8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Targeted ELA intervention for ELLs is provided through small English literacy groups that are organized based on reading level and meet three days a week, all ELL subgroups are targeted. On a regular basis, content area teams review student data to identify students not making adequate progress. The data of ELLs as a sub-group is reviewed and teachers refer students for additional supportive services: tutoring, smaller class size, etc. Teachers receive PD on assessing and conferencing with students to develop their English literacy skills. Literacy skills are further developed within the content area classes though the development of academic vocabulary and disciplinary literacy. Additionally, students may attend Regents Review sessions or become part of the After School book club. Targeted math intervention is provided through after-school tutoring and Regents Review sessions, ELL students not making progess in math class or earning proficient scores on periodic assessments are targeted. Targeted Social Studies intervention is provided through after-school tutoring and Regents Review sessions for ELL students not making progress in their Social Studies class or earning proficient scores on periodic assessments. Targeted Science intervention is provided through after-school tutoring and Regents Review sessions for ELL students not making progress in their Science class or earning proficient scores on periodic assessments. In terms of native language intervention, the Spanish teacher is available as a resource to providing targeted translation support/services for any of the core subject intervention areas; in addition, the ENL teacher is a support for students in two most spoken native languages of ELL student population: Spanish and French. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Our literacy program has been enhanced this year by extending the time spent in groups by students, by grouping students by reading level, decreasing the group size for lower level readers and by increasing students' access to books on their level. The data to support our literacy program is determined from the DRP (degrees of reading power). 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? All students will continue to have ENL services, nothing will be discontinued. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. UAM is a fully inclusive school, dedicated to providing differentiated instruction across the content areas. Differentiation is further enhanced by the use of media in classrooms so that students receive and transmit information through a variety of mediums using all modalities. All activities including drama club, book club, dance, chess, music club, cooking club, and all PSAL sports programs include ELL students. All ELL's are encouraged to participate in all school activities. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Materials used with ELLs include but are not limited to texts in their native language, leveled texts, document cameras, recorded texts, e-readers and blogs. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? ENL teacher Camille Freund is fluent in French and proficient/conversational in Spanish. UAM has a Freestanding ENL model. Additional resources and supportive materials are constructed for students in their native language to enhance their understanding in core classes. When possible, the teacher explains and demonstrates concepts in ELLs' native languages, or makes connections (synonyms, cultural or ideological similarities) between English and Native Language to create support and understanding. Some of the marterials and resources used are: English Language Learner Adapted Interactive Reader by Holt McDougal Literature Timed Readings Plus by Jamestown Education Grammar to Go by Robert J. Dixson ESL Literacy by Longman 2018-19 SCEP-FL 57  ESL by Scott Foresman English in Action (Levels 1-4) by Barbara H. Foley and Elizabeth R. Neblett True Stories by Sandra Heyer English Verb Drills by Ed Swick Basic English Grammar by Betty Schrampfer Azar and Stacy A. Hagen Grammar Games by Mario Rinvolucri Language Arts by Harcourt Family Learning Signature Reading by Jamestown Education 100 Clear Grammar Tests by Keith S. Folse Advanced English Grammar for ESL Learners by Mark Lester A Multicultural Reader by Perfection Learning Teaching English Language by Teresa Walter NewsELA.org 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Services, support and resources provide for ELLs are based on their age and grade level so that students are provided with supports that will develop their academic skills so that they are performing at or above grade level in all content areas. This includes leveled literacy groups, 9th grade integrated algebra regents review, 10th grade global review, 11th grade US and Living Environment review and 11th and 12th grade SAT review. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Materials used with ELLs include but are not limited to texts in their native language, leveled texts, document cameras, recorded texts, e-readers and blogs. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). All ELLs are fully integrated into classes and have access to after school clubs, teams, activities, tutoring and regents review. There is a whole school summer orientation for incoming students. This year it included a 4 day bridge week, which focused on skills assessment and integration into the UAM school culture. Additionally, the first week of school, students' literacy, language and math skills are assessed in order to to program them appropriately. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? All students, including ELLs are offered Spanish language programs. Our school has created several classes based on the proficiency of the students. The students are divided into Spanish speakers and non-Spanish speakers. Non-Spanish speaking ELLs are provided basic Spanish language instruction while Spanish speaking ELLs take a course designed to strengthen the students' language skills through various mediums. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 58  Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Our ENL teachers attended professional development offered by the Department of Education and our network. All staff (Assistant principals, teachers, guidance counselors, paraprofessionals, etc.) receive professional development with the ENL teacher in sessions developed for the whole staff (Wednesdays in September) as well as sessions developed for specific content area teams (Wednesdays in November - January). To help our ELLs transition into high school they participate in our summer orientation and bridge week. They are in 9th grade only classes and their advisor is part of the 9th grade team. All staff participate in ELL training led by the ENL teachers during our weekly professional development with a focus on the SIOP methods and academic vocabulary development with additional support given to specific content area teams Grade team, and vertical team PD is done weekly, with a focus on integrating ELLs. Administrative meetings (whole school) planned on cross-collaboration on ELL-SWD planning for next semester; meeting will be facilitated by Special Education teaching team and ENL teacher. Policy and implementation will be discussed with all school staff. Tentative dates: January 13th and January 20 th . 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Guidance Counselors Debbie Delshad and Denise De Jesus push into advisories to support students. Guidance Counselors receive professional development through the UAM grade team and content team meetings. They also receive outside professional development provided by the Borough Support Center and the Urban Assembly. Attendance is taken for UAM's grade team and content team professional development. All teachers attend both of these meetings weekly. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Parents new to the school participate in an orientation over the summer or in September. During these orientation sessions, the school's academic programs and expectations are introduced. Guidance Counselors Debbie Delshad and Denise De Jesus, with teachers present the school along with a description of our Freestanding ENL program. The school also discusses the options available to ELL students in the NYCDOE: Transitional Bilingual Education (TBE), and also Dual Language Program (DL). Translation to Spanish is provided by one of our Spanish speaking teachers, attendance teacher or other administrative staff. All communication is in the parents preferred language using DOE translation services if necessary. Other opportunities to have individual meeting with parents also include UAM's annual Curriculum Night, and Parent Teacher Conferences (which happen twice annually). Additional meetings are available upon request. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. All parents are invited to participate in the Parents Association. Outreach is done by the parent coordinator and parent members. Additionally, there are regularly scheduled information sessions for parents on topics ranging from financial aid to health care. Parents are welcome to school presentations including but not limited to our Open School Nights, Media Presentations and student Academic Round Tables. Parents are invited to visit the school as they desire by making an 2018-19 SCEP-FL 59  appointment with their child's advisor, the guidance counselor, parent coordinator or AP or Principal. Parents who speak languages other than English are provided a translator. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 60 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Cordelia Veve, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 61  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Urban Assembly Media HS School DBN: 03M307 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Cordelia Veve Title Principal n/a Assistant Principal Amalia Sanchez Parent Coordinator Camille Freund ENL/Bilingual Teacher Sophia Crooks Parent n/a Teacher/Subject Area Baldwin Pena Teacher/Subject Area n/a n/a Coach Coach Deborah Delshad School Counselor Fred Walsh Jocelyn Santana n/a 01/01/01 01/01/01 Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member n/a Other n/a Other n/a Other n/a Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 06/28/17 12/8/01 06/28/17 06/28/17 06/28/17 01/01/01 06/28/17 01/01/01 00/00/00 6/28/17 01/01/01 01/01/01 n/a n/a n/a 2018-19 SCEP-FL 62  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 03M307 School Name: Urban Assembly Media HS Superintendent: Frederick Walsh The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. In order to assess the language preferences of our parent community for both written and oral communication we use three resources. The first is the Home Language Identification Survey which is given to all newly enrolled students. This survey informs the school of the language being used in the home. We also use the Student Emergency Cards when communicating with parents. Lastly, we use the Adult Preferred Language Report or RAPL. This report identifies both the written and oral language preferred in the household allowing the school to translate the documents in a timely manner. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 63  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language Spoken prefences include: Afrikaans (1), Arabic (3), Bengali (6), Chinese (1), French (9), Haitian Creole (1), Mandinka (1), Spanish (192), Wolof (2) Written preferences include: Afrikaans (2), Arabic (3), Bengali (6), Chinese (1), French (8), Haitian Creole (1), Mandinka (1), Spanish (192), Wolof (2) 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Student Handbooks - distributed in September Newsletters - distributed bi-monthly Calendars - distributed monthly Parent-teacher conferences - four times a year, September, November, February and May 2018-19 SCEP-FL 64  Progress Report Inserts Regents Tutoring - three times a year Regents calendar - three times a year Attendance letters - as needed, minimum monthly Contact Verification - as needed Mandated parent meeting letters - as needed Parent Association - election notification goes out twice a year and the monthly meeting notifications monthly 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Parent Teacher Conferences happen four times a year. The first time was September 30 th , we had Curriculum Night. On November 19 th and 20 th we have Parent-Teacher Conferences as well as on March 10 th and 11 th . Our final Parent-Teacher Conference is on May 10th. Twice a month advisors work on parent engagement and make calls home to parents to talk about both strengths and struggles their student is experiencing. We call the parents of absent students daily. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 65  Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Our school has a Welcome Poster in the main office. Every home will be mailed the Parents' Bill of Rights as well as the Parents' Guide to Langage Access. The Parent Coordinator will also hold a workshop for parents that want to know more about language access and the variety of resources available to them. A Language ID guide will be made availabe at the security desk and main office as well. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? In order to gather feedback from parents on the quality and availability of services we will use the NYC Schools Learning Environment Survey. We will also speak to parents, informally, to gather insight and better cater our translation and interpretation services to their needs. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 66 
