 03M403 School Name: THE GLOBAL LEARNING COLLABORATIVE Principal: KARLA CHILUIZA 2018-19 SCEP-FL 1  School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Section 4: SCEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Global Learning Collaborative 03M403 School Number (DBN): 310300011403 9-12 145 West 84 th Street 917-750-2930 Fax: 212-877-1138 kchiluiza@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: Phone Number: Karla L. Chiluiza School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Karla L. Chiluiza Jeffrey Picca KemberlyDavid Jerome Miller MarygilTan MariaCheco KennethGuzman N/A District Information Affinity CUNY/UA Geographical District: Superintendent’s Office Address: Fred Walsh Superintendent: 333 7 th Avenue Room 708 New York, NY 10001 fwalsh@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 212-306-3754 Phone Number: 212-356-7514 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 3  Affinity FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Yuet Chu Executive Director: 333 7 th Avenue 8 th Floor New York, NY 10001 ychu@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 646.470.0721 Phone Number: 917.339.1765 Fax: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the SCEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Karla L. Chiluiza Jeffrey Picca KemberlyDavid MarygilTan Kenneth Guzman MariaCheco N/A Jerome Miller Anita Salvate *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/Teacher Member/Teacher 2018-19 SCEP-FL 5  SandraRamirez EvelynAlarcon n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 SCEP-FL 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) is a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. The process of developing and implementing the SCEP is aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding SCEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and SCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 7  In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement 2018-19 SCEP-FL 8  NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the SCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the SCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for SCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 9   Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 5: Build consensus around activities, strategies and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 6: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 7: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 10  1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: SCEP Overview At the Global Learning Collaborative, our goal is to place students on a path to college readiness and global competency. Infused with global themes, our curriculum strengthens awareness and advocacy of global issues. Our curriculum is enhanced by a breadth of academic and extra-curricular experiences exposing students to the rigor of college level work and a globally responsive education.. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Located on the Upper West Side, the Global Learning Collaborative (GLC) serves 432 students from grades 9 to 12. At the Global Learning Collaborative, our curriculum, enhanced by a breadth of academic and extra-curricular experiences, exposes students to the rigor of college level work and a globally responsive education. Special Initiatives Accelerated Global History: Traditionally, students complete the Global History curriculum in two years. At the GLC, our students complete the Global History course and Regents exam in their 9th grade year. Double periods of Global History provide the rich immersion necessary to strengthen students' knowledge of the world around us. World Dance: All 9th graders are programmed for World Dance. This course is aligned to the Global History curriculum and thus, allows students to experience the history and creativity of our world's cultures as expressed through music and dance. Advanced Placement Courses: We currently offer 10 AP courses: English Language, English Literature, Spanish Language, US History, Calculus AB, Government and Politics, Computer Science Principles, World History, Macroeconomics and Environmental Science. AP Scores on the AP Exam may grant students college credit. Each college makes decisions about AP Exam scores eligible for college credit. Collaboration and Partnerships: We currently maintain the following partnerships:  College Access for All  AP for All  Computer Science for All  Morningside Center for Restorative Justice  College Now at Hunter College  Double Discovery Center at Columbia University  Hochman Writing Institute  Generation Citizen  MissionBe for Mindfulness 2018-19 SCEP-FL 11  Solar One  NYU Advising Corps   One to World  UNICEF High School Chapter 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. The school population comprises 27% Black, 64% Latino, 5% White and 3% Asian students. The student body includes 15% English Language Learners and 25% students with Individualized Education Plans. English Language Learners have specific needs that focus on language acquisition. Our Generation Education and English as a New Language teachers work in co-teaching teams to design and implement rigorous instruction that supports reading complex texts, strengthening writing skills and consistently embedding opportunities for speaking and listening. English as a New Language Teachers are programmed to remain with English Language Learners across subjects (ELA and Social Studies or Math and Science) and across grade bands (9th and 10th or 11th and 12th grade). This programming model ensures teachers develop the necessary knowledge of students needed to personalize instruction. Students with Individualized Education Plans have specific needs that focus on access to multiple entry points to the lesson's content and skills. Our General Education and Special Education teachers work in co-teaching teams to design and implement Universal Design for Learning (UDL) best practices. Special Education Teachers are programmed to remain with students with IEPs across subjects (ELA and Social Studies or Math and Science) and across grade bands (9th and 10th or 11th and 12th grade). This programming model ensures teachers develop the necessary knowledge of students needed to personalize instruction. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Framework Area of Strength = Effective School Leadership  The May 2017 Quality Review noted Teacher Support and Supervision as our Area of Celebration. The QR Report notes: School leaders and teacher peers strategically use effective feedback and next steps from classroom observations to support teacher development. Clear expectations and feedback to teachers are constructed using the Danielson Framework for Teaching and are aligned with teachers' professional goals. Framework Area of Focus = Rigorous Instruction  The May 2017 Quality Review noted Assessment as our Area of Focus. Specifically, the QR Report notes: Across classrooms, teachers' assessment practices reflect checking for understanding, but not student self-assessment activities. In 2018-2019 we look to establish greater consistency in systemically designing and implementing activities that promote reflection, peer review and self- assessment. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 12  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 03M403 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 436 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 1 1 8 12 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 14 11 8 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 81.0% % Attendance Rate 79.8% % Reduced Lunch 15.4% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.7% 67.0% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 4.1% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 6.1 0% 14% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 75% 70% 69.5% 7.6% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No No Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups Black Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A NO N/A N/A NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient N/A YES N/A NO No N/A 92 85 86.4% 1.4% 19.7% 24.5% 2.3% 2.1% 4 18% 6.5 N/A N/A 82% 64% 83.7% 9% N/A No Yes N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 13  Economically Disadvantaged YES ALL STUDENTS YES 2018-19 SCEP-FL 14  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed x x x Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths:  A review of curricular documents revealed purposeful planning aligned to the school’s instructional focus. The May 2017 Quality Review Report notes: Curricula promote college and career readiness for all students. Faculty members adjust materials through guides that make texts and lesson objectives more accessible to the school's diversity of learners.  Our graduation rate has steadily improved. In reaching a graduation rate of 80%, the Class of 2018 saw a 4% improvement from the Class of 2017.  Teaching strategies consistently provide multiple entry points into the curricula. Student work products reflect high levels of student thinking and participation in most classes. The consistent use of manipulatives and student to student discussion protocols result in students demonstrating higher-order thinking in work products and in discussions reflecting high levels of thinking and participation. (May 2017 QR Report) Priority Needs: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 15   The school received a Focus Designation based on ELA and Math Regents college-readiness scores. This means that we need to increase the number of students who score above 74 on the CC math Regents exam and above 79 on the CC ELA Regents Exam. (NYS School Report Card Feb. 2016)  A review of our classroom practices revealed a need to increase opportunities for student self-assessment activities. (May 2017 QR Report) Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will effectively increase the level of rigor across classrooms, as evidenced by a 4% increase in the number of 12th grade students meeting college readiness benchmarks in ELA and math Regents Exams, from 36% to 40% on the CC ELA Regents Exam and from 35% to 39% on the CC Algebra Regents Exam. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 16  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Common Planning Time is embedded in the teacher schedule. This schedule allows English, Math, English as a New Language (ENL) and Special Education co-teachers to co-plan units of study, performance tasks and lesson plans with appropriate UDL strategies to support all learners. UDL strategies include ensuring lessons incorporate multiple representations of content and skills (UDL Principal 3). English, Math, ESL, SPED teachers Design and facilitate teacher PD aligned to best practices for standardizing writing instruction across content areas. Teacher PD to be provided through ELA, History, Science, and World Language Department meetings and the Hochman Writing Institute. All teachers September to January ENL and SPED teachers support students in a horizontal (ELA and Social Studies; Math and Science) and vertical loop (9th to 10th grade and 11th to 12th grade) so they can provide continuous instructional support to high need student groups. SWD and ELLs September to June Grade level teams engage in data analysis (scholarship and attendance) to coordinate the weekly parental outreach plan in which teachers call parents or meet with parents to discuss students’ progress. Families September to June Teachers take attendance and send instant text messages to families using the Skedula Messenger platform. Families can communicate with teachers on the Skedula Messenger platform. PupilPath, our online grade-book, grants parents the ability to view grades, attendance and assignments. Parents can e-mail teachers and receive emails from teachers. PupilPath parent workshops are coordinated each semester by our parent coordinator. Parent conferences and workshops will be offered throughout the school September to June School Principal Assistant Principal of Instruction Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) SPED Coordinator ENL Coordinator PD Committee Hochman Writing Institute Department Chairs School Principal Assistant Principal of Instruction SPED Coordinator ENL Coordinator Grade level leaders Advisors Parent Coordinator 2018-19 SCEP-FL 17  year with topics connected to our focus on writing. Parents will receive hands-on workshop on the Hochman Writing Program so they can support their children at home. To support teachers with designing coherent and rigorous units, school leaders will provide feedback to unit maps on Rubicon Atlas' messaging system. Through cycles of observations and debriefs, school leaders will monitor progress with unit development and implementation. English, Social Studies, ESL, SPED teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement November School leaders How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. It has been our practice to share with families our curriculum and Common Core activities at Meet the Staff Night. Timeline: Our parent coordinator designs and facilitates monthly family workshops designed to engage families with our Hochman Writing program and online resources that families can use to support their child at home. Key personnel: Parent Coordinator. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Schedule adjustment  1 additional period to allow for common planning time Human Resources:  5 per diem days to hire substitutes who will cover classes so that teachers can participate in external professional development throughout the school year.  10 per diem days to hire substitutes who will cover classes so that teachers can schedule inter-visitations. Instructional Resources:  Hochman Writing Institute High Impact Partnership  Curricular materials (student texts and documents) to supplement our curriculum  Materials for parent workshops. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring 2018-19 SCEP-FL 18  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February, 2019, the level of rigor across classrooms will improve, as evidenced by an increase of 2% in the number of 12th graders meeting college readiness benchmarks on the CC ELA Regents examination from 36% to 38% and on a math Regents exam from 35% to 37%. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. January 2019 CC ELA Regents and CC Math Regents Exam scores June 2019 CC ELA Regents and CC Math Regents Exam scores Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 19  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. x x x SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Strengths:  All students belong to a small Advisory group. This allows all students to be well known by an Advisor. Our Advisory curriculum combines Restorative Justice Circles and College Board's CollegeEd Curriculum. This curriculum addresses socio-emotional needs in the college preparation process.  Our partnership with College Access for All and NYU Advisory Corps makes it possible to support students with a dedicated College Advisor who guides juniors and seniors through the college application process. Priority Need:  While our 2017-2018 attendance rate improved from the previous school year, we have identified chronically absent students per grade level. Attendance case managers work with families to support their attendance improvement plan. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 20  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools –Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, our socio-emotional interventions will target students with at risk attendance as evidenced by a 2% increase in average student attendance from 86% to 88%. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 21  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Skedula Messenger will be utilized to send text message to families. The text message will be translated to address the needs of English Language Learners. Families September ENL Families Additionally, families have access to real time attendance data via their PupilPath parent account. A mini-unit of Staff Professional Development will be implemented on the use of Skedula Messenger to record and track attendance per class period on a weekly basis. Monday Extended Time is utilized for grade level team meetings. Grade level teams use this time to analyze grade level attendance data, design grade-level incentive systems to promote strong attendance and coordinate the parent engagement outreach plan. Teacher September School leaders All advisors September to June School leaders Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) School leaders, grade level leaders, all teachers Grade level leaders Advisors Attendance Case Managers School leaders Grade level leaders Advisors Attendance Case Managers School leaders Monday Extended Time is utilized for parent engagement time. During this time, teachers call, text and/or email families to communicate student's attendance trends and ways to support strong school attendance at home. All advisors Grade level leaders September to June Professional development is provided to grade level leaders once a month. This time serves to analyze grade level attendance data and align incentives towards the goal of strong attendance. Grade level leaders share out their plans and receive feedback from school leaders. Grade level leaders September to June 2018-19 SCEP-FL 22  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Grade level teams and attendance case managers work closely with families to support the attendance goal. Timeline: We utilize a daily text messaging system to increase awareness of attendance. This form of communication allows families to respond and this increases communication. Key personnel: Parent Coordinator Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources: ● 3 hours of per-session for 4 grade level leaders for grade level leaders per month Instructional Resources:  College Board’s Advisory Curriculum for grades 9 – 12.  Attendance chart trackers  Materials for incentives  Skedula Messenger Schedule Adjustment:  Advisory meets for 10 minutes Monday to Thursday. On Fridays, advisory meets for 38 minutes, allowing for the implementation of advisory lessons. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 23  Midpoint Benchmark: By February 2019, year to date student attendance will reach 87%. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Daily, weekly. monthly Year to Date attendance reports, class period attendance reports, cutting reports and lateness reports. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 24  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. SOP(s) Addressed x x x 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. x 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths:  There are established systems for teachers to collaborate: co-teaching groups, department teams, Professional Learning Communities, grade level teams.  General education, Special Education and English as a Second Language co-teachers share common planning time.  Department teams meet once a week for looking at student work, vertical planning and discussing inter-visitations feedback.  Grade level teachers team meet once a week to co-plan advisory lessons, engage in data analysis and plan parent outreach.  Our professional development model centers on teacher learning teams engaged in a cycle of inquiry. Teacher teams design a focus question, engage in research, implement an action plan, reflect and share out with the whole staff.  Department chairs and grade level leaders are provided with monthly professional development to build  teacher leadership capacity and monitor progress with teacher team goals. School leaders participate in teacher teams and provide support through 1:1 department chair PDs to monitor progress of teacher team towards the departmental goal and analyze Regents results. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 25  Priority Need:  Establish a grade level team approach to the analysis of credit accumulation to ensure a reduction in students with Promotion in Doubt status. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, effective teacher collaboration in grade level teacher teams will lead to a 6% increase in credit accumulation across grades from 74% to 80%. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 26  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Design and facilitate teacher Professional Development aligned to Understanding By Design best practices for curriculum mapping and lesson design to serve the needs of diverse learners. Grade Level teams meet once a week to analyze student performance and monitor the goal of credit accumulation per grade level. Grade teams communicate and collaborate with families to communicate credit accumulation process. Additionally, grade teams design Advisory lessons designed to promote student monitoring and reflection of credit accumulation goals and progress. All Teachers September PD Committee to June Families Students September to June Hochman Writing Program School leaders Grade Level Leaders Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Teachers Advisors School leaders SPED Teachers ENL Teachers School leaders Special Education and ENL teachers meet to monitor credit accumulation for special populations. Teacher teams implement UDL best practices and through peer-invisitations support each other with these practices. ELLs and students with IEP September to June To support teachers with aligning UDL best practices, school leaders will provide feedback to lesson plans through the cycles of observations. All teachers September to June 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Grade level teams meet once a week to design the family outreach for each student. Grade level leaders ensure follow up to monitor student progress. Additionally, our parent coordinator designs and facilitates monthly family workshops designed to promote teacher-parent collaboration such as Hochman Writing, Attendance monitoring on PupilPath, and Communicating with teachers. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 27  Key personnel: Parent Coordinator Amy and grade level leaders Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Schedule adjustment  1 additional period to allow for common planning time Human Resources:  5 per diem days to hire substitutes who will cover classes so that teachers can participate in external professional development throughout the school year.  10 per diem days to hire substitutes who will cover classes so that teachers can schedule inter-visitations. Instructional Resources:  Curricular materials (student texts and documents) to supplement our curriculum  Materials for parent workshops. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Midpoint benchmark: By February 2019, we expect a 3% increase in credit accumulation per grade level. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Skedula gradebook, progress reports, report card data, transcript credit accumulation data, promotion in doubt status report. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 28  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). x x x x SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths:  Our professional development model centers on teacher learning teams engaged in a cycle of inquiry. Teacher teams design a focus question, engage in research, implement an action plan, reflect and share out with the whole staff.  Our High Impact Partnership with the Hochman Writing Institute means teachers receive a series of professional development (PD) sessions around writing instruction, non-evaluative classroom observations and feedback and recommendations based on submitted samples of student writing throughout the school year. Teachers return from Hochman Writing PD and plan unit and lesson implementation.  Department chairs and grade level leaders are provided with monthly professional development to build teacher leadership capacity and monitor progress with teacher team goals.  Teachers are encouraged to attend external Professional Development offered by national and regional teacher organizations. This year, PD conferences are planned for English as a New Language teachers (TESOL), math teachers (NCTM), English teachers (Hochman Writing Institute) and science teachers (NSTA). 2018-19 SCEP-FL 29  Priority Need:  To reach greater consistency across classrooms with normed assessment practices such as monitoring and adjusting use of trackers, intentional grouping, peer assessment and self-assessment. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART– Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, school leaders will design and implement a professional development plan as evidenced by a 6% increase in the number of teachers who earn an Effective rating in Assessment (Danielson 3d) from Cycle 1 to Cycle 4 of teacher observations. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 30  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) English teachers administered a diagnostic exam at the Students September School leaders beginning of the school year. Item analysis results were Teachers Teachers September to November School leaders Teachers Teachers December to February School leaders ELLs and SWD September to June Teachers School leaders Teachers, ESL, SPED co-teachers shared at the weekly English department meeting. Student difficulty with reading comprehension questions trended as an area of improvement. The teacher team designed an action plan that called for vertical alignment of close reading strategies to support reading comprehension. English teachers engaged in analysis of EngageNY modules and checklists that focused on close reading strategies. English teachers will vertically align close reading skills checklists to build towards greater levels of text complexity per grade level. Inter-visitations will allow English teachers to support each other with close reading strategies, thus, building peer to peer support and trust. Weekly common planning time between English, English as Second Language (ESL), Special Education (SPED) teachers allows for coordination of scaffolds and modifications to support all learners. ESL and SPED teachers are programmed in a horizontal and vertical loop so as to provide a culture where students feel academically and personally known and supported. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 31  School leaders will observe teachers, provide 1:1 face to face feedback, ratings and next steps to support assessment practices. Observation trends and ratings will inform and shape the weekly professional development meeting. Teachers September to June School leaders 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The school sends monthly family newsletters that support understanding of our assessment practices. Additionally, families receive progress reports with results of interim assessments so they can support their children at home. Key personnel: Assessment Coordinator and Parent Coordinator. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Schedule adjustment  1 additional period to allow for common planning time Human Resources:  1 Assistant Principal of Instruction to support teacher practice  5 Per diem days to hire substitutes who will cover classes so that teachers can participate in external professional development throughout the school year.  10 Per diem days to hire substitutes who will cover classes so that teachers can schedule inter-visitations. Instructional Resources:  Hochman Writing Institute High Impact Partnership  EngageNY Curricular materials (student texts and documents) to supplement our curriculum  Materials for parent workshops Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 32  Midpoint benchmark: By February 2018, the professional development plan that builds teachers' capacity to utilize assessment in instruction will be evidenced by a 3% increase in the number of teachers who score an Effective rating on Danielson 3d (Using Assessment in Instruction) from Cycle 1 to Cycle 2. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Teacher observation ratings on Danielson component 3d: Using Assessment in Instruction, teacher lesson plans and post-observation feedback which includes teacher self-reflection Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 33  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. x x x SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths:  There are established systems for communicating with families: PupilPath, attendance team outreach, monthly parent newsletters, advisor structure, Monday’s parental outreach, and the school’s website.  Based on parental input, our parent coordinator has planned 3 parent workshops per semester.  We have partnered with Hunter College to offer College Now courses, Project Rousseau and Double Discovery Center to offer students assistance with the college application process.  We have established partnerships with New York Public Library, HealthFirst Insurance Plan, Food Bank for income tax preparation. Our partners participate in our parent teacher conferences, providing our families with resources and contact information for additional services. Priority Need:  To increase family involvement at teacher parent conferences, parent workshops, Parent Teacher Association and School Leadership Team meetings. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 34  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2018, there will be a 2% increase of families’ average attendance rate from 38% (2017-2018 Parent Teacher Conferences) to 40% for 2018-2019 Parent Teacher Conferences. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 35  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Utilize call and text messaging program to communicate Families September to June Parent Coordinator with families in the targeted home languaged on parent teacher conference dates. ENL Families Advisors Utilize Monday Extended Time for advisors to outreach to families and schedule appointments for Parent Teacher conferences. Reward the advisory with the highest turn-out of families per grade. At the end of every marking period, a report indicating Families which students with IEPs or ELLs failed a course is presented to SPED department and ESL department. Teachers within the department conduct outreach to families and schedule Parent Teacher conferences to September to June Data Specialist SPED and ESL department chair SPED and ESL teachers discuss how to support students. PupilPath, our online gradebook, grants families the Families ability to view grades, attendance and behavioral logs. September to June Parent coordinator Advisors Families can email teachers and receive emails from Grade level leaders teachers. PupilPath family workshops are coordinated each semester by our parent coordinator. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 36  Monthly family newsletter and calendar increase the family's awareness of key academic dates and events. Six family workshops will be offered throughout the school year with topics related to parenting adolescents. Establish grade level teams that engage in kid talk and coordinate the weekly parental outreach plan. Teachers call parents or meet with families to discuss students’ progress. Utilize family leaders to outreach to other families for Families Parent Teacher conferences. This creates support and September to June Parent coordinator Parent leaders trust among families. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Double Discovery Center Restorative Justice Skedula Messenger Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources:  Parent coordinator, grade level leaders, advisors Schedule adjustment:  Monday Extended Time will serve for grade level team meetings to coordinate family outreach plan. Following grade level meetings, teachers will engage families through emails, phone calls, etc. Instructional Resources:  Global Connect to send text messages to families.  Skedula Messenger 2018-19 SCEP-FL 37  Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Midpoint Benchmark: By February 2019, we expect an increase of 1% in the family attendance rate at parent teacher conferences from the 2017-2018 average rate of 38% to 39%. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Family attendance rate at the November Parent Teacher Conference Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 38  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Students with low 8 th grade ELA scores. Students who have failed the ELA Regents. Mathematics Students who have failed the Algebra or Geometry Regents. Science Social Studies Students who have failed the Living Environment or Earth Science Regents. Students who have failed the Global History or US HistoryRegents exam. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Period has been created to ensure small group instruction for students who have a low 8th grade ELAscore. Students who failed the Regents exam are programmed for a period of additional support. Period has been created to ensure small group instruction for students who have failed the Regents exam in Algebra or Geometry. Period has been created to ensure small group instruction for students who have failed the scienceRegents exam. Period has been created to ensure small group instruction for students who have Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small group period of instruction embedded in the regular school schedule. During the day, in a period called recitation. Small group period of instruction embedded in the regular school schedule. During the day, in a period called recitation. Small group period of instruction embedded in the regular school schedule. During the day, in a period called recitation. Small group period of instruction embedded in the regular school schedule. During the day, in a period called recitation. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 39 At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Students who are failing 3 or more classes on their report cards will be placed on a counseling schedule. failed the Regents exam. Guidance counselor provides at risk counseling to students who are identified as not meeting attendance goal and not passing 3 or more classes. Individual student and parent counseling During a non-core academic period counseling session is embedded in the regular school schedule. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 40  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 40 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. We have a guidance counselor who meets with students in temporary housing to providing counseling and monitor the students' social, emotional and academic progress. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). n/a 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 41  n/a 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. n/a 2018-19 SCEP-FL 42  Section 8: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Recruitment: ● Teachers are recruited at hiring fairs at NYU and Columbia University and NYC Teaching Fellows. Retention: ● We provide high quality PD through weekly PD sessions aligned to the school’s instructional focus. ● We provide a New Teacher PLC to support teachers new to our school community. The PLC focuses on instructional practices covered last school year. ● First year teachers are paired with a mentor teacher. Assignments: ● All general, SPED and ESL teachers participate in weekly common planning time through which they engage in curriculum mapping and lesson planning. ● All department teachers meet once a week to look at student work, vertically plan curriculum and debriefs inter-visitations. ● All grade level teachers meet once a week to plan advisory lessons, engage in data analysis and coordinate the parent outreach plan. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). 2018-19 SCEP-FL 43  Teacher PD includes: 1. PD committee comprised of teachers meet to design PD aligned to the school’s instructional focus of strengthening literacy strategies aimed at improving vocabulary acquisition, reading comprehension and writing skills. 2. Our professional development model centers on teacher learning teams engaged in a cycle of inquiry. Teacher teams design a focus question, engage in research, implement an action plan, reflect and share out with the whole staff. 3. Teacher Common Planning Time is used by teacher teams to develop curriculum aligned to CCLS. The goal is to achieve vertical alignment across all grades. 4. New Teacher PLC: Once a week for PLC Cycle 1 we offer PD for new teachers to our school to provide support with the Danielson Framework and instructional strategies. 5. Assistant principal and principal participate in PD through school inter-visitations, ASCD, network, etc. 6. Department chairs and grade level team leaders receive monthly PD with school leaders. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 44  Measure Of Student Learning (MOSL) committee of teacher members was created. We came together to discuss options and implications. Decisions were made as a committee. Then the entire staff received Professional Development on MOSL. As a staff we discussed the incorporation of interim assessments into our school calendar to systematically gather and analyze evidence of student learning. During department Common Planning Time, teachers designed common assessments which were administered as midterm exams. During weekly Professional Development sessions, as a staff we have looked at goals per department and item analysis of interim assessments and Regents exams to improve instruction and establish an action plan. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (SCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Title I Part A (Basic) Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 294,043.00 16,979 86,314 0 12,366 0 3,055,908 x x x x x x x Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) 5A, 5C, 5D, 5E 5A, 5C, 5D, 5E 5A, 5C, 5D, 5E n/a 5A, 5C, 5D, 5E n/a 5A, 5C, 5D, 5E 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 45  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/SCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 46   Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 47  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Global Learning Collaborative , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA) Act, is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Global Learning Collaborative will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve writing skills using best practices from the Hochman Writing Program ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 48  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The Global Learning Collaborative's Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 49  ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Elementary and Secondary School Act; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The Global Learning Collaborative will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 50  Global Learning Collaborative , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA) Act, is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA) Act; I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 51  Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Elementary and Secondary School Act Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 52  ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; III. Student Responsibilities ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 53  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: Global Learning Collaborative This school is (check one): DBN: 03M403 conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): K 6 1 7 2 8 3 9 4 10 5 11 12 2018-19 SCEP-FL 54  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Rationale: For school year 2018-2019, the Global Learning Collaborative continues the Title III goals of developing academic English and increasing achievement in the core content areas of math, English and Social Studies. Specifically, the Title III direct instruction supplemental program will provide students with time after school for academic support with Algebra I on Wednesdays and academic writing development with ELA and Social Studies content writing on Thursdays. Students will be engaged in the following activities: direct instruction, independent and/or group practice and 1:1 student conferences for review and feedback. Subgroups and grade levels of students to be served: ELLs identified as entering, emerging or transitioning on the 2017-2018 NYSESLAT Exam. Scores on NYSESLAT and the ELA and Social Studies Regents Exams reveal a need to support ELLs with academic writing. Grade levels: 9- 12 Schedule and duration: I. The Math ENL Academy runs Wednesdays from 3:00 pm to 4:00 pm. There is one Math teacher and one ENL teacher running this program. The teachers will use a team building model with flexible groupings to meet the needs of students. The dates of operation are below: September 26 = 2 per-sessions hours October: 3,10,17, 24,31 = 10 per-session hours November: 7,14,21,28 = 8 per-sessions hours December: 5, 12, 19 = 6 per-session hours January: 2,9,16,30 = 8 per-session hours February: 6, 13, 27 = 6 per-session hours March: 6, 13, 20, 27 = 8 per-session hours April: 3, 10, 17 = 6 per-session hours May: 1, 8, 15, 22, 29 = 10 per-session hours June: 5, 12: 4 per-session hours Total per session hours for Math ENL Academy = 68 per-session hours II. The ELA ENL Academy runs Thursdays from 3:00 pm to 4:00 pm. There is one ELA teacher and one ENL teacher running this program. The dates of operation are below: September 27 = 2 per-sessions hours October: 4, 11, 18, 25 = 8 per-session hours November: 1, 8, 15, 29 = 8 per-sessions hours December: 6, 13, 20 = 6 per-session hours January: 3, 10, 17, 31 = 8 per-session hours 2018-19 SCEP-FL 55  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information February: 7, 14, 28 = 6 per-session hours March: 7, 14, 21, 28 = 8 per-session hours April: 4, 11, 18 = 6 per-session hours May: 2, 9, 16, 23, 30 = 10 per-session hours June: 13: 2 per-session hours Total per session hours for the ELA ENL Academy = 64 per-session hours III. The Social Studies ENL Academy runs Thursdays from 3:00 pm to 4:00 pm. There is one Social Studies teacher and one ENL teacher running this program. The dates of operation are below: September 27 = 2 per-sessions hours October: 4, 11, 18, 25 = 8 per-session hours November: 1, 8, 15, 29 = 8 per-sessions hours December: 6, 13, 20 = 6 per-session hours January: 3, 10, 17, 31 = 8 per-session hours February: 7, 14, 28 = 6 per-session hours March: 7, 14, 21, 28 = 8 per-session hours April: 4, 11, 18 = 6 per-session hours May: 2, 9, 16, 23, 30 = 10 per-session hours June: 13: 2 per-session hours Total per session hours for the Social Studies ENL Academy = 64 per-session hours Cost for entire program: 196 per session hours = $11, 887.40 Language of instruction: English Number and types of certified teachers: Wednesday Math Academy = 1 Math Teacher + 1 ENL Teacher = 2 total teachers Thursday ELA Academy = 1 ELA Teacher + 1 ENL Teacher = 2 total teachers Thursday Social Studies Academy = 1 Social Studies + 1 ENL teacher = 2 teachers Types of materials: Composition notebooks for student use will be purchased for this program so that each student may receive a book for note-taking Cost of materials: $478.60 Total cost of program = $11, 887.40 + $478.60 = $12, 366 (100% of allocation is spent on ENL Academy) Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Rationale: Our ENL teacher will engage in a study group to support with writing across the curriculum. Specially, our ENL teacher will receive training on the Hochman Writing Method which is our school-wide common language and approach to writing instruction. Hochman Writing provides a series of scaffolds that allows English Language Learners to progress from sentence writing to essay writing. Thus, students develop their academic writing skills. Cost: Our ENL teacher will receive 10 hours of per-session not to be paid from Title III funds. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 56  Part C: Professional Development Teachers to receive training: 2 ENL teachers Schedule and duration: Monthly hourly meetings scheduled from 3:00 pm to 4:00 pm in room 416 10 Topics to be covered per month: September 21, 2018: Hochman writing sentences to support development of academic language October 26, 2018: Hochman writing sentences to support development of academic language November 30, 2018: Hochman writing paragraphs to support development of academic language December 21, 2018: Hochman writing paragraphs to support development of academic language January 18, 2019: Hochman outlining essays to support development of academic language February 15, 2019: Hochman outlining essays to support development of academic language March 22, 2019: Engaging students in peer editing to support development of academic language April 12, 2019: Engaging students in peer editing to support development of academic language May 24, 2019: Engaging students in publishing to support development of academic language June 7, 2019: Engaging students in publishing to support development of academic language Name of provider: ENL Teacher Chair: Timea Voros Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Rationale: Through relevant parent workshops for the parents of High School ELLs, we will inform and expose parents to the college application process and high interest topics. The topics below are designed specifically for families of English Language Learners. These opportunities will strengthen academic language development towards college and academic achievement. Records of agendas, attendance sheets and invitations will be maintained in a binder kept in the office of the parent coordinator. Schedule and duration: After school meetings from 5:00 pm to 7:00 pm Topics to be covered: October 17, 2018: Pupil Path Workshop. In this workshop, ENL families will log in and assess their child's grade book. Discussion will focus on establishing frequent monitoring of grades and strong communication with teachers. and action planning for academic success in the new year. January 15, 2019: Reviewing the Fall semester transcript. In this workshop, ENL families will review NYS credit and exam requirements towards the HS diploma. This informative workshop will also include action planning for academic success in the spring semester. Name of Providers: Parent Coordinator Amy Casillas Cost: Parent Coordinators do not earn per-session. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 57 Part D: Parental Engagement Activities How parents will be notified: (1) Monthly parent newsletters (2) Automatic text messages and phone calls (3) Announcement on school's website (4) Postcards Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 58  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 03 School Name The Global Learning Collaborative Borough Manhattan School Number 403 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Karla L. Chiluiza Coach NA ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Timea Voros Teacher/Subject Area Natasha Sta.Ana/ENL Teacher/Subject Area Nadeia Miah/ENL Related-Service Provider type here Superintendent Fred Walsh Assistant Principal Stacey Batista Coach NA School Counselor Julia Garcia Parent type here Parent Coordinator Amy Casillas Field Support Center Staff Member Maria Houghton Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 3 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] D. Student Demographics 2018-19 SCEP-FL 59  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 420 Total number of ELLs 65 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 15.48% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 3 4 2 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? We use data from the NYSITELL, the NYSESLAT and teacher-created assessments to inform our instructional plan for ELLs. Our data reveals that while a large number of our ELLs are successful in their coursework, they have difficulty with passing Regents exams (see data under New York State Regents below). However, results from the NYSESLAT reveal that over half of our ELLs score at transitioning (10) and expanding (28) levels of proficiency. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 2018-19 SCEP-FL 60  Our ENL teachers support our students through our vertical and horizontal loop. This means that students have the same ENL teacher for Math/Science and ELA/History for 9/10 and 11/12. Additionally, students have after-school support groups where they can receive extra support with homework and other assignments. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We specifically program our ELLs based on their English proficiency level, providing more instructional minutes from a licensed ENL teacher than the required minutes. Data is gathered frequently and compared to determine the success of our ELLs both in coursework and on Regents exams. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Once summative data is gathered, ENL teachers work with content teachers to design and implement modifications such as reteach/retool lessons and intentional groups to address misconceptions. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] N/A 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. NYSESLAT scores, ELA Regents scores, Algebra Regents Scores, Hochman writing scores. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? A Google spreadsheet is created and shared with all ENL and content teachers teachers so they have access to the data and the findings. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. We incorporates both the integrated and standalone models: In the 9th grade integrated model students travel as a group. When students reach grade 10, they are grouped based on credit and Regents needs. This requires heterogeneous grouping. In the standalone model, students are grouped by grade band (9/10 and 11/12) in homogeneous groups. Our ENL teachers are programmed for a horizontal and vertical loop. This means they co-teach 9/10 ELA and History, 11/12 ELA and History, 9/10 Math and Science. This allows our teachers to bridge support across content areas and leverage their relationship with students for 2 consecutive years. b. TBE program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 61  c. DL program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Beginning students are programmed to receive 3 units or 540 minutes of ESL per week, intermediate levels receive 2 units or 360 minutes per week and advanced levels receive 1 unit or 180 minutes of ESL and 1 unit of ELA per week (consistent with CR Part 154). Students are grouped heterogeneously in content classes and homogeneously in standalone classes. Additionally, all students who score entering and emerging on the NYSESLAT are programmed for a stand-alone ELA/ESL class. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. The curriculum development at the Global Learning Collaborative reflects a three-stage design process called Understanding By Design (Stage 1-Desired Results, Stage 2-Assessments and Stage 3- Learning Activities. Completed unit curriculum maps that are CCLS aligned are uploaded onto Rubicon Atlas using this framework. Using the Workshop Model, teachers teach skills and introduce concepts in directed mini-lessons, design meaningful tasks, and serve as facilitators for students as they actively produce high quality content rated products. Through this workshop model, teachers actively work with students individually or in small groups, assessing student understanding and providing individualized meaningful support. For each content area, general content teachers have ESL co-teachers who plan (during scheduled common planning times) units and lessons that are infused with ESL strategies and methodologies geared toward language objectives, academic and content vocabulary acquisition and leveled learning tasks and/or learning activities. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Home language surveys are administered at the beginning of year. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status For SIFE students and newcomer students, we provide native language literacy classes for Spanish speakers, for Global Studies, there is a double block of integrated ENL instruction. For ELL receiving services 4 to 6 years and 6 plus. In addition to the mandated minutes, we provide Regents support. For former ELLs, for assessment, we provide extra time and glossaries while ESL teachers keep open communication with content teachers for additional support as needed. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Lessons created for ICT classes for ELL-SWDs are planned and created by content teacher, special education teacher and ESL teacher. During learning activities (tasks) students are, to the extent possible, grouped homogeneously based on learning level and ability and on English language proficiency. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? .The uniqueness of the Global Learning Collaborative is that we have ICT content classes for SWDs. To help ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment, our ESL teachers push-in a co- 2018-19 SCEP-FL 62  taught model to assist both the content and special education teacher. There are three teachers in the ELL-SWDs classroom. In another period; ESL teachers conduct ELA based lessons using traditional ESL methodologies and strategies to help students with literature, writing and language. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Our ESL program is structured to meet the demands of preparing students to achieve academic success in standardized testing through discovery and mastering of subjects during regular coursework. Additionally, for Math, Social Studies, Science and ELA at all levels, ELL classes are programmed with a co-ESL teacher who assists the content teacher by providing strategies and methodogies that facilitate the acquisition of learning by ELL students. ESL teachers co-teach at all levels of ELA, Science, Social Studies and Math. For entering and emerging ELLs, ELA is also provided in a self-contained classsroom setting. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We implemented the Hochman writing program geared toward improving reading comprehension, vocabulary acquisition and improving writing proficiency for ELLs. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs are given access to all school programs and are encouraged by all to participate. In particular, our ELLs participate in the school campus PSAL sports, in school specific extra-curricular activities -- cooking club, musical concerts, international travel, community service, College Now programs as well as our after school and week-end credit recovery and Regents prep programs, where applicable and necessary. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. All subjects are taught visually using SMART BOARDs, dedicated computer laboratory, use of Google translate, native language libraries and supplementary websites as well as use of audible and visual materials where applicable and necessary. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? As our program is an ENL program, we do not solely provide home language for our students. All students including ELL students are eligible to avail themselves of any of the five World Languages (French, Spanish, Mandarin, Italian and German) offer at our school. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Required services and resources are provided to ELL students based on English Language proficiency based on the NYSESLAT results. Additionally, students are programmed based on their Regents needs. For example, there are Regents prep classes with a mix of grades 9 through 12. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? All subjects are taught visually using SMART BOARDs, dedicated computer laboratory, use of Google translate, native language libraries and supplementary websites as well as use of audible and visual materials where applicable and necessary. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). 2018-19 SCEP-FL 63  Newly enrolled ELLs are programmed according to the NYSITELL results. However, in each content area, teachers as well as ESL teachers provide summary packets which highlight course requirements, missed content and class and project summaries. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? We offer 5 World Languages: Spanish, Italian, Mandarin, French and German that is available to all students including ELL:s.. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Professional development on Common Core Learning Standards, Danielson's Framework for Teaching, Universal Learning Design, Understanding By Design, Working and reviewing data as a Professional Learning Communiity, Data Driven Instruction, among other topics are provided for all staff including our ESL teachers. This professional development focuses on helping our students, in particular, our ELLs to meet the common cores standards and literacy across curricula, and includes topics such as Demystifiying ELL data, Redefining Instructional Models to promote English Language Learner's and Reading Skills , and Providing ELLs Access to Challenging Content: Distributed Responsibility for Developing Academic Language, etc. Additionally, all new teachers including ESL teachers are coached by a mentor teacher to assist them in planning, delivery and assessment. All teachers including ELL teachers participate in outside vendor and DOE professional development, e.g. all of our ESL teachers attended QTEL as available. Additionally, ESL teachers are participating in on-site intervisitation at other schools with large ELL populations to explore and see first hand, best ESL practices in other schools. See #1 above. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Outside professional development as well as training from DOE ELL personnel are made available to all ESL teachers in order to assist ELLs as they transition from middle school to high school. The requirements for professional development as per CR Part 154.2 are met during our intiial in-house PDs for all teachers and via outside specific professional development for our ESL teachers. Where deemed beneficial, all teachers are allowed to attend outside ELL specific professional development. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 64  Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? During all regular activities, i.e. PTA, SLT, Curriculum Night, etc., opportunity is made possible for individual meetings with the parents of our ELLs. We meet identified interpretion needs primarily through translation servies provided both verbally over-the-phone and in written form that are provided by our Parent Coordinator, who is bilingual, and from our World Language teachers who teach Spanish, French, Italian, German and Mandarin. If communication is necessary is another language, we contact and secure the services of the Translation and Interpretation Unit. The ESL Coordinator (Department Chair) along wth the Assistant Principal of Instruction and Pupil Personnel Secretary and Parent Coordinator work together to maintain control and proper retention of meetings and hard copy documents. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Parents of ELLs are invited to participate is specific activities that promote socialization as well as provide workshops specific to the needs of ELLs. Parent Appreciation night where movie tickets, etc. are provided is once such activity wherein specific outreach and invitations are extended to parents of ELLs. Additionally, we conduct workshops that are specific to the needs of parents of ELLs. One such workshop is the College for Immigrants which makes parents aware of scholarship programs and social aspects of college residentail living on campus. We also provide a workshop entitled, "College Dream Act" for undocumented students. Both workshops serve to help inform parents of our ELLs about the various pathways to college for their children while addressing academic responsibility and legal challenges, where applicable. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 65 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Karla Chiluiza, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 66  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Global Learning Collaborative School DBN: 03M403 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Karla Chiluiza Title Principal Stacey Batista Assistant Principal Amy Casillas Timea Voros Parent Coordinator ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Nadeia Miah Teacher/Subject Area Natasha Sta.Ana Teacher/Subject Area Julia Garcia Fred Walsh Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 2018-19 SCEP-FL 67  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 03M403 School Name: The Global Learning Collaborative Superintendent: Fred Walsh The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. In order to determine the translation needs for our community, we review both the home language information provided in ARIS and ATS and complete an informal survey among our population. ARIS and ATS provide us with the documented home languages. As such, we are able to prepare appropriate materials from orientation throughout the school year until we get to know each family and ensure we are maximizing communication. Home language information is recorded on Emergency Cards, in our online grading system (Skedula), in ATS, and with advisors (teachers who stay with the same group of students for four years). Our Parent Coordinator also completes informal surveys through conversations, conferences (PTA and teacher conferences), mailings, and email. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 68  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language Most of our parents prefer that both written and oral communication is in their home language with the majority of parents speaking Spanish. Other home languages spoken by our parents are: French, German, Mandarin, Albanian, and Arabic. We offer courses in French, Spanish, German, Italian and Mandarin and accordingly those teachers assist with translation in the those languages. Where necessary, for other languages, we contact Translation Services for support. Translation needs are reported to the community through staff meetings, through the School Leadership Team and through the PTA's Executive Board. 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 69  Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. All materials (including monthly newsletter, emails, parent-teacher conference announcements, after-school program information and services, calendars, New York State testing dates, general overview of student curriculum, letters from the school leadership, and handouts) go out to the community in both English and Spanish and other languages where needed. This includes the Parent Handbook as well as student progress reports that are sent home every 6 weeks. In order to provide timely translations, all school-based materials that cannot be translated by school staff are sent to the Translation Unit (outside the school) at least two weeks prior to distribution. Additional translating services are paid for in house (school staff) to ensure that all materials are available in a timely manner (provided by teachers and/or parent volunteers). 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Throughout the school year, there are various formal face-to-face meetings with parents such as Chancellor's mandated curriculum night, parent outreach for student progress reports and behavior and outreach around attendance and tardiness. Informal interactions are anticipated by a student's advisor regarding social, emotional and academic issues and handles immediately. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 70  3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Materials posted in the main office of the school, including information about access to ARIS Parent Link and other DOE services and are displayed in multiple languages. Copies of the Chancellor's Discipline Code, Title 1, Title III, Respect for All and other handouts are available in the languages of all our students. Office staff is prepared to acquire interpretation services in multiple languages as needed (through outside contracted vendors only when necessary). Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Our Parent Coordinator, who takes the lead in this area and who frequently provides translation personally, gathers feedback from parents on the quality and availabity of services via parent surveys, during the PTA meetings, and during any school function where parents are in attendance. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 71 
