 06M463 School Name: HIGH SCHOOL FOR MEDIA AND COMMUNICATIONS Principal: JUAN VILLAR 2018-19 SCEP-FL 1  School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Section 4: SCEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: High School for Media and Communications 3106000113 BEDS Code: Grades Served: 9-12 School Number (DBN): 06M463 School Address: 549 Audubon Avenue, New York, New York 10040 Phone Number: 212-927-1841 Fax: 212-927-2326 School Contact Person: Juan Villar Email Address: jvillar@schools.nyc.gov Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: Juan Villar Katy Stapleton DulceMendez SLT Chairperson: Bienvenida Galvez Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Maria PeraltaMorales To be determined To be determined Juan Rosa District Information Geographical District: 06 Manuel Ramirez Superintendent: 4360 Broadway; New York, NY 10033 Superintendent’s Office Address: mramire4@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: (917) 521-3757 Phone Number: (917) 521-3797 Fax: Manhattan FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Field Support Center (FSC) Executive Director: Yuet Chu 333 7 th Avenue, New York, NY 2018-19 SCEP-FL 3  Executive Director’s Email Address: YChu@schools.nyc.gov Phone Number: 917-705-5856 Fax: (917) 705-5856 2018-19 SCEP-FL 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the SCEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Juan Villar Katy Stapleton DulceMendez Linda Carbonell Maria Peralta Morales FatouKebe Robert Burgos Juan Rosa Valerie West Lucia Jimenez Isabel Payamps *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent 2018-19 SCEP-FL 5  DifreReyes BienvenidaGalvez Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/Teacher Member/Guidance Counselor Assistant Principal Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 SCEP-FL 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) is a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. The process of developing and implementing the SCEP is aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding SCEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and SCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 7  In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement 2018-19 SCEP-FL 8  NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the SCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the SCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for SCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 9   Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 5: Build consensus around activities, strategies and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 6: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 7: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 10  1. What is your school’s mission statement? School Overview Section 4: SCEP Overview The High School for Media and Communications (HSMC) is a learning community whose mission is to provide a rigorous education that encourages and inspires inquiry, creativity, critical thinking and free expression. Our responsibility is to provide a learning environment that is engaging and culturally responsive in order to develop life-long learners who will succeed in college, future careers and become productive citizens. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. We are currently a Community School located inside of one of the most iconic public school buildings in New York City, The George Washington Educational Campus. This is the home school of Henry Kissinger, Alan Greenspan, Dennis Farrell, Jr. and Belinda Martinez (current HBO Executive Vice-President). The building sits in a neighborhood filled with historical sites such as The Cloisters, The Jumel Mansion and Dyckman House. Our student body is comprised of 409 students (See Quality Snapshot). Our school population is comprised of 86% Hispanic, 11% Black Americans, 1% Asian, and 1% White students. Our student body includes 40% English Language Learners and 18% students with Special Needs. 116 students (35.25%) live in temporary housing. The graduation rate for the R Cohort was 50.7%. As a Community School we work in partnership with Catholic Charities/Alianza Division as our Community Based Organization (CBO). Our plan and vision align both the school and the CBO resources to provide our students with a social-emotional component that focus on the student as a whole. This provides a social worker and three additional workers to assist us in reducing chronic absenteeism and to improve attendance. In addition, Media has been successful at establishing strong working relationships with the following organizations to support the school's curriculum and instruction and impact student learning in media:  The Hispanic Information and Telecommunications Network (HITN) in Brooklyn, NY  Manhattan Neighborhood Network (MNN)  El Diario La Prensa  The Manhattan Times Simon & Schuster, Inc.   City College   Additional CBOs located in Washington Heights-Inwood area Lehman College We are also partnering with the TRIDENT Swim Foundation to provide students with swimming classes. It is our relentless determination to build a web of relationships from where our students can benefit not only by being exposed but by securing internships that may lead to find a job. Finally, we are eager to announce the creation of 4 academies to oversee parental engagement, students' social/emotional needs, as well as the academics. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 11  Our Student Body High School for Media and Communications serves a diverse, high needs community. Our student body includes 46.57% English Language Learners and 18.63% students with special needs. Our ELLs and Newly Arrived ELLs have specific needs that focus on language acquisition. For this reason, our ENL team consists of 4 ENL teachers who co-plan with general education teachers to design and implement supports for students to access rigorous instruction aligned to the demands of the Regents exams and college courses in the areas of reading, writing, and problem solving. Co-teaching teams work to consistently embed frequent opportunities for students to speak and listen to one another. Our students with IEPs need significant instructional support to progress in the least restrictive environment as they prepare for college and career post-secondary life. Our special education teachers work closely with one another and their general education co-teachers to create multiple entry points into each lesson’s content and skills. Our special education department in moving away from the “one-teach, one-assist” model of ICT, and instead, working towards implementing station and parallel teaching to meet the diverse needs and learning styles of all of our students. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Areas of Progress: We have obtained an overall improvement across the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools. However, creating a supportive environment, effective school leadership and strong family-community ties were the elements with the strongest gain. It is our relentless determination to transform Media into a successful school. Rigorous instruction and collaborative teachers are the corner stones of any successful school. Consequently, we have hired the services of multiple providers to strengthen the work of our school as a professional learning community (PLC). We have established a partnership to provide training on curriculum design and mapping using the elements of Understanding by Design with a lens of 21st century learning. The school environment is conducive to learning and, most teachers are conscious about engaging each other in collaborative practices inside and outside of their classrooms. To support this work, all the schedule embeds a common planning time for all teachers to get together. Media continues to celebrate an effective school leadership built around the tenets of a great school; the 90/90/90 plan promoted by the District Superintendent. Additional Strengths: Advanced Placement Program: Thanks to the past and current Chancellors' vision, the AP for All initiative has been a success at Media. We were able to catapult the course offerings from three AP courses to five: AP Spanish Language and Composition, AP English Language and Composition, AP English Literature and Composition, AP US History, AP Biology. Use of Technology to Elevate Student Learning, Instruction, and Promote Creativity: Students are granted with access to lap tops, chromebooks, film and photo cameras, among others. School-Wide Writing Program: In order to support our student writers, we have designed and implemented a 3-year writing program that exposes all students to multiple college level writing experiences. This ensures that students develop the skills and persistence necessary to achieve success in college level work. Equally important, we have established a partnership with Simon and Schuster. Their Diversity Council prints every year -for the last two years, a book (RISE) with the best poems written by our young artists/writers. Key Areas of Focus: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 12  Rigorous Math Instruction: By the end of this school year, Media will have a completely new team of math teachers. We have been able to program our students for double period of mathematics following two different curriculum. We -in collaboration with The HS for Health and Science Careers, hired an Assistant Principal Math. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 13  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 06M463 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 408 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual YES Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 5 6 5 8 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 5 6 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 91.0% % Attendance Rate 93.6% % Reduced Lunch 47.3% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.2% 85.8% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 1.7% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 3.13 0% 0% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 52% 45% 46.2% 0.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No No No No Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A NO N/A N/A NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient N/A NO N/A N/A No N/A 124 86 85.7% 2.0% 15.0% 11.3% 1.0% 0.2% 4 19% 8.4 N/A N/A 51% 51% 70.1% 4% N/A Yes No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A YSH NO N/A N/A N/A YSH NO N/A N/A N/A NO 2018-19 SCEP-FL 14  Economically Disadvantaged NO ALL STUDENTS NO 2018-19 SCEP-FL 15  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed X X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Summary The 2016-2017 School Quality Snapshot identifies rigorous instruction and collaborative teachers as two areas we need to make improvement. In rigorous instruction, 76% responded positively to questions about rigorous instruction, 3% below the City and 4% below the Borough. Two areas which require continued action are: a) feedback to students on their work (63%) and b) students building on each other's ideas in class discussions (59%). In collaborative teachers, 77% responded positively to questions about collaborative teachers, 6% below the City and 4% below the Borough. An area which requires continued action is: a) teachers working productively with their colleagues in school (83%). To excel in these areas, the school will implement Solution Tree's research based approach to Professional Learning Communities to support curriculum design, rigorous planning, creating better assessments and feedback mechanisms to demonstrate and further accelerate our students' learning. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 16  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 50% of the faculty (15 teachers) will have embraced the concept of the professional learning community. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 17  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Septiembre 2018-June 2019 National Conference once a year. Monthly follow up September 2018 - June 2019 Monthly In partnership with the AP for ALL program, two teachers and a school administrator participated in Solution Tree's 3-day "The Summit on PLC at Work" conference in February 2018; and, an additional team will attend the training in February 2019. The staff members who attended the 3-day PLC conference will receive continued training and support through Solution Tree and the AP for ALL program to unpack the elements of the PLC model. Two teachers and an Assistant Principal The staff identified above will design and facilitate a series of workshops to the entire Media community in faculty conferences and department meetings to unpack the elements of the PLC model and begin implementation. Workshop goals include: All teachers, Assistant Principals, and Principal 1. Establish an understanding of the four critical questions and three central ideas of Professional Learning Communities (PLCs) Identify where faculty members are in the change continuum Identify where departments are in the critical issues for team consideration 2. 3. 4. Lay a foundation for PLCs with the four pillars established by Dr. DuFour: mission, vision, values, and goals. 5. Revisit the school's mission and create a shared mission, vision, and collective commitments for our Media community. Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Professional Learning Committee, Professional Learning Community Coalition, Professional Developers (Consultants), Principal, Assistant Principals Professional Learning Committee, Professional Learning Community Coalition, Professional Developers (Consultants), Principal, Assistant Principals The current Professional Learning Committee (PLC) will transform into a PLC coalition to build shared knowledge of the big ideas of the Solution Tree's PLC model. They are: All teachers, Assistant Principals, and Principal September 2018-June 2019 Professional Learning Community Coalition, 1. We accept learning as the fundamental purpose of our school and therefore are willing to examine all practices in light of their impact on learning. Professional Developers On-going (bi-weekly 2018-19 SCEP-FL 18  2. We are committed to working together to achieve our collective purpose. We cultivate a collaborative culture through the development of high-performing teams. 3. We assess our effectiveness on the basis of results rather than intentions. Relevant data and information will be used to promote continues improvement. Members of the PLC Coalition will read "Learning By Doing: A Handbook for Professional Learning Communities at Work" by Richard DuFour, Rebecca DuFour, Robert Eaker, and Thomas Many. They will utilize the protocols in the book to facilitate team sessions focused on curriculum design, teaching strategies, impact on student learning, formative assessments, and academic intervention supports. School leadership will schedule common planning time for all teachers to meet in teams by content area to facilitate this work. and monthly meetings) (Consultants), Principal, Assistant Principals All teachers, Assistant Principals, and Principal September 2018-June 2019 Professional Learning Community Coalition, Daily and weekly Professional Developers (Consultants), Principal, Assistant Principals Parents will be invited to join classes to provide teachers with feedback on their instructional approaches at least once per semester. All teachers and parents September 2018-June 2019 Assistant Principals, Principal, PLC Coalition Twice per year 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will facilitate two workshops in the 2018-2019 school year to unpack the key concepts of the professional learning community work with students' parents and families. One workshop will take place each semester. The APS, PC and The Community Schools Office will oversee and supervise the implementation of this area. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We will align budget and resources for the Assistant Principals and teachers participating in the PLC coalition to engage in professional learning sessions with Solution Tree consultants, provide planning time for the PLC coalition to design and implement a professional learning plan for all faculty members with necessary resources ("Learning By Doing" books, Atlas Rubicon, etc.), and provide common planning time for all teachers to engage in this work. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 19  Per session will be made available. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding X C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 1. By mid-year (February 2019), 50% of the faculty will have received training in the PLC approaches guided and supervised by the Principal. 2. By the end of June 2019, 50 parents will have participated in two workshops on the key principles of the PLC. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 1) The current Professional Learning Committee (5 members) will evolve to become a coalition of a minimum of 15 teachers as a Professional Learning Community Coalition. This will be measured by February 15 having a special meeting with the team to discuss future plans. 2) The agendas, workshop materials, feedback forms, and attendance records will reveal the parental engagement in the PLC workshops. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 20  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. X X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Summary The school community (parents, teachers, support staff and the Community Schools) has developed a cohesive plan to address most of the social-emotional issues affecting our students and their families. The Community School (CS) has partnered with us to bring to the classrooms the expertise of a social worker (full time), who does weekly presentations. In addition, we have created a network of meaningful friends to promote mentoring as a tool to provide the students with a mature voice of reasoning and guidance. These practices will be demonstrated by the Quality Reviewer's findings, NYC School Quality Guide and NYC school survey. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools –Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 21  By June 2019, our social-emotional support structure will result in 95% of students feeling safe, supported, and respected in their classrooms and in the hallways, bathrooms, locker rooms, and cafeteria as evidenced in OORS by a 10% reduction of our level 3, 4, and 5 suspensions. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 22  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). A restorative justice year-long program will be planned and implemented. All students Sept. 2018-June 2019 A collaborative School Support Team that consists of Deans, Guidance Counselors, Teachers, and Parent Coordinator will meet regularly to address current concerns, design initiatives, and assess progress and will be facilitated by the AP Guidance. All students Sept. 2018 June 2019 We will facilitate a monthly grade level assembly by Academies. All students Peer mediation program and re-entry plans will be instituted and assessed on an on-going basis. Plans will also be tailored for high-need subgroups such as SWDs with Behavioral Intervention Plans in their IEP. Posting schedule will be designed, communicated, and monitored with pre-determined sweeps and consequences for students who do not follow the established rules of behavior. Programs such as Support Intervention Program (SIP) will offer workshops to help build student capacity and foster leadership. Teachers will be strongly encouraged to conduct parental outreach about the academic progress of each of their students on a more consistent basis before making a guidance referral. The school will promote a parental and student councils organized. The Student Council will seek to mediate issues normally handled by the Deans. We will bring back The Peer Mediation training to expose all council members. Incoming class All students All students All students All Students Sept. 2018 June 2019 Sept. 2018 June 2019 Sept. 2018 June 2019 Sept. 2017 June 2018 Sept. 2018 June 2019 Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Deans, Guidance Counselors, Parent Coordinator and The Community Schools Office Deans, Assistant Principal-Pupil Personnel, Guidance Counselors, Teachers, and the Parent Coordinator Guidance Counselors, The Community Schools Office and the Principal Deans, Guidance Counselors, Teachers The Dean The CS Director Teachers' team by academies 2018-19 SCEP-FL 23  3b – Parent and Family Engagement The AP Guidance and the Principal How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Beginning in October 2018, we will begin the 9th grade academy for both parents and students. A team of teachers, guidance counselor, social worker and representatives from the Community Schools Office will be an essential part of it. By narrowing the scope of the meetings to a particular cohort we are attempting to increase level of interest of parents and relatives in attending these meetings; and, consequently increasing their participation and quality time devoted to their child's school. The Academy will organize a retreat to foster an environment of respect and high academic standards. The lead teacher/guidance counselor will establish an agenda that will include team building, social emotional issues and how to tackle them, collaborations and respect for all issues. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We will align budget and resources assigned to the Community School CBO and the school to strengthen the work of our Student Support Team. We will provide interventions and social-emotional support to all students within the cohort with a particular emphasis on at-risk students. Using our budget and resources will also be aligned to support enhanced communication with families and the implementation of restorative approaches to school wide discipline. Students and their parents will participate in workshops, seminars, arts and recreational programs offered after school and on Saturdays. After school teachers will also receive professional development opportunities that enhance their classroom management skills and their ability to communicate effectively with students and families. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019 as a result of an array of interventions guided but not limited to data (comprised of scholarship, parent outreach by teachers, written Skedula anecdotes, OORS reports, attendance, and SIP data) there will be a 10% decrease in all level 2, 3, 4 and 5 incidents as measured by OORs during the period of September 2018 to February 2019. for the incoming class. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 24  Weekly update meetings with SSAs, guidance counselors, CBOs and with students will be used to evaluate progress towards meeting our goal using OORs reports. By-weekly call conferencing with the parent leaders. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 25  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by SOP(s) Addressed X X X X using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Summary We tried a variety of approaches to establish a tone of collaboration among teachers; for instance, inter-visitations, collaborative team meetings, grade team meetings and team of teachers to advise the school administrators about new steps, future design and creating a three year plan. The 2016-2017 School Quality Snapshot identifies rigorous instruction and collaborative teachers as two areas we need to make improvement. In collaborative teachers, 77% responded positively to questions about collaborative teachers, 6% below the City and 4% below the Borough. An area which requires continued action is: a) teachers working productively with their colleagues in school (83%). As a result of our work with AP for ALL this year, two teachers and an Assistant Principal were introduced to the research model of a Professional Learning Community in spring 2018. The AP for ALL program provided this team with participation in a 3-day "The Summit on PLC at Work" conference in February 2018 in Phoenix, Arizona and a series of full-day workshops with a consultant from Solution Tree in NYC. The AP for ALL program also provided the team with access to a year-long subscription to Solution Tree's web-based professional learning bank of resources. Beginning in 2018-2019, Media will become a school wide Professional Learning Community using these resources and research based approaches. The PLC will serve as a key instrument for empowering teachers. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 26  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 85% of teachers will have worked in collaboration with their colleagues to design curriculum, instructional approaches, and assessment tools using the PLC protocols from Solution Tree. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 27  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). The PLC coalition will design and facilitate a professional learning retreat for all faculty members in the fall semester. The purpose of the retreat will be for teachers to design an action plan to implement the PLC goals in departmental and inter-disciplinary teams. Create a structure for common planning time for teachers to meet by departments and in inter-disciplinary teams during the school day. Teachers will receive on-going feedback through walk through and the formal observation process on an on-going basis that reflects their implementation of pedagogical strategies learned in the team planning sessions. Teachers who have been trained on Atlas Rubicon and Curriculum 21 will facilitate curriculum mapping professional learning sessions. They will also provide feedback to teachers on their unit plans in Atlas Rubicon. All Teachers September 2018-June 2018 Professional Learning Committee, Assistant Principals, Principal All teachers September 2018 Assistant Principals, Principal All teachers All teachers September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 Professional Learning Committee, Principal, Assistant Principals Professional Learning Committee, Principal, Assistant Principals Professional Learning Committee, Principal, Assistant Principals Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Create a system and structure to monitor the impact of professional learning sessions on the continuous improvement of student progress as reflected in the progress and scholarship reports. All teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Each semester, parents will be invited for a "CURRICULUM DAY" where they will spend a half day of instruction following a student's program. Afterwards, parents will participate in a mid-day debriefing session where school administrators, teachers and students leaders will be present to hear all recommendations/findings made by the parents. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 28  We will align budget and resources for the Assistant Principals and teachers participating in the PLC coalition to engage in professional learning sessions with Solution Tree consultants, provide planning time for the PLC coalition to design and implement a professional learning plan for all faculty members with necessary resources ("Learning By Doing" books, Atlas Rubicon, etc.), and provide common planning time for all teachers to engage in this work. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding X C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Each marking period, we will analyze the scholarship pass rate for all courses and compare it with the scholarship pass rate for previous years to measure the impact of PLC work on student achievement to look for gains. Each semester, a minimum of 15 parents will participate in the Curriculum Day. Teachers will engage in collaborative practices as demonstrated by the agendas, journals, etc. reflecting on their common prep periods, grade teams and Department meetings. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 1) The agendas, workshop materials, feedback forms, and attendance records will be kept on record for all team planning sessions. 2) The agendas, feedback forms, and attendance records will reveal the parental engagement in the Curriculum Day activities each semester. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 29  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). X X x x SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. School strengths:  According to the Framework for Great Schools, Media high school has made consistent progress in creating a supportive environment, effective leadership, strong family-community ties and trust.  The PLC is also a strong body of influence to promote best practices and a shift in teaching paradigm.  Distributive leadership. A balanced distribution of power and clear streamlined process for collectively arriving to key decisions has been in place for three years now. As a result the SQS reported that 91% of teachers believe the Principal communicates a clear vision for the school; 70% of teachers believe the curriculum is aligned to the CCLS and 93% of parents feel that the Principal works to create a sense of community in the school. 2. Surpassing a 70% graduation is the top priority for the school administrators and the Principal. Part 2 – Annual Goal 2018-19 SCEP-FL 30  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART– Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound.  By June 2019, as a result of school leaders' creating and implementing effective leadership systems and structure, at least 70% of the class of 2019 will graduate on time, as measured by the 2018-19 RGCS. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 31  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teachers are participating in monthly professional development sessions with multiple providers. The school instructional focus is "Rigorous Instruction"; therefore, a great effort occurs around curriculum design, mapping, and assessment. Students are participating in a variety of approaches to bring them to the on track list. There is an after school program for enrichment. It meets Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday. In addition, the school is open on Saturdays from 8:00am - 2:00pm courses to those in need. Similarly, the school will be open during Mid-winter and spring recesses. The school leaders will meet weekly to explore trends in academic achievement for ELLs, SWD, SIFE and STH students. Teachers Seniors off-track School leaders Oct. 2018- June 2019 Sept. 2018 - June 2019 Sept. 2018 - June 2019 Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) The Principal and Assistant Principals Monthly meeting with the seniors and their parents to explore graduation trends. Seniors and their parents Oct. 2018- June 2019 AP Guidance, Parent Coordinator A retreat will be organized to map out colleges, careers and plans for the future for all seniors. Seniors October 2018 - June 2019 AP Guidance and The Community School Office The school leaders will meet weekly to explore trends in academic achievement for ELLs, SWD, SIFE and STH students. Special groups Sept.2018- June 2019 Principal and Assistant Principals 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The school leaders will meet monthly with the parent councils (one per grade) to unpack the school goals; discuss students progress; and, to evaluate how effective the faculty has been in addressing every student's needs. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 32  The school will provide teachers and guidance counselors with per session and per diem as well as school administrators (if needed); students, with the instructional resources needed and, a flexible schedule for its delivery; and, parents will have the opportunity to voice their concerns via the monthly and at times bi-weekly meetings. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant X 21st Century School Achievement Funding X X C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, as a result of school leaders demonstrating the implementation of systems and structure an evaluative summit will be hold with 90% of all parties involved in attendance. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The School Environment Survey will be used to determine the success/failure of this initiative. The number of students ready to graduate by February 2018 will be used to measure our success or lack of. In addition, this data will be used to produce the Mid-Winter Recess academy. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 33  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. X X x SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Summary Parents are increasingly becoming an active voice in shaping their son/daughter's education. We will run a summer internship program for the incoming class. In addition, the Community School Office will organize an evening of celebration with parents of the freshmen class. The George Washington Educational Campus will hold, for the third consecutive year a common welcoming ceremony for 9th grade students and their parents. The Principals will design the agenda for this assembly as well as the shared goals and expectations for this cohort. Media and Communications will organize two curriculum days for parents. Media and Communications will seek to organize parents around parental academies. Media and Communications will create 1 student council in the 9th grade; and, the parent council will be directed by a guidance counselor. Part 2 – Annual Goal 2018-19 SCEP-FL 34  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, as a result of the new parental involvement policy 90% of the parents will provide a positive response in the "Strong Family-Community Ties" section of the QS in comparison with 86% reported in the year 2016-17. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 35  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). School leaders will ensure that the pipelines of communications are created for parents, guardians, teachers and students to be inform (SOP 6.2). Therefore, we will create a year-long plan of activities and programs for parents that includes a system for parents to understand key curriculum, graduation and attendance policies. This will be tailored for specific cohorts of student and their families. In addition, there will be a set of sessions to address the specific needs of STH, SIFE, SWD and ELLs. Increase parent participation in the 4 Academies of the Parent Association by offering targeted workshops and developing the capacity of parent leaders. The community partners (Alianza and Catholic Charities) were trained to use The Data Sorter created by New Vision; therefore, it is expected that data will be share on an-on-going basis. Ensure that all contact information for students’ families is updated in a consistent manner. Increase modes of communication with students’ families by gathering E-mail addresses, mailing addresses, phone numbers and utilizing tools such as Skedula/PupilPath and Remind 101. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Parents in specific cohorts Sept. 2018-June 2019 Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselors, Assistant Principal-Guidance Parents Sept. 2018-June 2019 Parent Coordinator, Assistant Principal-Guidance Parents Sept. 2018-June 2019 Parent Coordinator, Attendance Team If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Catholic Charities/Alianza Dominicana Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Under the supervision of an Assistant Principal and the School Community Director, we will align the school budget with the School Community's budget to build a comprehensive plan to address the needs of our students and their families. Per session will be available for supervisors and teachers. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 36  X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP X Title I TA Title III PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, a celebration of the work performed by the the 9th Grade Parent Councils will be organized by the school in conjunction with Catholic Charities/Alianza Dominicana as measured by the data collected throughout the year. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Their monthly meetings minutes will be used to determine the level of success/failure of this initiative. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 37  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) All students who received less than 65% on the English Regents. Students struggling with reading comprehension and writing techniques Mathematics All students who received less than a 65% on the Algebra Regents exam. 1. Twelfth grade students who have not passed the English Language Arts Regentsare programmed into a writing class during the school day. 2. Differentiated instruction to support the multiple learners during the school day. 3.Small groups 1. All 9th grade students are programmed for an Algebra I class plus a Problem Solving class for one year. 2. Tutorial sessionstake place after-school and on Saturdays. 1. Whole group instruction and use of strategic collaborative groupings are used in the writing classes. 2. Tutoring is facilitated using a range of small group and one-on-one sessions. 1. Classes take place during the school day, five days per week. 2. The after-school tutoring program meets on Tuesdays, Wednesdays, and Thursdays from 4PM-6PM. The Saturday Program takes place from 8AM-2PM. 1. Whole group instruction and use of strategic collaborative groupings are used in theAlgebra I and Problem Solving classes. 2. Tutoring is facilitated using a range of small group and one-on-one sessions. 1. Tutoring is facilitated using a range of small group and one-on-one sessions. 1. Classes take place during the school day, five days per week. 2. The after-school tutoring program meets on Tuesdays, Wednesdays, and Thursdays from 4PM-6PM. The Saturday Program takes place from 8AM-2PM. 1. The after-school tutoring program meets on Tuesdays, Wednesdays, and Thursdays from 4PM-6PM. The Saturday Program takes place from 8AM-2PM. Science All students who received less than a 65% on the Living Environment and/or Earth Science Regents exam. 1. Tutorial sessionstake place after-school and on Saturdays. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 38  1. The after-school tutoring program meets on Tuesdays, Wednesdays, and Thursdays from 4PM-6PM. The Saturday Program takes place from 8AM-2PM. 1. These services are provided to students during the school day. 2. Counseling sessions vary based on students’ needs as per their IEP. Many sessions take place on a weekly basis. Social Studies All students who received less than a 65% on the Global History and/or US History Regents exam. 1. Tutorial sessionstake place after-school and on Saturdays. 1. Tutoring is facilitated using a range of small group and one-on-one sessions. At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) All students with attendance and social emotional issues interfering with their academic progress will be provided individualized counseling services. 1. Services include one-on-one, small group, and case conferences. 2. Counseling services are delivered in both small group counseling sessions and one-on-one sessions. 1. Student records are reviewed and students are identified for academic intervention services. Referrals are made on an as-needed basis. Counselors meet in case conferences including representation from teachers, deans, parents, administrators and students to design an intervention plan. In addition, Counselors visit all classes to make students are aware of graduation requirements and available opportunities for assistance. In certain cases, students are referred to ERSSA for an assessment and evaluation for special services: IEP and intervention services for students not currently in special education. 2. The School Psychologist assesses students based on the needs of students. Our school 2018-19 SCEP-FL 39  has a partnership with New York Presbyterian Hospital that provides students with full time psychologists and psychiatrists. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 40  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) There are one hundred seven (107) students currently living in Temporary Housing out of which seven are currently living in shelters. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. The school social worker and school psychologist will meet with students in a small group setting at least once per week. The Catholic Charities/Alianza Dominicana will guide them through the process of finding a permanent place to live. While at Media, they will receive all materials (books, notebooks, pen, pencil, a chrome book and, calculator) needed to accomplish their academic assignments and tasks. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 41 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 42  Section 8: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. ● Administrators and teacher leaders review candidate resumes and make selections based on the needs of the school. ● Teachers and administration interview potential candidates and require prospective applicants to facilitate a demonstration of a lesson. ● Potential candidates along with teachers observe the candidate during the lesson. A follow-up conversation occurs where the teacher shares lesson plan, resources, discusses purpose and teachers and administration ask follow-up questions using the Danielson Framework as a guide. ● A rubric is utilized to assess the potential candidate and determine if he/she is a good fit for our school. ● Support is given to all new teachers through mentoring, collegial conversations, and Assistant Principal’s walkthroughs, coaching and observations using the Danielson Framework as a guide. ● A coaching model is utilized to provide feedback to all teachers as well as offer assistance in planning and meeting professional goals. ● Differentiated opportunities include District workshops, conferences and courses offered for professional growth. ● Teachers of Advanced Placement classes attend AP workshops offered by the College Board and the AP for ALL program. ● Experienced teachers can submit curriculum for a potential elective to be offered. Elective proposals are reviewed and discussed for potential implementation. ● Experienced teachers are selected as Instructional Leads to build teacher capacity and provide professional development. ● Teachers meet during common planning (Professional Activity) to plan units of study and review student work using protocols. This offers new faculty members an opportunity to collaborate and learn from peers. In addition, collaboration among faculty promotes teacher leadership, retention strength and a collective commitment to the instructional goals of the school. ● Sharing of practice and instructional rounds are encouraged so that more experienced teachers are recognized for their expertise and teachers can learn from one another. ● Teachers meet in subject area team meetings to engage in professional conversations about curriculum, instruction and student achievement. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 43  ● School-Wide professional learning along with subject specific professional learning is devoted to the Common Core Standards and the Danielson Framework so all teachers are effective and highly effective. Teachers are assigned following a simple process of matching our best faculty with the most needed group of students. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). The school hired a new Assistant Principal (math), who is spearheading the professional conversations about designing coherent/rigorous instructional strategies; use of data to inform instruction; and, the instructional shifts in math. In addition, the school administrators work tirelessly to align our goals with those of the District in regards to literacy and fluency in mathematics. The faculty, in particular ELA/ENL teachers work in providing multiple entry points to our students in an effort to better serve the most needed students (ELL, SWD, STH and SIFE). The Principal and Assistant Principals are committed to participate in several series developed by the Borough Field Office, The Chancellor's Conference Day and, The Danielson Group. Paraprofessionals are participating in District 6 rounds of professional development. A team of teachers and school leaders are participating in AP for ALL training sessions with Solution Tree and NMSI. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 44  There is a common prep time for all teachers. Departments meet every week to discuss instructional items, in particular how to better create/design assessments suitable for our student population largely comprised by ELLs and SWD students. Teachers provide feedback through feedback forms collected in professional learning sessions and in team meetings. School leaders also provide their input for obtaining a stronger alignment. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (SCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Title I Part A (Basic) Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 289,526 0 0 0 25,038 0 3,502,924 x n/a n/a n/a x x x Column B Section Reference(s) Section 1, 2,5 and 8 n/a n/a n/a Section 6 n/a Sections 1,2,5 and 8 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual 2018-19 SCEP-FL 45  identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/SCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 46   IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG or SIF funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 47  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Parent Involvement Policy (PIP) The High School for Media and Communications’ Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. Our school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this Parent Involvement Policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of our school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students  maintain the Parent Coordinator to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend our school and will work to ensure that our school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 48   conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home;  provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; Parental Involvement and School Quality In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, our school will:  actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact;  engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to schools to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills;  ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and  strategies as described in our Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills;  host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); in collaboration with the Guidance Counselors, schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; translation service information is posted In the school in the appropriate language. conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help.    Our school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement  holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference;  hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year;  encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association and Title I Parent Committee; supporting or hosting Family Day events;   establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents;  hosting events to support male asserting leadership in education for their children. parents/guardians, grandparents and foster parents;  encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers;  providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 49  developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress (Parent Coordinator newsletter, Principal’s newsletter, and school newspaper);  providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teachers and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) The High School for Media & Communications, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum School Responsibilities The school will provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by:  Communicating with parents regarding Common Core State Standards, graduation requirements, and curriculum; respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards;  using academic learning time strategically;    offering high quality instruction in all content areas;  providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); The school will support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships    conducting Parent-Teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; in addition to report cards, 6 progress reports will be distributed to students and families over the course of the school year; convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved;  Principal newsletters and Parent Coordinator newsletters will be distributed to parents on a monthly basis; arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and  funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 50   respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education;  providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact;   providing parents with timely information and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information;  ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with  parents each year; identify barriers to gain greater participation by parents in parental involvement activities, with particular attention to parents who are economically disadvantaged, are disabled, have limited English proficiency, have limited literacy, or are of any racial ethnic minority background in order to ensure participation in their child’s education. This school will provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff  ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents;  notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff  member; arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities;  using PupilPath/Skedula as a means of communicating with teachers via E-mail;  planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences, Parent Association meetings, parent workshops, celebratory events, and School Leadership Team meetings; This school will provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents    creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments including alternate assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents;   ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs;   2018-19 SCEP-FL 51  Parent/Guardian Responsibilities: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities  monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent;  ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games;    promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits;  encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child;   participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education;  communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested;   become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact;  participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; take part in the school’s Parent Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School Leadership Team; share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child;    Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities        attend school regularly and arrive on time; complete all of my assignments to the highest standard possible and submit all assignments on time; follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; show respect for myself, other people and property; try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; to maintain an 80 and above average in all of my classes; to apply to and enroll in a college in senior year. Addendum: Community School Partnerships Directions: The Community School (CS) strategy is directly aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. Community Schools bring schools and community partners together and integrate academics, health, youth development, and family engagement to provide students with the tools and opportunities they need to succeed. The Core Services in Community Schools are Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness. Part 1 – Community School Partnerships Goal(s) How is the CS strategy integrated into academic instruction at your school, and what impact has it had on student academic outcomes? 2018-19 SCEP-FL 52  The CS serves as a formidable vehicle to reunite parents, teachers, students and the community in one single approach: the success of every student in high school and beyond. The impact of their interventions are visible in area such as student attendance, reduced chronically absent students, decreased number of incidents, increased college awareness and, stronger social-emotional interventions. Indicate the summative goal(s) of the Community School for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. By June 2019 we will achieve 91% average daily student attendance. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Community School Annual Goal(s): How will achieving your Community School Goal(s)--in Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness--support your academic goals for students? By synchronizing the CS and the school goals we are aiming at making them achievable. We will engage in monthly meetings to review the progress or lack of it in regard to our goals. In addition, The CS will gather and share data about students enrolment in their events. There will be a weekly meeting to track students' attendance. A team will be visiting the home of those with an attendance below 75% Part 2 – Community School Partnerships Core Services Action Plan Part 2a. Identify the Community-based Organization (CBO) partnerships that you will develop in ELT, Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness, their target student population(s), and scope of the services provided. As well as supporting schools’ supportive environment and attendance work, CBOs should be helping to support your school’s instructional focus. CBO Partnership Alianza Dominicana/Catholic Charities Target Population Scope of Service Incoming 9th grade Success mentoring SY18-19 SMART Goal By June 2019, Success Mentors will create and implement attendance improvement plans for ninth graders who were chronically absent the previous year resulting in 80% of the targeted students missing fewer days than the previous year. Part 3 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 3a. Indicate resources your Community Partnership will leverage to achieve your summative SMART goal(s) and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 53 CS will received $478,893.47 to support Media High School Part 3b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside 21st Century SIG Grant School X Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 3c. Describe how the school will partner with the Lead CBO to do the following: 1. Community Schools are expected to partner with a community-based partner organization (CBO) and together with members of the School Leadership Team, hire a Community School Director. The Director will lead implementation of the asset and needs assessment process, and other critically important coordinating activities. Indicate how you will leverage this aspect of the work. Community Schools are expected to personalize the needs of all students, through strategic programming and services, as determined by the asset and needs assessment, and must also offer Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and mental health programming. In completing this section, ensure that you think about how: (1) the right services are provided to the right students and families at the right time; and (2) how you will seamlessly coordinate services with instructional programming happening throughout and outside of the school day. Indicate how you will implement this work, and describe other programming you anticipate to be in place to strengthen this initiative. Community Schools are expected to emerge as Partnership Schools, which are places where parents and families feel welcome, actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. Monthly meetings and Community School Forums engaging families and community stakeholders will be a critical part of this family engagement strategy. Describe how you will implement this aspect of the work. Community School Principals are expected to meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. Data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter - and training will be available for schools to use. Indicate how you will implement this aspect of the work. 2. 3. 4. The CSD is a full member of the school cabinet. He also sits in the SLT. Together, we have developed the strategies to accomplish this year's goals. These strategies go from home visit to targeted interventions; from school-wide events to small gathering; to incentives for busting attendance among the STH students to a peer mentoring for ELLs; we will monitor attendance with weekly join meetings; and, we will also run a parent engagement seminar seeking to build a stronger cohort of parents' advocates. Part 4 – Community School Partnerships Oversight Part 4a. Key Staff and Partners 1. Name and describe the scope of involvement of all community partners working in the school (include partners supporting ELT, counseling, enrichment, etc.) 2. Name the members of your Community School Team and how meetings will be organized and structured to engage all stakeholders and be focused on results. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 54  3. Explain data strategies including the use of the data sorter, and steps that the school will take to ensure that the appropriate interventions are provided to the right students 1. The Young Men’s Christian Association (YMCA)/ Comunlife Inc, Catholic Charities/Alianza Dominicana and New York Presbyterian Hospital clinic inside the George Washington Campus will host a two night retreat to help 9th Grade students building community and character. 2. The CST is comprised by the following people: The Community School Director, social worker, AP Guidance, AP Instruction, the attendance coordinator, the guidance counselors and the Principal. The meeting will be hold every Friday during third (3) period. Minutes and data will be share. 3. The CSS and guidance counselors received training on the use of the data sorter. The data is shared school-wide. Part 4b. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the Community School program. I believe we possess the human capital and resources needed to be successful. Part 4c. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. By June 2019 we will achieve 91% average daily student attendance. Part 4d. Mental Health Work Plan Separate from this S/CEP, schools will complete a Mental Health Work Plan that will become an addendum to this document. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 55 Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components: 1. 2. 3. The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers. Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. 1. 2. 3. 4. High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” 1. Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences. Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. 1. These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): K 6 1 7 2 8 3 9 4 10 5 11 12 60 2018-19 SCEP-FL 56  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 2 1 Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the · · · · · · rationale subgroups and grade levels of students to be served schedule and duration language of instruction # and types of certified teachers types of materials Begin description here: Overview of Instructional Program: The target population selected for this program reflects the data collected from assessments such us NYSESLAT, NYSITELL and Regents examinations. Based on the 2018 NYSESLAT results and 2018 History Regents results (both Global History and US History), we identified that many senior ELL students are in need of Social Studies writing and reading support in order to expand their language, reasoning, and analytical skills. In addition, analysis of first marking period grades reveals that our ELL students need further support in core classes such as math, science, and in English. The Title III program will provide students with targeted instructional sessions in English and social studies. The program will target a minimum of 60 students with a focus on our newcomer and long-term ELL students in grades 10-12. Each student will have a 1 hour session in ENL, 30 minute session in social studies, and a 30 minute session in ELA three days per week. Schedule and Staffing: The Title III program will take place after school on Tuesdays, Wednesdays, and Thursdays from 4:00PM until 6:00PM (6 hours weekly). The program will be staffed by three teachers in English, ENL and Math for a total of 60 sessions. There will be 18 additional sessions on Monday and Friday for SIFE and/or students identified as far below level or hardship to graduate. These sessions will last 60 minutes each for a total of 120 minutes weekly. The program will be supervised by Ms. Bienvenida Galvez, Assistant Principal. The supervisor per-session will be at no charge to Title III funds. Materials & Resources: We will purchase supplemental reading and workbook materials from National Geographic for the Title III program. All materials purchased for the program will solely be used for the Title III program. In addition, technology already owned by the school, will be utilized in the form of iPads and iMacs to support the English acquisition process through the use of programs such as NewsELA, iPhoto, and iMovie. Additional materials will be purchased using different funding sources. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 57  The Advanced Literacy Skills with a special focus on ELL Students.&nbsp;(2 Sessions-Content Area Literacy Strategies for ELL Students (4 Sessions-Facilitators: Edge Staff rationale teachers to receive training schedule and duration topics to be covered name of provider Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. · · · · · Begin description here: The three teachers who participate in the Title III program will engage in frequent professional learning opportunities with the PLC Guidig Coalition and the Assistant Principal Ms. Emel Topbas-Mejia as well as a facilitator from National Geographic regarding literacy instruction. Professional learning sessions will take place on a monthly basis beginning in November for a total of eight one-hour sessions on the third Monday of each month beginning on Monday, November 19th. The titles of topics to be explored are: · Facilitator: &nbsp;PLC). Dates:&nbsp; March 5 and 12, 2019 · Developer). Dates: Thursdays, November 1, 8, 15 and 29, 2018 Department level professional learning sessions will take place through departmental common planning sessions on a weekly basis so that all staff members can support the literacy needs of the school's ELL population. These sessions will be facilitated by Ms. Emel Topbas-Mejia, the PLC Guiding Coalition members, and ENL teachers. In addition, ENL teachers will participate in professional learning sessions hosted by the Manhattan Field Support Center (MFSC). These include ENL related PLOs and the ELL Leads Workshop Series. The dates for the ELL Leads Workshop Series are: · in Advanced Literacy Framework&nbsp; &nbsp; (Date: 9/21/18) · &nbsp;(Date: 10/30/18) · &nbsp;(Date: 12/4/18) · Classrooms&nbsp; &nbsp;(Date: 01/17/19) · (Date:&nbsp;02/04/19) Topic One:&nbsp; Knowledge-building approach to developing language – Unit Design Topic Four:&nbsp; Bring It Together – Units for ENL Co-teaching and Stand-Alone Topic Five:&nbsp; Share of Learning – What Was the Impact on Learning?&nbsp; Topic Two:&nbsp; Design learning tasks in content area units&nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; Topic Three:&nbsp; Scaffold Interactive Learning tasks in units&nbsp; &nbsp; Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. · · · · · rationale schedule and duration topics to be covered name of provider how parents will be notified of these activities 2018-19 SCEP-FL 58  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Begin description here: Parents are an important cornerstone in our work to strengthen the academic and social-emotional needs of our ELL students. We will continue to partner with our Parent Coordinator, Mrs. Dersa Gonzalez, and the members of our school's Parent Association, to provide valuable workshops for the parents of our ELL students. Workshops will take place on the first Monday of each month during the Parent-Association meetings from 6PM until 8PM from November until June for a minimum of eight sessions. In addition, Mrs. Gonzalez will host additional workshops during the school day for parents who are unable to attend the evening workshops. Mrs. Gonzalez is responsible for keeping track of parents' attendance (attendance sheets are kept in the PC office). Translation services will be available for our parents at all parent workshops. Mrs. Gonzalez, Parent Coordinator, is fluent in Spanish. In addition, all written materials are translated into the home languages of parents participating in the program in order to ensure that they fully benefit from the learning activities. Our rationale in addressing the parents needs is based on the premise that the success of a student is built on a strong collaboration between parents and the school community; therefore, we strive to motivate, organize and mobilize as many parents as possible to support the education of their son/daughters. To support this vision, beginning in fall 2018, the school is creating four leadership academies for students' families by grade band. Representatives from each leadership academy will participate in parent leadership workshops once per semester (Fall: November 17, 2018/Spring: To be determined). Parent workshop topics will include: - English Language Courses for Parents (This is a Saturday program and the cost will be at no charge to Title III funds.) - Transitioning to a New City and Place - College Readiness for ELL Students - How to Finance College? - Academic Supports and Study Habits for Multilingual Learners - Cultural Workshops (A focus on arts and reading) - Bullying Any additional monies needed to complete the Title III program will be taken from different funding sources. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) 1. 2. Purchased services 1. Per session Per diem High quality staff and curriculum N/A N/A Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 59  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. development contracts. Supplies and materials 2. N/A Must be supplemental. Additional curricula, instructional materials. Must be clearly listed. 3. 4. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 60  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 6 School Name High School for Media and Communications Borough Manhattan School Number 463 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Juan Villar Coach N/A ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Lily Miao/ENL Teacher/Subject Area Jorge Gonzalez-Mendez/Science Teacher/Subject Area Marilyn Ramirez/Sp.Ed. Related-Service Provider Dolly Arroyo, Social Worker Superintendent Manuel Ramirez Assistant Principal Emel Topbas-Mejia Coach N/A School Counselor Difre Reyes Parent Maria Peralta Morales Parent Coordinator Dersa Gonzalez Field Support Center Staff Member Alice Cohen Other (Name and Title) Bienvenida Galvez/AP, Guidance C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 1 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 7 0 4 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 2018-19 SCEP-FL 61  D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 407 Total number of ELLs 207 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 50.86% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown Program TBE Lang. Spanish School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 2015-2016 K 0 1 0 2 0 3 0 4 0 5 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 9 10 11 12 Tot # 1 0 1 1 0 1 1 0 1 1 0 1 4 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Instructional planning is guided by the administration and analysis of the following formative assessment tools at our school: These assessments provide information regarding students' literacy skills to guide teachers in their instructional design and delivery of instruction with our ENL students. Data collected from these assessments reveal that our ENL students need support in their reading and writing skills, especially in the writing of argument based responses and text analysis responses. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 62  As a result, students receive reading and writing instruction that scaffolds critical literacy skills in their ENL classes and additional support classes. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Common planning meetings are built into the school day so that teachers can collaborate at the departmental level to design assessment tools and to analyze the data collected from the assessment tools. ENL teachers collaborate to review the curricula and to design and administer a weekly assessment from the National Geographic Edge curriculum three days per week (8th period). Beginning in Spring 2018, all teachers will meet for common planning periods as follows: -Department Curriculum Team: This team will meet two days per week by content area to focus on curriculum implementation and looking at student work to refine curricula in alignment with the school's instructional focus. -Grade Level Team: This cross-disciplinary team will meet once per week to focus on students' academic progress at school and to build alignment across disciplines with a lens on literacy skills. In addition, to support the administration of assessments built into the Edge curriculum (the curriculum used in the ENL classes), ENL teachers receive professional learning in the administration of these assessment tools with an Edge Staff Developer and via the Professional Development portal on myngconnect.com. The Language Allocation Policy Team convenes once per semester to revisit the LAP plan and assess the linguistic and academic progress of our ELL students. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Assessment of student growth and learning is guided by the administration and analysis of the following summative assessment tools at our school: 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? The school has implemented a mid-term and final exam schedule to administer uniform mid-term and final assessments for mathematics, English, science, and social studies. ENL students take examinations according to the program they are enrolled in. Results from these assessments are scored within 2-days to provide immediate feedback to guide instruction. Feedback from the assessments are also shared with students. The school uses the Data Driven Classroom portal on Skedula to facilitate the item analysis of these assessments. The Language Allocation Policy Team convenes once per semester to revisit the LAP plan and assess the linguistic and academic progress of our ELL students. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Not Applicable. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The following outcome assessments are used to evaluate and inform our TBE and freestanding ENL programs: 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? 2018-19 SCEP-FL 63  Common planning meetings are built into the school day so that teachers can collaborate at the departmental level to analyze the data collected from the outcome assessment tools listed above. Based on their analysis of the data, adjustments are made at the classroom level with instructional design. Data is also reviewed and analyzed by the school's leadership team (Principal, Assistant Principal Supervision, Assistant Principal Guidance, and Guidance Counselors) to make adjustments to the structure and design of the programs. When necessary, programming changes are made to create new courses to meet students' needs. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Students in the freestanding ENL program take integrated ENL/ELA classes and/or stand-alone ENL classes as per CR Part 154.2 and their linguistic levels based on the NYSESLAT exams. All ENL classes utilize the balanced literacy approach to provide explicit instruction in sharpening students' reading, writing, listening, and speaking abilities in a structured setting. To support this goal, the ENL classes utilize the National Geographic Edge curriculum. Integrated ELA/ENL classes use curriculum that is created by the ELA department and aligned with the Common Core standards. b. TBE program. If applicable. In the TBE-Spanish program, students in grades 9 and 10 are programmed for the following: ENL classes using the approaches listed above (IV, question 1a), bilingual Global History, bilingual math (9th grade: Algebra, 10th grade: Geometry), bilingual science (9th grade: Living Environment, 10th grade: Earth Science), Home Language Arts, math skills class, physical education, and additional electives as needed. All instruction is aligned with the Common Core State Standards to accelerate student achievement. As students (all ELLs) develop English language skills, time in the home language decreases. in each TBE content area course. When ELLs reach proficiency on the NYSESLAT, they are placed in a monolingual class in the content area classes and an integrated ELA/ENL class. c. DL program. If applicable. We do not have a dual language program. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? The explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes are delivered in each program model as per CR Part 154.2. The Guidance Counselors work in collaboration with the Assistant Principal of Guidance and the Assistant Principal of ELA/ENL to ensure that students are programmed accordingly. The Guidance Counselors review the RLAT report at the beginning of the school year to identify students' needs and to program them accordingly for the necessary number of minutes in ENL, ELA, and HLA. Please 2018-19 SCEP-FL 64  note: each period of instruction equals 49 minutes. Students in the free-standing ENL program are programmed as follows: Students in the TBE-Spanish program are programmed as follows: In the TBE-Spanish program, students in grades 9 and 10 are programmed for the following: ENL classes using the approaches listed above (IV, question 1a), bilingual Global History, bilingual math (9th grade: Algebra, 10th grade: Geometry), bilingual science (9th grade: Living Environment, 10th grade: Earth Science), Home Language Arts (HLA), math skills class, physical education, and additional electives as needed. In the TBE program, the HLA class meets for one period everyday. The Guidance Counselors and the Assistant Principals frequently review the programs of ELL students to ensure they are programmed for the mandated number of instructional minutes. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Core content is delivered in each program using curricula aligned with the Common Core State Standards in ELA/ENL, history, science, and math classes. In the TBE program, the students' home language is utilized in history, science, and math classes. To support the facilitation of these curricula, the following resources are utilized: Engage NY curriculum in mathematics classes, Engage NY units of study in ELA, the Key Principles of ELL Instruction, Understanding Language units of study, and the National Geographic Edge curriculum. The balanced literacy framework is utilized to provide explicit instruction in reading, writing, listening, and speaking using the National Geographic Edge curriculum. In the TBE classes in social studies, science, and mathematics, the core textbook is available in both English and the students' home language of Spanish. Technology is utilized in the form of iPads, laptops, computers, and cameras to create content using applications such as iMovie and Google Apps for Education to develop students' literacy and thinking skills and to encourage collaboration. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? ELL students in the TBE-Spanish program are regularly evaluated in their home language in history, science, math, and home language arts classes. Each of these courses is taught by a certified bilingual/Native Language Arts teacher who provides students an opportunity to access information and communicate information in Spanish in class. Content area teachers in the TBE-Spanish program evaluate students' literacy skills in Spanish using teacher-created reading and writing assessment tools. The content area teachers and home language arts teacher in the TBE-Spanish program utilize print and web-based resources in Spanish. In addition, students engage in peer-to-peer conversations in Spanish permitting allowing content area teachers to assess students' speaking skills in Spanish. Teachers in the TBE-Spanish program collect assessment data for students using teacher-created assessment tools that are aligned to the Common Core State Standards. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing 2018-19 SCEP-FL 65  d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status A) SIFE Students: SIFE students are provided with additional supports in their content area classes and HLA classes with the use of graphic organizers, scaffolding, increased use of visuals, and physical gestures to focus on literacy instruction in both English (in ENL classes) and in Spanish (in HLA and bilingual content area classes). In addition, SIFE students are enrolled in a Saturday Academy reading class with an emphasis on phonemic awareness, phonics, decoding, fluency, and vocabulary in English. If funding is available, newcomers and SIFE students attend a four week summer ENL enrichment program in July to enhance and improve their high school experiences. The summer enrichment program focuses on strengthening students' literacy and mathematics skills and immersing students in NYC culture. B) Newcomer ELLs: Newcomer students are programmed for homogeneous stand-alone ENL classes which meet as a block on a daily basis. This course utilizes the National Geographic Edge-Fundamentals level as its curriculum and utilizes a balanced literacy framework using ENL strategies to teach academic and content literacy strategies. Students also receive additional support in the after school program from certified teachers (ENL, HLA, and/or content area). Teachers who provide these services meet in grade teams to discuss ELL students and share strategies to use in the classroom to support their learning. If funding is available, newcomers and SIFE students attend a four week summer ENL enrichment program in July to enhance and improve their high school experiences. The summer enrichment program focuses on strengthening students' literacy and mathematics skills and immersing students in NYC culture. C) Developing ELLs: Developing ELL students receive integrated ENL/ELA services during the school day. Content area teachers meet with ENL teachers to discuss ELL students and share instructional strategies that will enhance their content learning and new language acquisition. D) Long Term ELLs: Long term ELL students take are provided with differentiated instruction based upon their academic needs in class. The majority of long term ELL students are proficient in speaking and listening and need further support in strengthening their academic reading and writing skills. Specific supports utilized to address this need include: the teaching of the seven habits of proficient readers, graphic organizers, writing templates, and vocabulary instruction. Long term ELL students are placed in heterogenous intermediate and advance level ENL classes which place greater emphasis on the reading and writing skills needed using a balanced literacy model. E) Former ELLs: In accordance with CR Part 154.2, former ELL students continue to receive 90 minutes of ENL support per week in integrated ENL/ELA classes and/or integrated ENL/content area classes. ENL teachers in the integrated classes provide differentiated supports based on the needs of the individual students. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? The teachers of ELL-SWD students differentiate instruction accordingly in order to provide students with multiple entry points so that they can access the curriculum. In the classroom teachers use the following instructional strategies and grade-level materials: 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? The Special Education department works closely with the ENL teachers to ensure that there is flexibility in supporting the academic and language needs of our ELL-SWD students. Additionally, school leaders carry out the district’s vision for ELL-SWDs, and have clear and high expectations for all ELL-SWDs. During the school year, professional development is offered to the ENL teachers where they learn strategies to work with ELL-SWD. During this time the special education teachers train ENL teachers on how to access the IEP. Some of the sections that are highlighted are the present level of academic achievement, annual goals, reading levels, participation in state assessments, program modifications and specially designed instruction, 2018-19 SCEP-FL 66  educational placement and type of service and support as mandated by the IEP. Throughout the school year, the Special Education department checks in regularly with ENL teachers and provides them with ongoing support in accessing instructional materials so that students can meet the standards of the Common Core Curriculum. Some of the supports include graphic organizers to support the students during instruction, scaffolding of material to make it accessible to students. Reading instruction includes phonics, comprehension and word recognition, and analysis. Cooperative learning is used in the classroom where students of mixed abilities have the opportunity to work together. We also provide a bilingual paraprofessional to students as mandated on the IEP where they receive translation support in the classroom. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Targeted intervention programs for ELL students in specific subject areas include: 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Based on data and trends, the school will continue to provide ENL teachers with professional learning sessions for the National Geographic Edge curriculum with a staff developer from 2017-2019. In addition, the ENL teachers will work with a staff developer from Curriculum 21 to strengthen approaches to curriculum design with a lens on the needs of 21st century learners from 2017-2019. To strengthen students' non-fiction reading skills, the school will incorporate NewsELA into its curricula in ENL/ELA, science, and history in 2018. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? We are not discontinuing any programs and/or services right now. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELL students are afforded equal access to all school programs during the school day, in our after-school program, and in our Saturday Academy program. School leaders, Guidance Counselors, and our Community School Office communicates after-school and supplemental services available to students on a frequent basis using class visits, calls home, and fliers. The after-school program includes tutoring sessions, club activities, theater programs, music programs, and sports programs. The Saturday Academy program includes credit bearing courses, reading, club activities, tutoring sessions, and enrichment opportunities in broadcast journalism. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Common Core aligned curriculum is used in all content areas for ELL students. To support the facilitation of these curricula, the following resources are utilized: Engage NY curriculum in mathematics classes, the National Geographic Edge curriculum in ENL classes, the Key Principles of ELL Instruction, and Common Core aligned curricula in social studies and science. Technology is utilized in the form of iPads, laptops, and cameras to create content using applications such as iMovie, Audacity, and Google Apps for Education. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 67  13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Home language support is delivered in the TBE programs in home (native) language arts classes. The home language arts courses follow the Spanish Native Language Arts Curriculum Guide as its curriculum. This curriculum is grounded in developing students' literacy skills in Spanish with an emphasis on reading a range on non-fiction and literary texts and writing argument based responses. Outside of home language courses, students receive home language support in their content area classes as teachers utilize the home language to deliver lessons in bilingual content area classes. Outside of the TBE program in the ENL program, students receive home language supports in their classes through the use of bilingual glossaries in their native language (Arabic, French, or Spanish) and, when needed, differentiated materials based on their home language. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. The school ensures that all required services/resources best support and correspond to ELL students' ages and grade levels by a series of quality review checks. Guidance Counselors review students programs carefully at the beginning of each semester to ensure that students are taking the appropriate course work in ELL based on their program option. School leaders also review student programs and student transcripts to ensure that students are programmed according to CR Part 154 and are on track towards graduation. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? The school collaborates with other schools on campus to share resources for the Saturday Academy program to maximize opportunities for ELL students to take credit bearing courses and ENL courses. In addition, the community based organization in two schools on campus share resources to provide students with resources and supports in SAT tutoring, college readiness, and socio-emotional supports. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Dependent on funding, incoming 9 th grade ELL students are enrolled in a Title III Summer Enrichment program every summer. The 6-week bridge to high school program focuses on language development through cultural immersion and the arts (theater). During the school year, newly enrolled ELL students participate in our Title III Academy which offers tutoring supports in all subject areas both after-school and on Saturdays. In addition, the Guidance Counselors meet with newly enrolled ELL students frequently to check in on their transition to both high school and life in the United States. The Parent Coordinator meets with the parents of newly enrolled ELL students in parent workshops to discuss concerns and/or needs about living in the United States. These workshops provide supports in immigration, housing, college access, and English Language programs for adults. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? In addition to taking Home Language Arts in Spanish, our ELL students also take Advanced Placement Spanish Language and Culture as a language course. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 68  In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Not applicable. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? We aim to prepare all of our teachers and staff members to deliver the best and most appropriate level of instruction and support to our ELL population. In the 2017-2019 academic years, the professional learning program will focus on two primary goals: Professional learning sessions are facilitated via department meetings, faculty meetings, professional activities, and Chancellor's Conference Days. The professional learning plan is designed by the Professional Learning Committee (PLC) in collaboration with the school's leadership. The 2017-2018 PLC is comprised of: We began and will continue to offer the following professional development opportunities for all teachers in 2017-2018: 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Professional learning sessions are facilitated via department meetings, faculty meetings, professional activities, and Chancellor's Conference Days. The professional learning plan is designed by the Professional Learning Committee (PLC) in collaboration with the school's leadership. The 2017-2018 PLC is comprised of: In addition to the members of the PLC, the Assistant Principals, ENL Teacher, Guidance Counselors, staff members from the school based health clinic, and staff members from our community school partner Catholic Charities/Alianza Dominicana also provide professional learning sessions at the school. Records of these professional learning sessions are kept on file in Ms. Topbas’ office in the form of agendas, attendance sheets, and workshop packets. Topics for workshops include (but are not limited to): Analysis of the NYSESLAT scores: What do they reveal about our students?, differentiated instruction strategies for ELL students, vocabulary strategies for ELL students, looking at student work, best practices for teaching ELL students, CCLS alignment in ENL classrooms, and a general ELL overview training session. Additional training sessions will be offered in response to the needs and requests of staff members. The meetings are facilitated for the entire staff, including Guidance Counselors, Special Education teachers, and the Parent Coordinator. Spanish translation and interpretation services are available in all meetings that involve parents. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 69  Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? In addition to the mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-schedule parent-teacher conferences, the Parent Coordinator and bilingual Guidance Counselors collaborate with the ENL Department to schedule and facilitate individual meetings with the parents of ELL students. These meetings take place during monthly Parent-Association meetings, over the phone in collaboration with the student's ENL teacher, and/or are scheduled throughout the school day based on the parent's availability. ENL teachers keep a record of these communications and the Guidance Counselors keep a record in iLog. Staff members provide Spanish on-site translation and interpretation services when meeting and working with parents whose home language is Spanish. When translation or interpretation services are required for another home language, the school staff contacts the Translation and Interpretation Unit at (718) 752-7373 for support. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Parental involvement and on-going communication with parents is the cornerstone of best supporting all of our students at the High School for Media and Communications. These structures include an active Parent Association, parent representatives on the School Leadership Team, a parent representative on the school’s Language Allocation Policy Team, and regular communication between the school and parents through awards assemblies, Parent/Teacher conferences, breakfast meetings with the Principal, and the Parent Coordinator's newsletter. We provide monthly workshops to parents, including ELL parents, on a range of topics including the college application process, transition from middle school to high school, parenting, cultural institutions, citizenship/immigration, and academic intervention services that can be provided at home. Staff members provide Spanish on-site translation and interpretation services when meeting and working with parents whose home language is Spanish. When translation or interpretation services are required for another home language, the school staff contacts the Translation and Interpretation Unit at (718) 752-7373 for support. ELL parents are also involved on our School Leadership Team to help us make decisions regarding the school's program, budget, and use of resources. In addition, parents volunteer to as parent volunteers throughout the school year to support the work of our school community at parent meetings, open houses, school tours, and additional events. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 70 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Juan Villar, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 71  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: High School for Media and Comm School DBN: 06M463 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Juan Villar Title Principal Emel Topbas-Mejia Assistant Principal Dersa Gonzalez Parent Coordinator Lily Miao ENL/Bilingual Teacher Maria Peralta Morales Parent Jorge Gonzalez Mendez Teacher/Subject Area Marilyn Ramirez Teacher/Subject Area N/A N/A Difre Reyes Alice Cohen 12/15/2017 Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Dolly Arroyo 12/15/2017 Other N/A Bienvenida Galvez Other Assistant Principal/Guidance Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 12/15/2017 12/15/2017 12/15/2017 12/15/2017 12/15/2017 12/15/2017 12/15/2017 N/A N/A Manuel Ramirez Alice Cohen, Senior ELL CPS Social Worker N/A 12/15/2017 1/1/01 2018-19 SCEP-FL 72  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 06m463 School Name: High School for Media and Communica Superintendent: Manuel Ramirez The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Dersa Gonzalez Parent Coordinator NO YES * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. The Home Language Survey is used to determine parents’ language preference needs. With the assistance of our Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselors and support staff, all parents and guardians of all incoming students are required to complete the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS). Using the information from these assessment tools; parents' interviews, emergency contact card (language preference), and parent orientations the school determines the translation and interpretation services needed to ensure that our parents and students are provided with the appropriate language services they need. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 73  Spanish English Language Written Preferred Percent Written 230 53 160 45 Oral Preferred Percent Oral 2 .00 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency How do you Distributed to plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Families On going In order to serve the parents of our students and the school community more effectively, written translations are offered for the following documents: letters, memos, newsletters, Code of Conduct Handbook, consent forms, promotional in doubt letters, agendas and emergency contact cards. These documents are mailed home and disseminated in school in both English and Spanish. Translators are available for parents throughout the school day, at open school sessions and during all School Leadership Team and Parent Association meetings. Translators are also hired for special events. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 74  Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Our school's major priority is to maintain open communication with our students, parents and families through phone calls, letters, individual and general parent-teacher meetings, attendance meetings and discipline meetings. Prior to every single meeting, the designated school personnel makes phone calls in the appropriate language to ensure parents receive the notification for these meetings. On going 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. The PC is bilingual (Spanish), while the Family Worker is monolingual. We reach out to both groups in their native language. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Chancellor Regulations are distributed in a USB to all teachers and staff members the first day of school Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) All written information for parents and students is disseminated in English and Spanish. There is a sign posted at the main entrance of the school and in every office in English and Spanish stating that translation services are available. The school's office phone gives the option of choosing English or Spanish for each caller. Each parent is able to communicate with the office in either language at any time. In addition, there is Spanish speaking personnel in every school office. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 75  Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? A Learning Environment Survey is sent every year to every Media family. The school utilizes the data on these surveys along with verbal feedback to evaluate services provided to our students and families. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 76 
