 05M514 School Name: NEW DESIGN MIDDLE SCHOOL Principal: MARCELLUS STOVALL 2018-19 SCEP-P 1  School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Section 4: SCEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Section 7: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 8: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 9: Title I Program Information Section 10: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 SCEP-P 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information New Design Middle School 05M514 310500010514 06, 07, 08 School Number (DBN): 625 West 133rd Street, New York, NY 10027 212-281-6339 212-281-6674 Phone Number: MarisolVasquez Fax: Mvasquez4@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 5 Email Address: Marcellus Stovall Ms. Mack ElizabethDelgado Theresa Johnson n/a n/a Jermaine Small District Information Danika Rux Superintendent: Community School District 5;123 Morningside Drive,Unit 2, Room 235; New York, NY 10027 Superintendent’s Office Address: DRux@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: (212) 222-1395 Phone Number: (212) 316-0451 Fax: Manhattan FSC: Field Support Center (FSC) Executive Director: Yuet Chu 2018-19 SCEP-P 3  Executive Director’s Office Address: 333 7 th Ave, NY, NY ychu@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 646.470.0721 Phone Number: (212) 356-7564 Fax: 2018-19 SCEP-P 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the SCEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Marcellus Stovall Tiffany Mack Elizabeth Delgado NA Theresa Johnson NA NA JermaineSmall NA *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Recording Secretary Elected Parent Elected Parent 2018-19 SCEP-P 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Elected UFT Elected UFT Elected UFT Elected parent Elected UFT Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 SCEP-P 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) is a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. The process of developing and implementing the SCEP is aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding SCEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and SCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 SCEP-P 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: 2018-19 SCEP-P 8  Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the SCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the SCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for SCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you 2018-19 SCEP-P 9  monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 5: Build consensus around activities, strategies and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 6: Step 6: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 7: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 SCEP-P 10  1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: SCEP Overview Our Vision Our Mission New Design Middle School in partnership with students, families and the community will provide a safe, family-friendly environment for all. Additionally, NDMS will provide a quality rigorous education to all students with a focus on project-based learning fostering critical thinking and problem solving skills. The New Design Middle School community will demonstrate respect for all members by exercising empathy and kindness; which will cultivate positive and supportive relationships. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. New Design Middle School is a middle school located in Harlem, and serves 125 students in grades 6-8. Demographically, New Design Middle School’s population is 60% Black; 36% Hispanic; 6% of our students receive ELL services; and 36% of our students have IEP’s. New Design Middle school believes in supporting the whole child. To that end, we have incorporated structured time to allow for students to build connections with adults and each other in an Advisory class(Second Step). We also infused in the master schedule a club period which is another opportunity for students to build connections with adults Grade level town hall meetings have also been implemented to provide students a platform to discuss issues on their grade level. It is also a venue to communicate messages and to celebrate student achievement. Additionally, we have partnerships to allow for students to be supported academically, as well as socially and emotionally beyond the school day. Our Community-based organization, YWCA, provides after school programming for students to get additional support with homework and school projects, while also providing extracurricular activities to engage students in developing pro-social skills. We have also partnered with ABC to provide additional support to students in crisis. Moreover,America Scores incorporates soccer games and coaching, as well as an academic component that engages students in writing and presenting to their peers to develop confidence, self-esteem, and enhanced communication skills. Finally, our partnership with Midori & Friends has also supported students with building confidence and self-esteem while learning to play woodwind instruments. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Thirty-six percent of our students have IEP’s and six percent are ELL's. Their needs are reflected in the program offerings and supports are in place. For example, our school has co-teaching classes as well as self-contained classes for our special education students. And a stand alone and push-in model for our English Language Learners. We seek to move students to the least restrictive environment to support our students in building the independence necessary to engender future success. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. 2018-19 SCEP-P 11  As noted by New York State, our areas of celebration include: 1. Recognizing the need to increase student success, the school leader has allocated some staff and resources to develop and implement a co-teacher model to promote student achievement and support students’ social and emotional health. 2. Parents and students reported that students feel safe in the building, and reviewers observed a generally welcoming school environment. 3. Parents interviewed by the review team expressed satisfaction with the school, and students reported they are happy to be there and enjoy activities such as student projects, sports, clubs and advisories Key areas of focus this year: Improving school culture is one of the key focus for this year. It is also aligned to the 2nd element of the Framework for Great Schools called supportive environment. We will provide opportunities for students to engage in a variety of activities in school and outside of the school building that will promote positive relationships among staff and students. Additionally, an advisory program (Second Step) will be implemented to support social emotional learning which will help to build support structures within the school to allow for restorative practices to flourish. To support improving student outcomes, we will focus on aligning assessments to lesson objectives and Common Core Learning Standards to allow for more targeted feedback and adjustment of instruction in response to student needs. This focus is aligned to the 1st and 3rd element of the Framework for Great schools called rigorous instruction and collaborative teacher. To increase ELA & Math proficiency for all students especially, for students with special needs ,we will adjust the school schedule to develop instructional blocks in ELA & Math providing more instructional time and allowing for increased AIS opportunities. Additionally, data will be used as a tool to support targeted instruction during these instructional blocks. This area of focus is aligned to the 1st and 4th element of the Framework for Great Schools called rigorous instruction and effective school leadership. Lastly, to improve parent engagement, we will develop a variety of opportunities to engage families. Parent workshops, assemblies, town hall meetings, news letters and etc. will be used as vehicles for increased parent participation. This last and final are of focus is aligned to strong family- community ties, which is the 5th element of the Framework for Great Schools. 2018-19 SCEP-P 12  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 05M514 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 130 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 34 36 2 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 10 8 7 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 92.0% % Attendance Rate 86.9% % Reduced Lunch 6.2% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.8% 41.5% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 2.3% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 0.55 10% 33% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 21.1% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO N/A NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 44 40 3 86.3% 4.6% 39.2% 55.4% 0.0% 0.8% 4 33% 7.1 11.3% 0% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No NO N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 SCEP-P 13  2018-19 SCEP-P 14  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. 3.3 3.4 3.5 Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. SOP(s) Addressed X X x X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year.The 2016 School Quality Guide indicated that 4% of our students received a score of 3 or 4 on the NYS Math exam. After analyzing math achievement data for the school, it was determined that this is the most significant area of growth for NDMS. While student performance in Math was in the 32 percentile Citywide, there is still need for improvement. Of the students identified as “school's lowest third,” the median growth percentile was 50%. Although this was approximately the 47th percentile when compared to the rest of the city, it placed our school only in the 7% percentile when compared to our peer group. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Rigorous Instruction 2018-19 SCEP-P 15  Data that Indicates Need: Thirty-six percent of our students are students with disabilities. According to NY State Education data, in the 2016-17 SY, in ELA, 11% of students were overall proficient. Seventeen percent of our general education students were proficient, overall, and 0% of our special education students were proficient. Sixty-seven percent (29) of our students with disabilities were level one, and 33% (14) were level 2. Zero percent of students with disabilities were level 3 or 4 for ELA. For math 4% of all students were proficient. Seven percent (7) of general education students were proficient, and 2% of students with disabilities were proficient. The break down based on level of proficiency is as follows: 82% (37) level 1; 16% (7) level 2; 2% (1) level 3; and 0% level 4. There is a need to support students with disabilities, in particular, in building proficiency and to provide instruction in the least restrictive environment. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Goal By June 2019, NDMS will improve proficiency levels of our students with disabilities, moving from zero to three percent overall proficiency, as measured by the New York State ELA and math exams. 2018-19 SCEP-P 16 Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) IEP coordinator; Assistant Principals; testing coordinator Students Sept to June Classroom Teachers September through June Teacher leaders; iReady trainers; NTC trained teachers Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional    development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Student Supports Students will be provided with an additional support period in math and ELA to allow for AIS; RTI; and tailored instruction.  Teachers will push in and pull out to foster reading development.  We will work with SIT and IEP coordinator to support students in moving to least restrictive environment.  Use iReady to support differentiated, targeted instruction for specific math and ELA skills.  This year we will be implementing a writing curriculum to improve and support ELA skills. Teacher Supports  Inclusion, this year, of a special education teacher as a mentor to teachers and participation in Metamorphosis training to support math  Minimum of four observation cycles per teacher   Norming of observation and feedback cycle for Instructional rounds to guide next steps administrators  Time strategically provided in schedule to allow for content team planning during school day  Teacher leaders will develop intervisitation schedule to further enhance data driven instruction.  Ready training and support; use of iReady to measure growth and support individualized instruction Incorporation of support period to provide additional opportunities for AIS and tailored instruction Integration of teacher leaders in instructional cabinet   Distributed leadership systems(Instructional Team,Grade Teams, Department Teams,etc.)  One Peer Collaborative coach for ELA , math and special education 2018-19 SCEP-P 17   Use the Item Skills Analysis and iReady data to focus instruction on areas of need (on-going September-June), and high leverage standards  All Math teachers will receive professional development around "Algebra for All.". Parent Supports At New Design Middle School we understand the important role that caregivers play in supporting their children. It is crucial that we engage with parents in assisting them in deepening their understanding of rigorous instruction so that they can better assist their child at home. We will conduct parent engagement nights; open house events; and high school transition nights. We will also utilize our Tuesday Professional Development meetings (parent outreach) to expand on our strategies to deepen parent understanding of rigorous instruction as well as keeping parents aware of current curriculum in each content area, and specific student areas of and for growth. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Parents September through June Teachers; guidance counselor; parent coordinator How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Our school will offer a Back to School Night that provides and overview of what courses entail. Additionally, parents will also have the opportunity to participate in Parent/Teacher conferences for the year which will enable them to monitor and track student progress as well as monthly parent workshops with a focus on specific areas of need and improvement. The individuals that will be responsible are; Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Instructional Resources: iReady; Metamorphosis professional learning; Algebra for All; per diem funds will support teacher coverage when teachers attend professional learning. Human Resources: Peer Collaborative Teachers; New Teacher Coaches (an additional coach was added this year) - funding will be matched and per diem funds will support coverage of teachers. Time: Schedule Adjustments include incorporation of time for collaborative planning; Peer Collaborative Teachers are allocated approximately ten periods per week for supporting teachers, including conducting observations and providing feedback; our administrative team will conduct a minimum of four observation cycles for each teacher in order to provide support to improve teacher practice and student outcomes. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding X C4E Other 2018-19 SCEP-P 18  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 15, 2019, students who have been continuously enrolled at NDMS will show a 3% increase in the growth measure, as indicated by the growth metrics of iReady. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. We will use iReady, student Performance Series, Mock Assessments and MOSL assessments as a measure to assess progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 19  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. X X X X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? In SY 2016-17, the school invested time and effort in a Restorative Practice to formally address behavioral expectations and guidance. Through the use of presentations, in-class re-teach, modeling, and a rewards system, the school created a safer school climate. As a result, the impact was a decline in suspensions. However, the following year, several of the trained teachers left NDMS. On the most recent (2016) New York City Department of Education school survey, under 40% of our students responded "almost always" to the question “to what extent do students follow the rules in class." As noted by the New York State Review, a priority need for our school is to "designate a restorative practices committee and collaborate with the committee to develop a plan for re establishing restorative practices school-wide." Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools –Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified 2018-19 SCEP-P 20  priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 80%, or more, of teachers and deans will be trained in Restorative Practices and will lead at least two circles per semester. 2018-19 SCEP-P 21  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Training: All Students Our School Staff will be trained in Restorative Practices and will lead and model circles for the staff. and Families September 2018 - June 2019 Assistant Principals, Deans, Guidance Counselor, and Teachers Student Groups September 2018 - June 2019 Assistant Principals, Deans, and Guidance Counselor. All staff members will be introduced to TCIS and Life Space Crisis Intervention strategies. During the 2017-18 school year, the guidance department was running 12 groups of students a week, supporting almost half of the student body. It is our belief that a consistent, therapeutic space is beneficial to all students. It is projected that given proper scheduling and space that we are able to run more groups so as to meet the needs of more of our students. The guidance department will utilize grade level town hall meetings to provide additional support and guidance to the needs of each grade level to meet the needs of all of our students. Our guidance counselor will be using data from our Skedula platform, as well as information from our weekly attendance team meeting to identify students who are struggling (both academically and behaviorally) and identify students in need of counseling and support services. Engaging Families: Parent engagement/education activities are instrumental in improving student outcomes. Parent/family engagement will consist of the following: Parents - Welcoming all students into the community - NDMS will hold open house/Back to School Night to provide information to parents regarding the school and the curriculum. September 2018 - June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, parent coordinator, teachers 2018-19 SCEP-P 22  - NDMS faculty will use Tuesday parent out-reach professional development (70 minutes each week) to contact parents and hold in-person meetings. -Parents will be invited to award celebrations and student performances. -Parents will participate in monthly workshops. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. We will conduct a parent survey and identify specific topics of interest related to conversations with their child that they might like support with, and that relate to a restorative approach and provide a workshop on how to engage in such conversation with the support of trained professionals. Workshops will also be provided on the new advisory program(second Step) and its impact on their child's growth and development. The individuals that will be responsible for this initiative are; the parent coordinator and the guidance counselor. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Teacher support: Manhattan Borough Support Center - Restorative practices training. Per diem funds to provide teacher coverage will be utilized. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding X X C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 30, 2019, at least 60% of teachers trained in restorative practices. and 100% of teachers trained in the advisory program Second step. Additionally, at least two trained teachers will model learned practices by leading our staff in a restorative circle. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Student, staff and family surveys; student focus group feedback. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 23  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. SOP(s) Addressed X X X 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. X 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Throughout the first five years since New Design opened we have consistently worked towards the goal of student engagement, multiple entry points, and meeting the academic needs of our SWDs and ELLs. Our strengths was the ability of teachers to work together to support one another to collaboratively teach and refine lessons. A priority area in need of improvement is utilization of assessments aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards and lesson objectives used to inform instruction. This need was also indicated in the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. Additionally, the State visitors indicated that "lesson plans showed that many of the expected components were missing from teachers’ plans, such as pacing, assessment during and after the lesson, and questions to promote higher-order thinking from students. The document review and classroom observations also indicated that activities in many classes did not match the stated learning targets in the corresponding lesson plans. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified 2018-19 SCEP-P 24  priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, ELA and math teacher teams will engage in at least one cycle of the data review process, with the lens of emphasizing assessment aligned to objectives and Common Core Learning Standards. 2018-19 SCEP-P 25  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) During the 2018-19 school year we will use all three teacher leaders to form an instructional team. This team will engage in leading the staff in professional learning, inclusive of modeling the use of data. Additionally, PCTs will establish inter visitations, and model classroom sessions that allow for teachers to observe specific practices and engage in dialogue around observed practices. Teachers September 2018 through June 2019 Principal; Assistant Principals; teachers; teacher leaders During the 2018-2019 school year the instructional team will engage in calibration of understanding of the Danielson Framework and also participate in the development and revision of the professional learning plan. We will meet four additional hours per month outside of school hours to plan collaboratively. Teachers Teachers, and administration September 2018 through June 2019 We will continue to improve the balance of teacher and student talk, using formative assessment to differentiate and adjust instruction. The support will also address, but not be limited to the following: Students; teachers September 2018 through June 2019 Teachers; Teacher leadership coach; Borough Field Support Office  Writing a clear student learning target (What do I want students to know or be able to do, and why, by the end of the lesson?)  Designing tasks and activities for achieving the target, including the pacing of the tasks and activities;  Assessing whether or not the students achieved the target (How will I know if they know it or can do it and why they are doing it?); and  Defining the role of each teacher in a co-teaching lesson.  Developing an understanding of differentiation and how to create these opportunities in their classrooms for All students including SWD's and ELL's. Each department will share rolling agendas from their weekly meetings showing evidence of collaboration and implementation of the data process. Teachers will develop a curriculum and pacing map so that teachers can be on pace and align instruction to high leverage content standards. Teachers Teachers; administrators September 2018 through June 2019 2018-19 SCEP-P 26  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will be notified of parent engagement time allocated for caregiver outreach and meeting time( Tuesday afternoons). During this time, meetings can happen with a team of teachers, as appropriate to discuss and explore student needs and next steps. This will also be a time that families will be made aware of the significance of this time and how it can be a way for both the school and home to stay in communication. Additionally, by September we will host a Back to School night that will allow teachers to collaboratively present their course overview to caregivers to reflect teacher collaboration and consistency across the school as well as the " open school/door policy" that the school leader has developed allowing for parents an opportunity to engage the school community throughout the school year. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Schedule Adjustments: Teachers will have programs with periods assigned specifically for inter-visitations. Matching funds from the district will support the teacher leaders. Per diem will allow for any necessary teacher coverage that results. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding X X C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, teachers will have completely engaged in the data process. By engaging in this process teachers will be able to determine growth and make any necessary adjustments. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The end of unit assessments and interim assessments will be used to monitor progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 27  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). X X X X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. One of the school's strengths relative to effective school leadership, as noted in the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness, or DTSDE, teachers, parents and staff reported that the "school leader introduced several positive initiatives during the 2016-17 school year. Additionally, a priority need, also noted in the 2016-17 DTSDE, was a need to monitor progress regarding initiatives and other areas of improvement. In particular, areas highlighted for examination were as follows:  How well is lesson planning improving? (Tenet 3)  Are student outcomes improving as the result of teachers using "talk moves"? (Tenet 4)  Has a plan for re-establishing Restorative Practices school-wide been developed? (Tenet 5)  Is there a schedule in place for the presentations of learning to parents?" 2018-19 SCEP-P 28  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART– Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the administration will have engaged in four cycles of observations with review of data at the end of each cycle to inform support of teacher practice and professional learning. Adjustments and corresponding data will be reflected in professional learning plan. Additionally, leadership will adjust the schedule to allow for collaborative planning of two to four core content teams. 2018-19 SCEP-P 29  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Supporting Teacher Leadership - Each department will have a "department leader" who will facilitate department meetings, and build capacity of the team, alternating roles and supporting the team with the data process in at least ELA and math. Each week will be a data meeting focusing on student work that will be led by the department leader and supported by a member of the instructional team. Setting Norms and Weeks Meetings - Department teams will have established norms to facilitate collaboration. They will have set goals and beliefs to guide their work related to the instructional focus. Content teams will meet weekly to discuss consistency across classrooms, curriculum, alignment, assessment and achievement, and sharing of best practices. Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Teacher teams Aug. 2018 - May 2019 Teacher leaders; administration Teachers in all core content areas September 2018 to June 2019 Teachers/Teacher leaders, and administration The administrative team will engage in instructional rounds for each observation cycle to continue to norm and calibrate. Teachers in all core content areas September 2018 to June 2019 Principal and Assistant Principals 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will have a meeting in January to share with caregivers the initiatives underway and progress thus far. Additionally, to support parent leadership, we will establish a caregiver welcome center to allow for space and supplies to facilitate communication between caregivers by December 1, 2017. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Time/Teacher program: Teacher programs will be adjusted to include time for collaborative planning. Additionally, PCTs will have time to observe and give feedback to teachers. The PCT money includes hours monthly to engage in collaborative planning. Weekly meeting time for administrative team will be established Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 2018-19 SCEP-P 30  X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding X C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, administration will have completed and entered into the APPR form, at least three cycles of observations for each teacher in the school. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. We will analyze and look for evidence of growth aligned to identified components necessary in feedback in the optional additional notes section of the APPR form to support uniformity and high quality feedback. Additionally, when calibrating, we will expect to see an improvement in normed ratings when comparing calibration sessions in November, January, and March. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 31  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. x x x x SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. A strength thus far is our establishment of a school leadership team, and the adjusted quorum in our bylaws to allow for voting to occur even when all members are not present. Additionally, as indicated in the DTSDE, caregivers, school leaders, support staff, and students noted that "one pocket of success has been the student-led conferences or what the school refers to as presentations of learning to parents. Parents in the focus group said that these presentations gave them a better sense of how well their children were doing, what they were good at, and how they were struggling. The parents also shared that they enjoyed and were proud to hear their child explain what was going on along with the teacher’s comments A priority need, as indicated in the DTSDE is that a reciprocal communication tool is needed to support communication and engagement. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the 2018-19 SCEP-P 32  identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 90% of students will log on to Skedula at least once every marking period to review grades and create an action plan during their advisory class. 2018-19 SCEP-P 33  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) All content area teachers will work with students to identify and organize work that represents student's growth and areas of improvement. All content area teachers will have conferences with students to help students understand their strengths, growth and areas for more effort. Teachers Teachers September 2018- June 2019 September 2018- June 2019 Teachers and administration teachers and administration We will create a parent welcome center with access to Skedula and provide an information and training session by December, 2018. Parent Coordinator and teachers September 2018- June 2019 Parent coordinator, teachers, and administrators Students will create personal invitations to parents inviting them to review Skedula. Parents and teachers, September 2018- June 2019 Students, teachers, and administrators N/A 3b – Parent and Family Engagement N/A N/A N/A If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. We have partnered with YWCA, our Community Based Organization to lead our after school program. Part of our after school program also includes a partnerships with America Scores. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Parent Support: Computer software and general supplies to open more lines of communication; available in welcome center. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA P/F Set-aside 21st Century X C4E 2018-19 SCEP-P 34  Title I 1003(a) Title III PTA Funded SIG Grant School Achievement Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 1, 2018, at least three pilot classes will have engaged in conference s with students, which will include evidence shared on Skedula. Adjustments will be made to improve full scale implementation for all classes at least one to two times by June 2019. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Participation rates in targeted caregiver groups, such as pilot group, and Skedula login information Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 35  Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Program Description Directions: Expanded Learning Time activities are directly aligned to the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, Rigorous Instruction, Supportive Environment, and Strong Family and Community Ties. ELT provides enriching educational experiences that happen outside of the traditional school day and blend skill acquisition, relationship-building and fun to foster academic and social-emotional growth. Summer learning, afterschool programming, and extended-day ELT models, when well-implemented, play a critical role in supporting students in all grades and ensuring that they graduate from high school, college and career ready. SED requires that Priority schools offer a minimum of 200 additional student contact hours as Expanded Learning Time in addition to the current mandated length of 900 hours of instruction per year (25 hours per week) in grades K-6 and 990 hours of instruction per year (27.5 hours per week) in grades 7-12. Effective ELT models will blend school staff with community partners, and will provide a balanced curriculum that can include ELA, Math, STEM, arts, physical activity, and leadership development. Complete the sections on this page to demonstrate how the school will meet these requirements. Part 1 – ELT Program Goal(s) Describe the summative goal(s) of the ELT program for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. By June 2019 New Design Middle School will have a 90% increase of student participation in our expanded learning time program as measured by registration with our YWCA after school program and a 85% attendance rate. The goal of the expanded learning time program during the 2018-2019 school year is to provide school-wide learning opportunities in high-quality extended school day programs with a focus on improving academic achievement. To accomplish this we will actively encourage the participation of all students. We will ensure that learning is embedded within activities that students enjoy such as sports and games. Our after school partnership with the YWCA will be a major component of the expanded learning time and will structure their program around ensuring that students are receiving time and supports in their academics. The first hour of the after school program each day (2:20 - 3:20 pm) will be structured to ensure that students are working on homework assignments and receiving extra help in the content areas and skill that they struggle with. Part 2 – ELT Program Type Is the ELT program voluntary or compulsory? X Voluntary Compulsory If the ELT program is voluntary, indicate how you will actively encourage the participation of all students, with the goal of serving at least 50% of students. To actively encourage the participation of all students, we will have learning embedded within activities that students enjoy such as sports and games. We will also encourage participation by doing the following; 1. Student- Surveys, One to One conversations, group oriented activities. 2. Programming- Based on students’ needs and interest. 2018-19 SCEP-P 36  3. Safety- Ensuring appropriate ratios and space. 4. Community Service- Introduce the students to project based learning that contributes to the school and larger community 5. Attendance Incentives- Participation in trips coordinated with YWCA Part 3 – ELT Program Description The ELT program will be offered to all students eligible for Academic Intervention Services (AIS), with the goal of serving a minimum of fifty percent of AIS-eligible students. Describe how the school will meet the following SED requirements for an ELT program in a Priority School:  Integrate academics, enrichment, and skill development through hands-on experiences that make learning relevant and engaging.  Offer a range of activities that capture student interest and strengthen student engagement in learning so as to promote higher attendance, reduce risk for retention or drop out, and increase the likelihood of graduation.  Actively address the unique learning needs and interests of all types of students, especially those who may benefit from approaches and experiences not offered in the traditional classroom setting.  Contain components designed to improve student academic, social, and emotional outcomes, including opportunities for enrichment programs such as in music and art.  Ensure instruction in any core academic subject offered in the program will be delivered under the supervision of a teacher who is NYS certified in that particular content area.  Engage in outreach activities made to families. The YWCA staff and school teachers will engage in on-going meetings to share the student’s interest, needs, and the area of focus that the class is working on during regular school hours. They will review results from student data to make decisions on targeted areas of needs. Two days out of the week the YWCA will lead various youth development clubs and activities in which they will reinforce core concept that they are learning during day school. Examples of some of the activities that capture student interest and engage them in learning are soccer, drama, arts and crafts, book clubs, and trips to cultural institutions such as the New York Historical Society. Through these activities students will have the opportunity to apply some of the knowledge that they acquired in their classroom. Through the hands on activities and trips students are able to make the classroom and real life connections. As a result of the engaging activities in which the students participate in, their attendance is improved as they are motivated and looking forward to attend school. During the remaining three days the YWCA staff supports certified teachers with implementing ELA and Math for grades 6-8. Outreach will be made to families through phone calls, surveys, meeting and events at the school such as meeting with the principal, family game night, and PTA meetings. YWCA will participate in our Back to School Night to share program information with interested families and have a sign up table. Part 4 – ELT Program Implementation and Oversight Part 4a. Who will implement the ELT program? Who will oversee the program? 1. Indicate the key personnel that will be responsible for implementing and overseeing the ELT program, including school-based staff and any high-quality community partners that will be involved. If applicable, describe the scope of involvement of all community partners and how the joint ELT program is structured. 2. 3. Explain how you will evaluate the program to assess impact on student achievement. 2018-19 SCEP-P 37  New Design Middle School in collaboration with the YWCA will implement and oversee the ELT program. We will utilize several complementary methods to ensure that our programs deliver the services planned and that they are effective in meeting program goals and outcomes. Having talented, responsible staff will be a key to program implementation and effectiveness, which is why we will prioritize quality in hiring, staff orientation, training and supportive supervision. We will assess program quality through supervisory and administrative monitoring, including monthly meetings between NDMS and YWCA administrators. Additionally we will conduct periodic co-observations between the principal, internal site visits, informal and formal participant feedback, and data gathered through student focus groups. Through routine reviews of data, we will be able to identify obstacles and work with staff to make mid-course corrections or institute improvements. Other high quality community partners that will be involved in our ELT Program are: America Scores Road Runners Track Part 4b. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. ELT Starts on October 10, 2018 and ends on June 21, 2019. Part 5 – ELT Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the ELT program. The YWCA Staff is leading activities and clubs along with supporting teachers during ELT. In addition we have also contracted with community partners which also provide support and programs during ELT. Per session funding is allocated to provide YWCA staff with a teacher to support alignment to program expectations. Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support the ELT Program. Note: If the program is funded by 21st Century Community Center Learning Funds, it must be offered in conjunction with a high quality, high capacity community partner. 21st Century Title I 1003(a) X Tax Levy X Title III Title I SWP PTA Funded Title I TA SIG Grant P/F Set-aside School Achievement Funding X X C4E Other Part 6 – ELT Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Our first check-in to monitor the progress of the ELT program will be November 2018, at which point we will make any necessary adjustments to policies, procedures, and/or programming. We will meet once a month or more to review areas of concern and for growth and to make adjustments, as necessary. During this time, we will revisit rate of participation by using data from the YWCA to inform decisions regarding programming, retention efforts, staff development opportunities, and engagement strategies. Attendance rates in youth development activities will be analyzed to identify popular activities to continue or expand and recognize those activities to discontinue. Reviewing 2018-19 SCEP-P 38  the individual participation rates of youth regularly will indicate to program staff those youth who have not been attending and need phone calls and follow-up to ensure retention in the program. Attendance rates in youth development activities will also demonstrate those program staff who may benefit from additional supports and/or professional development to improve youth participation and retention. Routine review of participation data will allow staff and program partners to identify obstacles to engagement and make mid-course corrections or institute improvements. Part 6b. Indicate the instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Enrollment rate data for YWCA,as well as individual programs within the after school session. Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 39  Section 7: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Students scoring level 1 or 2 on the ELAState Exam. MOSL exams Students scoring level 1 or 2 on theMathState Exam. MOSL exams Previous year science foundation, and ELA NYS exam. Social Studies Previous year social studies foundation and ELA NYS exam. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) ELAafter school tutoring. Guided reading, intensive writing tutorials, and vocabulary instruction forELLs, andMOSL exams Small group Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) small group When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During the day and on Saturday. small group During the day and on Saturday. Teacher developedmaterials to support science content. small group During the day and on Saturday. small group, one-to-one tutoring(after school) During the day and on Saturday. Small group Teacher developed materials to support social studies content. small group, and one-to-one tutoring(after school) 2018-19 SCEP-P 40  At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Recommendation from school Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, or Social Worker Support groups(both in and out of school) Support groups(both in and out of school) During the day and after school. 2018-19 SCEP-P 41  Section 8: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) Eleven students are currently in temporary housing. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Students in temporary housing who attend NDMS are provided school supplies and clothing through clothing drives; we will also seek to partner with an outside organization to donate supplies by January 2019. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). n/a 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 SCEP-P 42  n/a 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. n/a 2018-19 SCEP-P 43  Section 9: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Professional Development is on going throughout the year, as teachers are part of a number of teams that support their growth as educators. Teachers meet weekly in content area inquiry teams. These teams are using data to support their inquiry work.- Teachers, paraprofessionals and school staff also do inter visitations 3 times a year and go to professional development as offered by the district and city. Once a week teachers meet in grade level meetings to discuss best practices and analyze student work and reach out to parents. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. n/a 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program 2018-19 SCEP-P 44  Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). n/a Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). n/a 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. At NDMS we will establish an instructional cabinet that consists of teachers and administrators that regularly meet to discuss assessment. We work as two teams that go through the cycles of data to discuss assessment measures and what professional development is needed as a result of the student outcomes we are seeing. This information is sent back to the Professional Development Committee that plan for the appropriate Professional development. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (SCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) Section 5a, 5b, 5c, 5d, 5e n/a Title I Part A (Basic) Federal Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Federal 143,023 n/a X n/a 2018-19 SCEP-P 45 Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Federal Federal Federal Federal Tax Levy (FSF) Local 57,707 n/a n/a n/a 1,682,515 X n/a n/a n/a X Section 5a, 5b, 5c, 5d, 5e n/a n/a n/a Section 5a, 5b, 5c, 5d, 5e 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/SCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not 2018-19 SCEP-P 46  available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 SCEP-P 47  Section 10: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. New Design Middle School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. New Design Middle School will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 SCEP-P 48  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 2018-19 SCEP-P 49  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Elementary and Secondary (ESSA) Act; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) New Design Middle School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. 2018-19 SCEP-P 50  Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Elementary and Secondary (ESSA) Act; Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; 2018-19 SCEP-P 51  Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; 2018-19 SCEP-P 52  ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; 2018-19 SCEP-P 53  ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 SCEP-P 54  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 5 School Name New Design Middle School Borough Manhattan School Number 514 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Marcellus Stovall Coach N/A ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Karina Perez/Special Education Related-Service Provider Superintendent Danika Rux Assistant Principal Coach N/A School Counselor Tara Brown Parent Parent Coordinator Stephanie Diaz Field Support Center Staff Member Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 1 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 2018-19 SCEP-P 55  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 130 Total number of ELLs 7 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 5.38% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 2 4 3 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? New Design Middle School administers the Fountas and Pinnell assessment and levels accordingly. In 2017-18, however, we will see students being assessed with Renaissance Reading, the school's new method for leveling within ELA. In addition to this, students will be given the city-wide ELA performance assessment. This baseline will be compared to a post-performance task in the spring. Student growth will be measured with these two assessments. Additionally, many performance tasks and assessments will serve as measures throughout the year. Once results are available, we will use the data to implement specific interventions to ELLs who might have particular literacy needs prior to the NYS exams. For example, if student A's data consistently indicates that he/she needs support with identifying central ideas and drawing conclusions, then the ELA and ESL teachers can plan accordingly. 2018-19 SCEP-P 56  2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? An Afterschool ELL Program or Saturday Academy will be in place to create an opportunity for language learners to receive more individualized help in literacy and an opportunity for language objectives to created that cater all four modalities: Listening, Reading, Writing, Speaking in student's areas of weakness. We will administer the data across grade team level meetings for students. Data will be used to revise RTI and AIS groups and interventions 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? NYC performance tasks and iReady data will be used to identify areas of need and baselines. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? To evaluate this year's ENL push-in model, we will be looking at multiple student assessments. The goal of pushing into content area classes with rich informational text is to increase student performance in both the push-in classes as well as ELA. We will evaluate growth in ELA looking at the city-wide tests. By comparing the baseline assessment to the post-assessment, which will be given in the spring, we expect to see growth among the ELLs in both subjects. Additionally, by working with ELLs on informational text, we will evaluate effectiveness by looking at this year's ELA scores compared to last year's. Finally, we will measure the effectiveness of this current ENL program by examining growth on the NYSESLAT exam 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] ENL teacher will meet with teacher teams to coordinate additional supports needed. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The NYSESLAT scores revealed that a large percentage of our ELL students are at an Transitioning or Expanding level. Our data suggests a need for vocabulary growth and development of reading comprehension. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? ENL teacher will meet with teacher team leads to disseminate findings and guide adjustments for review during the data process. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. New Design Middle School's free-standing ENL program is primarily push-in instruction. Push-in is used whenever possible, but for lessons where students require more individualized instruction, they are occasionally pulled out. We believe the ELLs are best served by learning among their English-speaking classmates, and take an immersion based approach to language learning. Our students travel in blocks, with each grade's ELLs condensed whenever allowed, allowing ELLs to be in a heterogeneous class of general education students, while working with other ELLs in that block who have the same proficiency level. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 57  N/A: 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Entering and emerging level students receive a minimum of 360 minutes per week with a fully certified ENL teacher. This includes instruction in Language arts. Additionally, students work on the ENL skills of speaking, listening, reading, and writing. Students at expanding and transitioning receive 180 minutes per week with a fully certified ENL teacher. Former English Language Learners receive 90 mins per week. Our ELA teachers are experienced teachers of literacy. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Laptops are used in the content area courses for our entering level students with the homepage set up as a translator for use by the student and teacher. This translation can be written or audible. The ENL teacher pushes into the language-heavy content classes such as ELA and Social Studies. The ENL teacher will use graphic organizers , sentence starters, and essay organizers for writings. Students at the Entering level will receive phonetic and comprehension instruction. For the majority of ELLs with basic English fluency, the ENL teacher uses visual aids and hands-on lessons to ensure student comprehension. For 3 Spanish speakers, the ENL teacher has been conducting writing interventions, as their verbal skills far surpass their written skill. Each Spanish speaking ELL has been tested to determine first language proficiency, and any who are not literate in their home language receive extra help from Spanish speaking teachers. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? An ELLs native language proficiency is first informally determined by the ENL teacher during the beginning instruction. Using information provided on the Home Language Survey, as well as the informal interview, the ENL teacher provides each new ELL with a diagnostic to determining L1 proficiency. Additionally, our school has a diverse staff with many languages who collaborate with the ENL teacher to determine a student's L1 level. Last, all ELLs take their state tests with accommodations, including the baseline tests given to establish a starting point. These accommodations include additional test time, separate location, bilingual glossaries, or translated exams when applicable. If unavailable, adult translators can be arranged. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. We have 1 SIFE student. So, we would employ the services of the ENL teacher to intensify instruction to help the students make up for what they have missed in prior years' interruptions, but we would provide the services of all the other pedagogues mentioned above. The ENL department has already purchased special materials designed, for example, to teach the alphabet and basic literacy to older children.b. Instruction for first-year ELLs focuses on maintaining the rudimentary content progress during acquisition of English orthography and literacy, and basic interpersonal conversation skills. In the second and third years in this country, the students are pointed toward enhancing performance on the ELA exams with test preparation especially in the mechanics of test taking (bubbling, question vocabulary, etc.) while continuing work on literacy skills (use of graphic organizers, paragraph construction, etc.).c. The plan for students who have received ENL services for 4-6 years is to give each student special attention in an effort to determine and address the individual issues preventing them from reaching proficient on the 4 modalities of the NYSESLAT exam. This may take the form of intervention by at-risk specialists, tutoring sessions with the ENL teacher, or participation in after-school programs. Our school holds many extra help sessions after school hours in an effort to work with high-needs students.d. Our approach to long-term ELLs is to give the specialized attention detailed in sub question c, as well as looking at the child as a whole. This may mean taking SIFE history or family related issues into account, as well as referring the child to be evaluated in order to diagnose any specific learning 2018-19 SCEP-P 58  disabilities that would be better addressed by specialists with training beyond that of an ENL teacher.e. We provide our former ELLs, in the two years following a NYSESLAT proficiency score, the same testing accommodations on state exams that current ENL students receive. The exams are to be proctored by their former ENL teacher, in an effort to make the student comfortable and included in the groups with identical testing accommodations. Additionally, the ENL teacher keeps close contact on the student's classroom teachers, offering strategies to help a child whose language skills are still growing. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Our school's ENL teacher pushes into the content area classes in an effort to improve student performance in language-heavy subjects. ENL students are also pulled out during reading club time, which is a 47-minute period at the end of each day devoted to reading and literacy skills. It is the goal of the ESL program to never interfere with the ELLs participation in any enrichment activities within our school, such as gym, elective classes, etc. Curriculum is simplified when necessary in order to accommodate the ELL-SWDs and in accordance with their IEPs. During push-in periods, the ENL teacher works with both ELLs and non-ELLs, and only sits with the ELLs separately when individual class work requires it. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? We allow our ELL-SWD scaffolded and differentiated work that is physically assessable (pencils with rubber grips) 3-4 mins early dismissal to be able to arrive to the next class in time. A one-on-one para also assistants with writing for the student in each of her classes (only when she is absent) so that she will not have a hard time catching up on the work. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Our school has staff who work specifically with students in need of academic system support in both math and ELA. We offer enrichment classes in both subjects in addition to the core classes.Those who need ELA intervention spend time working on reading and writing. For any additional help in content classes are teachers regularly offer after-school extra help on weekly basis. Lastly, all intervention services at our school are conducted in English, although the translator is provided for anyone who needs it. As previously stated, a number of our staff speak languages in addition to English. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Almost all ENL services in the 2018-19 school year will be delivered through the push-in model with a few stand-alone so as to keep each ELL from missing any valuable class time. This was possible by grouping the ELLs together where scheduling permitted, and has created a positive culture among our ELL students. They have developed more of a community as they share classes with students who come from the same cultures and backgrounds as themselves. It has brought forth a willingness to participate and share, and has lowered the affective filter. This model has also offered the ENL teacher the ability to observe ELLs in their classroom environment, as they interact with the teacher and classmates through group work. ELLs thus have more exposure to monolinguals and class discussion/peer interaction. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? No programs have been discontinued 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs are afforded the same access to school programs as every other student in our school. Our school offers basketball, flag football, soccer, test prep, and tutoring. Our school also offers extended day services to our 6th graders, with the intention of expanding the program to 7th and, eventually, 8th grade. Each of these programs are open to ELLs, and information is provided in the home language whenever possible. After school extra help with the ESL teacher to prepare ELLs for exams as well as the NYSESLAT are offered year round. 2018-19 SCEP-P 59  12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. For students who are new non speakers, we provide them with laptops to carry to class to translate any content in discussion. Written translations of the material are printed out for students ahead of time, with translation wherever needed. Otherwise, visuals and scaffolding are provided with each printout. Students are taught to use bilingual dictionaries, as well as thesauruses for intermediate students in order to grow vocabulary. School-wide, students are provided with the Renaissance Reading program to develop receptive/expressive vocabulary, and develop reading comprehension. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Students are given projects and work to do in their home language. For entering ELLs, it is acceptable to produce work in their home language. This serves to communicate that development and maintenance of home language is valued by our school and staff. Students are encouraged to read for leisure in both English and their home language. Any opportunity to share our languages with one another is encouraged among teachers and students alike. For example, when new vocabulary is encountered in a lesson, there is a natural opportunity to compare etymology among speakers of other languages. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. ELLs are grouped by grade level in groups that include both entering and expanding and commanding. However, groups of literate newcomers are taught together whenever possible regardless of grade level. Resources for all ENL groups are chosen with individual students in mind. One challenge of delivering ENL instruction across grade levels is to tailor it according to the developmental level of the array of students served, including what is typical of each age and grade, as well as that of students identified as having atypical cognitive needs. Continuous informal assessment throughout the term quickly reveals any mismatch between materials and methodology being used and the needs of any ELL student. Using these assessments assures that required services and resources correspond to appropriate ages and grades. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? For students who are entering ELLs, we provide them with laptops to carry to class to translate any content in discussion. Written translations of the material are printed out for students ahead of time, with translation wherever needed. Otherwise, visuals and scaffolding are provided with each printout. Students are taught to use bilingual dictionaries, as well as thesauruses for intermediate students in order to grow vocabulary. School-wide, students are provided with the Renaissance Reading program to develop receptive/expressive vocabulary, and develop reading comprehension. By December 2018, building principals will meet to discuss sharing of resources with charter schools in the building, wherever possible. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). There are currently no formal activities to assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the year. However, we plan on establishing communication between ELLs families to spread the word about appropriate summer opportunities such as camps and language assistance at public libraries during our spring student led conferences. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Language electives are not currently offered at our school. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A 2018-19 SCEP-P 60  Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? By December 2018, ENL teacher will meet with PD team to determine a specific date to present to staff, no later than January 2019. ENL teacher will seek professional learning through borough office, and sign up for at least one opportunity in the fall and spring. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. ENL teachers regularly receive an email newsletter from the DELLSS office. The state professional organization, NYS TESOL, has an annual conference with renowned speakers and experts in the education of ELLs. The schedule for PDs our ENL teacher will attend this year has yet to be finalized, so therefore a calendar is not yet in place. Currently the ESL teacher has yet to attend a PD regarding support of ELLs in the Common Core, but we do have plans to attend future events. The ENL teacher currently works on a weekly basis with both the science department and the social studies department. Additionally the ENL teacher meets twice a week with the 7th grade team for 50 minutes each time. Lastly, the ENL teacher periodically checks in with the remaining staff to help them grow in their teaching of ELL students. The ENL teacher provides the minimum 7.5 hours of ELL training for all staff during Chancellor Days (November and June) along with time spent training staff during parts of the hour-long weekly PD. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Currently; we contact parents by phone every Tuesday during family outreach hours as they are not always able to come to the school. Those conversations consist of the discussion of goals, language development, proficiency and needs. Durign student led conferences, individual meetings with parents will discuss the goals of program, as well as during our Back to School night. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. We are currently building a program that will foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs by targeting specific needs as indicated by survey to be administered by December 2018. Parent participation, in general is low, and we seek to improve that this year across the school. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 2018-19 SCEP-P 61  2018-19 SCEP-P 62 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Jeanine Benitez, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 SCEP-P 63  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: New Design Middle School School DBN: 05M514 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Jeanine Benitez Title Principal Sean Dunning Assistant Principal Stephanie Diaz Parent Coordinator Ashaunte Johnson ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Karina Perez Teacher/Subject Area Danika Rux Asha Raquel Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 10/30/17 10/30/17 10/30/017 1/1/018 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/018 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 SCEP-P 64  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 0M514 School Name: New Design Middle School Superintendent: Danika Rux The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Ashante Johnson ENL Teacher No Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Home Language Survey data are the initial indicator of parents' language and interpretation needs. ATS reports that support this are the RSDS and the RAPL. Our school utilizes the NYC DOE's Language and Interpretation Unit to support many of our translation needs around school-to-home communication. A majority of our parent population speaks Spanish as indicated on the Home Language Survey. We have additional languages spoken by our parents such as French, Wollof, and Arabic. For these parents, we have staff that is able to communicate in each language. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2018-19 SCEP-P 65  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral The information from our home language surveys and RHLA report indicate the following: Spanish-speaking French-speaking Arabic-speaking Findings were reported at PTA meetings. 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency How do you Distributed to Families Our school accesses the appropriate DOE resources to download translated versions of all mandated information that need to be sent to parents. We also use the Translation and Interpretation Unit for translation and/or interpretation. The results from our home language survey indicates Spanish is the language needs of most of our parents and families. New Design will provide parents with translated materials such as school updates, newsletters, and other important school information in a timely manner. As stated above, we have staff who are able to serve as in-house interpreters. Our parent coordinator works during the school day and then our afterschool staff ensures that we always have translation whenever a parent visits and can provide it both orally and written in a timely manner. We will also utilize the DOE's Translation and Interpretation Unit as well as in house staff members to support school needs around translation. By December 1, 2018 plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Parent Coordinator and ENL teacher will work with DOE translation services as necessary. Primarily our caregivers speak spanish, and our welcome packet, created for 2018-19 SCEP-P 66  parents, was translated into Spanish. Specific packets were made for the additional languages and corresponding families to allow for key information to be in the primary language utilized in the home. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school Throughout the school year our school will have face-to-face meetings with parents for parent-teacher conferences (September, November, March, and May), PTA meetings, SLT meetings, open house events, and professional development designed for parents. September 2018 through June 2019 plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Parent Coordinator and ENL teacher will work with DOE translation services as necessary. Primarily our caregivers speak Spanish, and will be translated in house. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. 2018-19 SCEP-P 67  Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Schoolwide professional learning plan will incorporate-663 by January 2018 Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Our school will fulfill parental notification requirements for translation and interpretation services by hold professional development sessions for parents and sending home notifications through the mail and backpacks. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Our school will use parent surveys throughout the school year to gather feedback from parents on the quality and availability of services. In house we will translate into Spanish, and DOE translation services will be utilized for lower-incidence languages. 2018-19 SCEP-P 68 
