 02M520 School Name: MURRY BERGTRAUM HIGH SCHOOL FOR BUSINESS CAREERS Principal: NAIMA COOK 2018-19 SCEP-FF 1  School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Section 4: SCEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 SCEP-FF 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Murry Bergtraum High School 02M520 310200011520 High School School Number (DBN): 411 Pearl Street New York, New York 10038 (212) 964-9610 Phone Number: ( 212)-732-6622 Fax: Naima J. Cook Ncook4@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 02 Superintendent’s Office Address: Email Address: Naima J. Cook Aristotelis Galanis Naima J. Cook N/A N/A District Information Vivian Orlen Superintendent: 333 7 th Avenue New York, New York 10001 vorlen@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: (212) 356-756 Phone Number: ( 212) 356-7514 Fax: Manhattan FSC: Field Support Center (FSC) Executive Director: Yuet Chu 2018-19 SCEP-FF 3  Executive Director’s Office Address: 333 7 th Avenue New York, New York 10001 YChu@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: (917) 705-5856 Phone Number: (718) 391-6189 Fax: 2018-19 SCEP-FF 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the SCEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Naima J. Cook Aristotle Galanis N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Assistant Principal Member/Parent l Member/ Parent 2018-19 SCEP-FF 5  N/A N/A N/A Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/ Parent Member/ Staff Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 SCEP-FF 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) is a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. The process of developing and implementing the SCEP is aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding SCEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and informed by New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and SCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a 2018-19 SCEP-FF 7  comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality 2018-19 SCEP-FF 8  Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the SCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the SCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for SCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 9   Step 4: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 5: Build consensus around activities, strategies and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 6: Implement at least one USDE Turnaround Principle (e.g., redesign the school day, week, or year; modify the instructional program to ensure it is Evidence-based, rigorous, and aligned with State academic content standards; provide time for collaboration on the use of) beginning no later than the 2018-19 school year.  Step 7: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 8: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 10  Section 4: SCEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? School’s Mission Statement: At Murry Bergtraum High School, students are challenged and empowered, faculty are inspired and supported. The student's core values are PHONEIX; Persistence, Heart, Ownership, Empathy, Nobility, Innovation and X Factor. The Instructional focus for the 2018-2109 school year is to engage teachers in cll be intellectually engaged in cognitively challenging writing and discussion. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. School Community: Murry Bergtraum High School for Business Careers (MBHS) is a high school with approximately 195 students from grade 9 through grade 12. Partnerships: CUNY College Now, Relationship Abuse Prevention Program (RAPP), ScriptEd and Syracuse University Project Advance (SUPA). Murry Bergtraum High School is dedicated to preparing young adults for the intellectual and academic rigors necessary for college as well as the social demands of the business world and society. The school's mission, is to enstill students with a strong sense of ethics, problem solving skills, strategies for consensus building, team spirit, a work ethic, a sense of self-esteem, critical thinking and interpersonal skills. This vision continues to be realized through a continuous effort of change guided by our School Leadership Team. The SLT unites the administration, staff, parents, teachers and students into a school policy making body responsive to the needs of all members of the school community. The support system provided for students, our dedication to high academic standards and our extensive connections with the community make Bergtraum the first choice for students. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 11  The student body includes 9% English language learners and 24% special education students. Boys account for 49% of the students enrolled and girls account for 51%. The average attendance rate is roughly 77%. There is a District 75 inclusion program for Deaf and Hard of Hearing students housed at MBHS. Students need support with recouping credit and staying current with their credit accumulation. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Over the last year the school has made the most progress in respect to Supportive Environment. The focus of the work for the 2018-19 school year is Rigorous Instruction. This work will be accomplished through professional development sessions on 3 to 5 instructional strategies around high-level discussion and writing skills. 5. Identify at least one USDE Turnaround Principle (e.g., redesign the school day, week, or year; modify the instructional program to ensure it is Evidence-based, rigorous, and aligned with State academic content standards; provide time for collaboration on the use of data) to be implemented in the 2018-19 school year. Provide time for collaboration on the use of data and feedback to students during common planning time periods. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 12  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 02M520 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 271 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 54 59 1 1 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 27 30 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 77.0% % Attendance Rate 72.7% % Reduced Lunch 8.5% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.4% 40.6% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 3.0% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 3.84 0% 11% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 63% 46% 53.7% 4.1% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) No N/A 171 171 3 77.3% 2.2% 24.7% 49.8% 5.2% 1.5% 6 14% 5.5 N/A N/A 60% 55% 70.6% 10% N/A No Yes Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No No Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups Black, Hispanic, ED, SWD, Hispanic, ED Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A YSH N/A N/A NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YSH N/A N/A YSH Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A YES YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A YSH YSH N/A N/A N/A YSH NO NO N/A NO YES 2018-19 SCEP-FF 13  2018-19 SCEP-FF 14  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed X X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The priority this year is Rigorous Instruction. The school reviewed qualitative and quantitative data and developed a theory of action for the school year. If we engage teachers in collaborative, coherent and targeted cycles of planning, revision and reflection on 3 to 5 instructional strategies around high-level discussion and writing skills, then students across all classrooms will be intellectually engaged in rigorous, standards-based tasks where they are able to articulate their thinking orally and in writing. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all teachers will engage in collaborative, coherent and targeted cycles of planning, revision and reflection on 5 instructional strategies around high-level discussions and writing skills evidence by an increase in student engagement and student performance. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 15  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff)  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Assess staff needs, goals and opportunities for the 2018-2019 school year in the form of a comprehensive survey that aligns to discussion and writing based tasks. Collaborate with school staff 2 times a month to assist in the planning and facilitation of school-wide Professional Development. All teachers will have engaged in at least 2 full Instructional Strategies (Plan, Revise and Reflect) and have started a portfolio, document their learning through teacher artifacts and student work. Teachers and Administrators November 2018 Teachers and Administrators All ELA and Math Teachers All ELA and Math Teachers Teachers and Administrators November 2018 Through May 2019 February 2019 Teachers and Administrators Partner with parents in the Parent Association Committee and School Leadership team to share instructional initiatives and incorporate their feedback in future plans. All ELA and Math Teachers December 2018 and May 2019 Teachers and Administrators 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. During July 2018, the school launched a new website to better communicate with parents and guardians. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Funding will be needed to support the design and implementation of the 5 instructional strategies. Consultants and outside staff developers will be needed to support these instructional initiatives. Per session will need to be allocated to support professional development initiatives. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other 2018-19 SCEP-FF 16  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, all teachers will engage in collaborative, coherent and targeted cycles of planning, revision and reflection on 3 instructional strategies around high-level discussions and writing skills evidence by an increase in student engagement and student performance. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Data from Advance observations will be used to assess the progress of this goal. Marking period data analysis. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 17  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. X X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? School personnel are strategically placed in key areas of the school to promote a safe and orderly condition for students. There are school personnel at the main door greeting students, guidance counselors, school social workers and other staff members are available to create a supportive environment and trusting relationship between students and their peers and students and staff. MBHS campus is seven floors and MBHS students occupy classrooms on 2 floors. The gymnasium and cafeteria are shared spaces and require additional supervision of student behavior. The school will hire additional staff to ensure that key areas of the school are being covered to maintain safety and order in the building. These areas include but are not limited to: the main entrance, corridors, stairwells, cafeteria and gymnasium. Part 2 – Annual Goal 2018-19 SCEP-FF 18  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools –Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, school culture of trust will show improvement as evidenced by a 10% growth in the number of students reporting they feel safe via the 2017-18 school learning environment survey and a 5% reduction of student Principal and Superintendent suspensions will be reflected through the Online Occurrence Reporting System (OORS). 2018-19 SCEP-FF 19  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Continue to promote and recruit students to be apart of student government and get their input on how to support student needs. Students and school staff Staff and administration are present in the hallways, cafeteria and gymnasium to monitor student behavior. Students and school staff Properly align the schedules of school aides and School Professional support staff to provide coverage in the boys and girls locker rooms to monitor and foster a safe environment. School Aides and School Professional Support Staff September 2018 - June 2019 September 2018 - June 2019 September 2018 - June 2019 School Social Worker (COSA) and students School staff and administrators School aides and administrators 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. The Parent Coordinator will support families through workshops and parent sessions. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Parent Coordinator Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School X Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 20  By February 2019, school culture will show improvement as evidenced by a 5% growth in the number of students reporting they feel safe via the 2017-18 school learning environment survey and a 3% reduction of student Principal and Superintendent suspensions will be reflected through the Online Occurrence Reporting System. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. We will use OORS data and school survey data to assess progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 21  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. SOP(s) Addressed X X 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 48% of students graduated in June 2017, 49% of students graduated in June 2018, The focus is to plan areas of instruction that will prepare students to the met the credit and assessment standards in all content areas. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teacher teams will collaborate in common planning meetings to ensure that curriculum is aligned to the content standards and common assessments are used to assess and monitor student achievement. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 22  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) General education teachers, English as a New Language teachers and Special Education teachers will meet 1 - 5 times a week in common planning meetings. Teachers and Guidance Counselors September 2018 - June 2019 Teachers, Guidance Counselors and Administrators Teachers will engage in the Looking at Student Work Protocol on a monthly basis that are aligned to the instructional strategies that will be introduced in professional development. Teachers will analyze student performance data and use this to make instructional shifts in their curricula and in their pedagogy. September 2015 - June 2016 September 2015 - June 2016 September 2018 - June 2019 Teachers, Guidance Counselors and Administrators September 2018 - June 2019 Teachers, Guidance Counselors and Administrators 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The school will engage parents/families through School Leadership Team Meetings, Parent Association Meetings, Parent Engagement Time on Tuesday afternoons and through school-wide and student specific mailings and iOClassroom. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The school plans on meeting this goal by sending out marking period grades, parent teacher conferences notices by hiring a parent coordinator to support this work. The guidance counselor and principal will meet with parents/guardians and students after each marking period to set goals and establish next steps to support student achievement. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other 2018-19 SCEP-FF 23  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Through the analysis of Marking Period, Semester and Mock Regents Data Analysis the school created a Strategic Instructional Action Plan aligned to supporting student achievement rates for increased credit accumulation, Regents/Common Core pass rates and Graduation rates. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Regents/Common Core Exams, Marking Period and Semester Grades. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 24  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. X 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strategic decisions were made around programming students with double periods of key classes so students can be eligible to sit for and take the required Regents and Common Core exams after one semester instead of one year. Teacher observation trackers are used to ensure teachers are receiving a cycle of observations in a timely manner. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART– Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the social-emotional supports that drive student achievement will increase as measured by a 5% decrease in the number of suspensions from last year as measured by Online Occurrence Reporting Systems (OORS). 2018-19 SCEP-FF 25  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Peer Mediation - Students will provide collaborative peer mentoring through the peer mediation group. Students November 2018 Peer Tutoring - Students will provide collaborative peer tutoring through the Writing Center. Students November 2018 Staff vs. Student Activities and Extracurricular Activities - Dance Team, PSAL Sports, ScriptEd, Financial Women's Association and Weightlifting. Students Student Government - Students have an opportunity to voice their opinions and concerns on how the school should run. Students September 2018 - June 2019 September 2018 - June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Programmer and School Administration Programmer and School Administration Students and school staff Students and school staff How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent Teacher Conferences will take place 4 times a year, weekly Parent Engagement Sessions will be held with the support of teachers and the parent coordinator. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. School is utilizing the human and capitol resources to ensure students are supported. Funds will be allocated to support academic and attendance incentives and rewards for students. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring 2018-19 SCEP-FF 26  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019 the social-emotional supports that drive student achievement will increase as measured by a 2.5% decrease in the number of suspensions from last year as measured by Online Occurrence Reporting Systems (OORS). Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. OORS data and NYC DOE school survey data will be used to assess the progress towards meeting this goal. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 27  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. X X X X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. School leaders and parent coordinator works to keep parents and families informed of the school schedule and initiatives through parent newsletters, letters, e-mails and phone calls. PA meetings are held monthly as a means to communicate and collaborate with parents and families. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, parent engagement will increase by 3% as measured by the 2017-18 NYCDOE School Survey Report parental response rate. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 28  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Parent Association meetings held on a monthly basis Parent Newsletters distributed every semester Host 4 Parent Teacher Conferences 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Parents and Guardians Parents and Guardians Parents and Guardians September 2018 - June 2019 September 2018 -June 2019 September 2018 - June 2019 Parent Coordinator and School Staff Parent Coordinator and School Staff Parent Coordinator and School Staff If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Relationship Abuse Prevention Program (RAPP) Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. From previous experiences, parents and guardians are engaged to participate in school activities that are aligned to their interests. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP X Title I TA Title III PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019 parent engagement will increase by 3% as measured by the number of parents who participate in parent teacher conferences. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 29  The school will use Advance data and scholarship data to indicate, measure and assess progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 30  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Students who failed one or more classes Students who failed one or more classes Students who failed one or more classes Students who failed one or more classes Counselor Check-Ins Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Achieve Now Small Group Classes Achieve Now Small Group Classes Achieve Now Small Group Classes Achieve Now Small Group Classes After school and Weekends After school and Weekends After school and Weekends After school and Weekends During school hours Students will have small group and individual check-ins with counselors to address academic concerns. Students will have small group and individual check-ins with counselors to address academic concerns. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 31  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 59 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. We will provide bookbags with academic supplies like notebooks, pens, pencils, calculators and Murry Bergtraum High School T-shirts and sweatshirts. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 32  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FF 33  Section 8: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. The school recruits staff through the NYC DOE Open Market website and the NYC DOE Hiring Fairs. Professional development is planned and facilitated by MBHS staff members and some outside facilitators. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Professional development for teachers is focused on Danielson 1A and 1E. Teachers need support with UBD planning and preparation. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. Not Applicable 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). Not Applicable Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) 2018-19 SCEP-FF 34  Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). Not Applicable 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. During Common Planning Time Meetings teachers have the opportunity to work on creating assessments. Professional development sessions are also provided on the use of assessments. Teachers engage in Regents Item Analysis work to make instructional shifts to their curriculum and assessments. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (SCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) X N/A N/A N/A Tenet3 Statement X X Column B Section Reference(s) Tenet 4 Statement N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Tenet 2 andTenet4 Statements Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Title I Part A (Basic) Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Tax Levy (FSF) Local 0 16978 46329 0 0 0 1554743 2018-19 SCEP-FF 35  1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/SCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 36  Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 37  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Murry Bergtraum High School for Business Careers, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Murry Bergtraum High School will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 2018-19 SCEP-FF 38  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 2018-19 SCEP-FF 39  ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Template School-Parent Compact (SPC) Murry Bergstraum High School for Business Careers , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and 2018-19 SCEP-FF 40  support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 2018-19 SCEP-FF 41  ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; 2018-19 SCEP-FF 42  II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; 2018-19 SCEP-FF 43  ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 44  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 02 School Name MURRY BERGTRAUM Borough Manhattan School Number 520 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Naima Cook Coach Jonathan Gamarra ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Jesus Duran Teacher/Subject Area Leonidas Jimenez Teacher/Subject Area N/A Related-Service Provider Christina Rodriguez Superintendent Marisol Rosales Assistant Principal Jeremy Daniel Coach N/A School Counselor Raymond Peguero Parent Peggie Pennie Parent Coordinator Carmen Munoz Field Support Center Staff Member N/A Other (Name and Title) N/A C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 3 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 1 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 1 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 625 2018-19 SCEP-FF 45 Total number of ELLs 65 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 10.40%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): N/A If yes, indicate language(s): N/A Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 3 4 2 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Our school will use teacher-created materials to assess the literacy levels of new comers. When a students enter our school we provide them with academic tasks to determine their literacy and numeracy skills before programming them into classes. There are 4 tasks: copying a sample text (focused on handwriting skills and memorization techniques, etc.); Read-Aloud drills (focused on reading accuracy and decoding skills); Dialogues (focused on verbal language skills in Chinese and/or Spanish); and numeracy skills (focused on the four arithmetic functions). We are continually refining this process. Our experience shows that though students come with their transcripts from abroad this does not always certify their academic level claims. We find that over 60 % of our new entrants have failed to score at the expected adequate academic level. This data is in turn used to plan flexible schedules and classes that will cater to these ELLs' needs. A combination of push-in and pull-out models allows ENL as well as content teachers to support the students in the satisfaction of their academic deficiencies. In addition to these assessments, our school also implements baseline assessments. These assessments have also shown that ELLs of certain regional origins tend to lack content knowledge expected of their grades. These baseline 2018-19 SCEP-FF 46  assessments a;low us to inform the instructional planning team on the content deficiencies of the ELLs. The periodic review of the results of these assessments and the monitoring of their progress facilitates the planning of targeted content and skills for the referred population. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? While newcomers are being admitted into our school, the guidance department and parent coordinator refer the to the ENL coordination. The ENL coordinator assesses the newcomer's skills using the aforementioned assessments and then proceeds to provide the assessment data to the teachers directly involved in the student's academic life. The ENL coordinator ensures that there are frequent meetings with staff members to discuss strategies to address the new student's challenges. The information provided by the teachers is stored in the student's ENL File (located in the ENL coordinator's office in Room 137K). 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We administer a second and third series of ELL assessments based on the structure of the diagnostic. The second series occurs at the middle of the semester (end of October for the Fall term); and the third series occurs at the end of the semester (January for the Fall term). If significant progress is not demonstrated by the student, a new series of assessments are implemented in mid-March and at the end of May for the Spring term. All content classes administer their specific baseline assessments. For ELLs, these assessments are adjusted so that they can be accurate measures of skills and content in students with the lack of language skills expected by the regular version. For speakers of Chinese and Spanish, we offer assessment versions in Spanish (full) and Chinese (in progress). Knowing that the transfer of information and skills form one language to another is made more effective when the students' mother tongue is used, we make sure that all content areas, except for English, provide translated versions of the assessments. For English the adaptation is a simplification of the language, and sometimes skills, expected by the task. The areas of most need as per the data are the areas of reading comprehension of academic English language (in native languages, too) and academic writing skills. History and Science content seems also to be lacking in more than 50% of the ELL population taking the assessments. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? After the assessments are administered and rated by the content area teachers, the ENL department team analyzes the results (data) to find the areas of content and skills where ELLs might be struggling. Once the team evaluates the data, recommendations are made to the programming office as to who might be the best match (teacher) for particular students. The counselling office in conjunction with the ENL team meets with the assigned teachers and after periodic goals for the students are suggested. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] We acquire our ENL data from the EDAT. This tool allows to have all data related to ELLs in all academic areas at our fingertips. The data tells us that: - Certain "entering" students are remaining at the "entering" level of language competence even after a year or so of instruction. - Many expanding students have remained stagnant at this level. We noticed that this is mostly long-term ELLs. We think this is caused by the fact that these tend to be students who are born or raised in the the United States and whose language skills are at the level of native speakers but who lack the academic language necessary to move beyond this proficiency level. We have also observed that our direct instructional efforts and encouragement of ELLs to take all parts of the exam have been largely successful due to a higher number of our ELLs able to test out in the most recent administration of the NYSESLAT. -- Most students who perform well in the NYSITELL examination also perform well in the NYSESLAT. We believe this is the case because there has been an alignment of the diagnostic (NYSITELL) and the yearly summative assessment (NYSESLAT). 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 47  We evaluate the progress of our ELLs in the program in two ways: 1) the level of achievement demonstrated in the NYSESLAT; and 2) the students meeting AYP. We include the level of achievement in the NYSESLAT because that gives us an indication of the level of a student's progress or regression with the English language. It is important to see as a positive sign of language development the movement of our ELL students from one proficiency level to the next . The level of achievement in the AYP is also important to the school and we consistently evaluate how to use the data to better support the students in their development. Right after Regents administration week,the ENL departments meets to analyse the data from all examinations taken by the ELLs. Their data is compared with that of peers in the same grades. The data is used to evaluate what the challenges are for the ELLs. We look for linguistic and content evidence of difficulties. The data is provided to all educators and the ENL teachers keep a folder with the students profile to keep in mind when planning for the push-in sessions. Throughout the year, the ENL department coordinates PD sessions in which the needs and progress of ELLs is highlighted. In these meetings, all staff members receive information and data pertaining to the ENL program and the adaptations that need to be made to address particular needs. We also engage in common planning meetings in which grade specific data is analyzed to get teachers acquainted with specific students' learning needs. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Throughout the year, the ENL department coordinates PD sessions in which the needs and progress of ELLs is highlighted. In these meetings, all staff members receive information and data pertaining to the ENL program and the adaptations that need to be made to address particular needs. We also engage in common planning meetings in which grade specific data is analyzed to get teachers acquainted with specific students' learning needs. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. There are two (2) components for delivering instruction to ELLs: the acquisition and the integration component. In the acquisition component we deliver language acquisition skills to all ELLs within proficiency levels from Entering through Transitioning. for entering students the direct language instruction is coupled with English language Arts class integration (push-in). An ENL teacher supports the ELLs development in their ELA class. Our classes are homogeneous in terms of the proficiency levels but heterogeneous in grades. Students of different grades are put together based on their language needs. In the integrated ENL program, however, students are typically programmed according to their grade needs, combining this way students of different proficiency challenges. Students are taught the academic language necessary for their survival and success. We focus on the language skills that will promote the ELLs' effective social interaction inside and outside of the school building. In the Integration component we have all ELLs, regardless of their proficiency level, integrated into academic interaction with other non-ELL population. Instruction is delivered in English and ENL teachers provide support in most reading-writing heavy classes (Social Studies, Science, English) following NYS time allocations as per CR Part 154.2 (9-12). b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FF 48  2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? As per CR Part 154.2 (9-12), our students receive the mandated 180, 360 or 540 minutes per week (1, 2, or 3 units of study per week). Whenever an ELL's program is changed the guidance department communicates the changes to the ENL coordinator so that the services provided to the student can be continued without interruption. Our ELLs are grouped according to their proficiency levels and organized in a heterogeneous mixture of ethnic backgrounds (Chinese with Latino, and other ethnicities). These students stay together during their stand-alone ENL period, but join their grade cohorts for the content classes. This is the distribution of minutes: Entering and Emerging: students receive 540 minutes per week of instruction distributed between the direct instruction of language skill and integrated language learning through the content areas. Transitioning: students receive a minimum of 180 minutes per week of integrated English language support in the content areas. Expanding: students receive at minimum 180 minutes per week of English language support in the content areas. Expanding students who have passed the CC English Exam (Regent) are placed in the same category as commanding students. Commanding (former-ELLs): students receive 90 minutes per week of integrated language support in the content areas. this is done for the following 2 years after scoring Commanding at the NYSESLAT spring administration. Note: We describe the time allocations as at minimum since in some cases we provide more than what is required based on two reasons: a) students of different proficient levels might be programmed for the same classes and while servicing one of a lower level (emerging) we find ourselves servicing the more advanced (expanding) students.; and b) determinations by our ENL department as to the needs of the students in a specific content area (sometimes requested by students themselves, other times by the content teachers). 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Core content is delivered in English. Content teachers use a variety of methods for delivering instruction. From direct instruction to inquiry based learning, students are engaged and supported not only by the ENL teachers but by the core subject teachers. All of our core content educators keep in mind the language needs of ELLs. They go to great lengths to ensure ELLs remain engaged and supported throughout their classes. For this purpose our classrooms are equipped with language dictionaries, language glossaries in all areas, and technological tools. teachers prepare word-walls with tier 2 and 3 vocabulary to be available at all times. Teachers also use the content materials translated or simplified. All our teachers have virtual access to a Google docs folder where they find materials prepared in Spanish (full) and Chinese (in progress) ton support the ELLs. The demands of the CCLS are not lowered for the ELLs, instead our educators support them so that they can achieve at the level of their non-ELL peers. Te Standards and expectations are posted, around all classrooms, in the native languages of Spanish and Chinese speakers (being these the majority of our students). We also make sure that the extended-time accommodations required of all State exams are provided for ELLs throughout the school year, for tasks and/or assessments. ELLs are scheduled to take their HLA classes throughout the year. These classes are used to develop their linguistic competence in their native languages. The instructors who teach these classes are in charge of evaluating their progress. Every year the ELL Coordinator meets with HLA teachers to verify the language levels of all ELLs. The particular assessments administered by the teachers are analyzed and the results are used for future adaptations to the program. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? 2018-19 SCEP-FF 49  As we mentioned above, ELLs are provided with Chinese and Spanish versions of content material. These are used to evaluate their progress since they often take the state examinations in that language (native). we do recognize that growth in the modern tongue will translate into growth in the second language acquisition. The Spanish classes in our school, at the present, are programmed as elective classes. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. SIFE students: These students receive the same instruction as the other ELLs but the materials they are provided with are adapted to their needs. The ENL coordinator prepares materials to be used in the content areas. These materials provide the SIFE student with the resources necessary for understanding the content in their own native language and is supplemented with the English versions of the texts. We also have a stock of videos available for the ELLs in the native language that facilitates the delivery of information in the different content areas. There is extra time made available for all assignments. The ENL teacher support these students by direct instruction within the classroom as well as through pull-out coordinated with the content teachers. b. Newcomers: These students are offered translated versions of all content in science and social studies. Teachers work with the ENL Team to create materials that will provide newcomers with the necessary tools to succeed in the content classes. Within the classroom, the teachers make sure that ELLs are seated as close to the front of the classroom as possible. There is more frequent use of visuals and multimedia resources to increase opportunities for acquisition (multiple entry-points) for the newcomer. There is extra time made available for all assignments. c. Developing: We supply developing students with the same materials as the mainstream student. However, we provide them with guides in simplified language to help them understand the most important tasks of the course. They are also provided with samples in their home language and offered the opportunity to write in their home language. The academic language and vocabulary sets are used to help students cope with new terms with regards to pronunciation and meaning. Developing students are assigned projects and tasks at their current academic level, this is why we offer them the opportunity to complete certain tasks in their native tongue so as not to simplify the achievement. There is extra time made available for most assignments. d. Long-Term: Our population of long-term ELLs is made specifically of students who were born and raised in the United States. Some of these students might not speak the home language as proficiently as they do English. The main need of this population is the structure to complete academically demanding tasks such as essays, research, etc. Our teachers in the content areas make sure that these students are provided with the necessary tools and assignments to improve in their weak areas. The ELL department works with the content educators to help them understand the academic (reading and writing) needs of each of these students. There is extra time available in all content classes for students to complete their assignments. Instruction is delivered to this group in the same way information is presented to all other students. In contrast, Long–term ELLs receive direct instruction from the ENL teachers to understand the material, and to complete the tasks they are involved. Language (grammar, style, etc.) and motivational support are provided to the LT ELL. e. Former ELLs: Former ELLs are provided with daily support throughout the content areas (at least 90 minutes a week). Content teachers and ENL teachers work in teams to make sure these students reach at the level of their non-ELL peers or higher. We regularly monitor our former ELLs and continually have conversations with content teachers about their progress. Our teachers make the adaptations demanded by the students' needs and plan accordingly. The extra time for the completion of certain assignments is available to them. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? 2018-19 SCEP-FF 50  Our ELL-SWD population is challenged by various rigorous reading and writing tasks. Our school ants to support them in their voyage to academic proficiency both in language and content. We plan to further support them in making connections between the content areas taught daily in class and the instructional tasks demanded at the end of units of instruction. There are two pieces of practice that will allow us to bridge the gaps between the ELL-SWDs, SWD, and other non-SWD peers: a) the preparation of materials in the student modern language [Spanish (completed) /Chinese (in progress)]; and b) the preparation of amplified English versions of the materials. a) Home language materials will allow students to acquire the content without the limitations of the target language. b) The amplified versions of texts will allow students to use language structures to develop their English language verbal-aural, and written skills. These materials do not simplify but expand on the concepts and vocabulary presented in the materials. In this way we do not deprive students of the opportunity to be faced with the content others are but supply clarifications and contextualization for what they are leaning. We hope the implementation of both elements will provide students with disabilities the opportunity of avoiding the challenges of the English language, as well as, the challenges of the academic English language. Other strategies include: Visuals to contextualize learning and understanding of new content including manipulatives, graphs, and videos. Age and grade appropriate materials with appropriate scaffolds. All materials will be taken from high school oriented resources. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? MBHS ensures that schedules for ELL-SWDs are made as flexible as possible. In this case, the department follows a pull-out model or an integrated approach. The ELL department evaluates, in conjunction with the Special Ed department, what the students' needs are and how best we can service them. We have an ENL teacher who is specialized in Spec. Ed and who has a flexible schedule to accommodate the needs in this area. The integrated approach allows us to provide guidance and fosters improvement in proficiency while in the context of the content classes. We do this in areas such as science and social studies, these being the most demanding areas in linguistic production and understanding. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. We are targeting two specific groups this year: Long-term ELLs and at-risk ELLs. Some members within these groups are the most challenging due to their minimal progress. Many of the members of the at-risk-ELLs group have remained stagnant in their proficiency levels without being able to pass the NYSESLAT. There are cases in which these students have gone back to lower levels of proficiency. This frustration has been caused because they have not acquired the writing and reading skills that will help them test out. This year, we plan to create targeted groups in the content areas of social studies and English language arts. This initiative will help us target particular students within the two groups mentioned and also specific academic skills that need to be developed. In ELA we plan to support LT-ELLs and at-Risk ELLs in the skills of informational and argumentative essay writing and literary analysis. We also find a great need in developing the stamina that gives students the capacity to sit for 4 ½ hours of the examination. We plan to provide support in content classes, after school programs specifically designed for them, social-emotional advisory. We are developing material for their advancement and keeping in mind their language capacities, as most of our LT-ELLs possess language competences often at the level of most of the non-ELL population. At-Risk ELLs, on the other hand, are targeted due to their lack of academic skills and their manifested lack of school adaptation. In the area of social studies, we plan to implement an initiative that gave us great results this past year. Social studies classes were supported by the ELA content teachers in their writing projects. This alignment of writing allowed a number of our students to better understand the logic of the structure of an effective essay. We will use this same approach to target the LT-ELLs and at-Risk ELLs within ELA and social studies. Students will be provided the content within the social studies classes and then the ELA class will provide time and direction for the completion of the tasks. These tasks will be aligned to the requirements of both classes so that content and structure can be differentiated at the core. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 51  Content teachers as well as the ENL coordination and staff are working to make sure that everything they need is available. All interventions will be delivered mainly in English, but native language support will also be available. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Based on the low regent’s scores in global history, US history and English language arts of several of our ELLs, we are creating an ELL writing workshop Program. The structure of the workshop contains: a. Facilitator: too monitor student progress, offer advice for improvement, support with questions, etc. b. Students: engaged in writing for ELA or social studies, c. Nature of program: freedom in writing, open at least once a day. This workshop program will take place during the students’ lunch and during ENL and content teacher professional assignment periods. The initiative will allow us to support the plans we have with targeting ELA and social studies writing skills. Students will be assigned to the workshop by their teachers (social studies and ELA). At their time of lunch ELLs will come to the room and work on the tasks. They will be able to have lunch during work, since it is not a regularly-structured class but a resource room. During workshop time the teacher will provide feedback and directions for the completion of the work. Once the work is finalized the students will write a clean final draft and give it to the workshop teacher who will make a copy (to keep) and give the original to the teacher responsible for the assignment. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? When we arrived at MBHS, there were not enough dual licensed teachers to support the program. We are looking to reopen it over the next couple of years as more dual licensed teachers become available. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs have access to all of our after school clubs, programs, and activities. Our school offers the following activities: Basketball teams (boys and girls) Soccer team (boys) Baseball team (boys) Softball team (girls) Badminton (girls) Chess Club (for all) Creative Writing Club (for all) ELLs are encouraged to try out for their sport(s) of preference. In addition, we work with the organizers of such activities to make sure ELLs are considered based on their skills and merits, and to prevent language issues to keep them out of them. We suggest that the activities be made appealing to ELLs who would like to join by fostering an open and non-discriminatory attitude and policy. ELLs are also involved in the preparations for the Hispanic heritage dance. This initiative celebrates the cultural heritage of the Hispanic cultures present in our population. Students participate in the preparations and take part in the dance. ELLs are also part of the preparations and performance of the Black History Month Gala, a show with dance performances, poetry, arts, and more. All school activities are promoted in the ENL newsletter and other media targeting ELLs. Last summer, we also provided an ELL enrichment program in conjunction with El Museo del Barrio wherein students received language instruction and immersion in cultural programs at the museum. We plan to hold the program again this year. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 52  A. All ELLs are provided with an electronic tablet (Nexus 7). These are used for access to the Internet during the classes. This is a useful tool when students need to find content or definition in their language, they can do it with ease. B. The ELL Center: it operates in suite 137 and it is a room where students have access to modern computers connected to the Internet and network printers. All works students need to do can be done at this center at specific times during the day and daily after school. C. New language textbooks for the free-standing classes: the American English Files is the language method we presently use and is designed for teenagers in high school. The language program develops all areas of linguistic competence. D. Bilingual textbooks (science, math, and social studies). E. Native language versions of all assessments in social studies and science. F. Video content as support in Science and social studies. G. Smartboard with multimedia capabilities and Internet access. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? In our free-standing ENL program the language of instruction is English. The native language is allowed whenever it is understood to clarify the understanding of targeted concepts in the new language. In addition, we foster an understanding that using the target language (English) will improve students’ competence and make them proficient. All assessments in the areas of science and social studies are presented in the native language, in English they are offered in amplified form. The ENL team coordinates the preparation of new materials. When teachers are going to administer an assessment they inform us ahead of time and give us a file with the assessment/material. We then prepare an amplified or translated version of the pieces and provide it to the teacher. The teacher uses the material / assessment in his/her class, and can request grading from us too. We make sure teachers with the necessary language knowledge help us in grading the task in the foreign language. The baseline assessments for science and social studies are already translated and in amplified versions. And native language versions of past regents’ exams are also available for teaches to use. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. The ENL department AP works in conjunction with the ENL team to determine the use of any particular material for the ELL population. The materials selected must be presented or prepared to satisfy the age and grade level needs of our ELL population. When materials are deemed to be beneficial but are not prepared for the high school level of interest, we initiate a search for similar materials at the appropriate level. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? We only share some athletic activiies with schools in our building. All coaches involved in such undertakings are well aware of the particular needs of our ELLs. Not only the language needs are highlighted but the socio-emotional component of their integration, as well. Coaches are eager to tap into the ELLs' physical skills and interests. . 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). For students who are newcomers we plan to implement a week-long ENL program for Entering ELLs. This before-school-year initiative will take place one week before the school opens in September and/or the first three (3) weeks of the school year after the school day. The total amount of hours will be 12/16 (4 hours 4 days a week before school opens; or 2 hours 2 days a week for 3 weeks). The Guidance department in conjunction with the ENL department ensures ELLs receive an appropriate orientation before and/or during the start of the school year. Once the year has started they conduct orientation sessions after school. In these sessions, students are informed as to what to expect from school, how to behave in class and the building, safety practices, common social practices, etc. The personnel involved in this initiative are the ENL coordinator, and one ENL teacher. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 53  17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? This year we will offer Spanish courses (both as native and foreign language). in addition, In the near future we hope to open Chinese and American Sign Language courses. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Twice each term the teachers of ELLs receive focused training on the education and strategic needs of ELLs. These sessions are conducted by well-trained ENL educators from the school as well as external guests. The sessions are being organized around the particular need that we survey during our push-in assignments and other insights from teachers of ELLs. These needs are catalogued and prioritized. These PD sessions take place twice every term during Monday PD sessions. Teachers of ELLs are being trained in best approaches in order to help students engage with the CCLS. The teachers are given the opportunity to learn language acquisition techniques that will allow the ELLs in their classroom to develop the language skills necessary for their adequate yearly progress. The ENL department works in collaboration with the PD Committee in the development of PD sessions that enhance the instructional practices of the instructors but that also enhance their social awareness of ELLs' needs. We have included the amount of 10 hours to be devoted for the training of all staff at school: this includes not only the teaching staff but also paraprofessionals, secretaries, school aids, etc. These PD sessions will help teachers understand the psychological, emotional and social challenges ELLs may face when transitioning from middle school to high school. Some of the topics of the sessions will be: Integrating ELLs into the classroom discussions; success and expectations in ELL instruction; writing as a pathway to language acquisition; avoiding verbal, social and emotional discrimination of ELLs; the language rich classroom, etc.We are in the process of revising our PD schedules to align it to NYSED compliance requirements. We plan to include the 15 percent mandated by the CR Part 154 for all staff in language acquisition. These new sessions will be conducted from the perspective of ELLs as the center of the practice. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Our PD calendar will include at least 15% of language related instruction for all staff members as per CR Part 154. In these sessions teaches will be reminded or exposed to the nature of the NL teachers in their classrooms. Some of the tentative topics that will be covered will be: - “ELLs around the school” - “Using the native language versions on Google Docs.” - “The ELL toolkit” 2018-19 SCEP-FF 54  - “How are languages learned?” - “The social component of language acquisition in school” - “Fostering a linguistic non-discriminatory atmosphere in the classroom” The calendar also includes differentiation for ENL teachers since they need a minimum of 50% of their PD training to be delivered on issues related to ENL instruction and acquisition. The school’s professional development for ENL teachers will have two parts: a) ENL teachers will attend part of the professional development activities for all teachers; b) ENL teachers will be working as a separate group on specific needs of their area. Part b includes teachers going out of the building to take part in training sessions coordinated by the city or other groups of professionals approved by the department of education. All teachers who attend outside PD training session submit a brief report of the content of their training. Some of the topics for ENL teachers: - “Team-teaching and ENL support” - “Language learning and acquisition today” - “Simplified vs. Amplified materials” The school will also offer OPD sessions covering ELLs’ issues for the non-teaching staff (school aids, Safety officers, secretaries, etc. Some of the topics included in these training sessions will be: - “Who is an ELL?” - “Social-emotional needs of immigrants?” - “How to foster a non-discriminatory atmosphere” Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Parents of ELLs are invited to meet with the ELL team (ENL coordinator, respective ENL teacher, and the ENL department A.P.). The department meets in September to schedule all the meetings. The meetings are not scheduled without the parents input. On the contrary, we call parents to let them know about the service and then have them decide when is best for them to visit the school. Once the parents agree on a set ate we plan for that meeting. During the meeting parent are explained/reminded of the nature of the programs they had chosen for their children. New regulations are presented and explained. Then, we spend time discussing the status of the ELL, his passing NYSESLAT scores, regent scores, academic expectations for the year, etc. Parent are informed about the progress or regress of the student and possible challenges he/she may be facing. We offer the parents suggestions. The suggestions range from ideas for support at home, to language and social development opportunities inside and outside school (clubs, sports, etc.). We lay out a suggested plan designed to target the deficiencies evidenced. Once parents agree on the goals and the plans for the year, we have them sign the attendance form and the ENL goal-setting meeting form. When the parents do not speak English (or Spanish, Chinese) we contact the Language Coordinator to arrange the translation services provided by the NYCDOE. We determine the language to use in the meetings based on the HLS information. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. The ENL department plans three activities around the year designed for parent engagement. The first is the Annual ELL Gala: this activity is designed to be a celebration of the cultural variety and heritage represented in our ELL body. We commonly schedule it for the spring semester, around April or May. The second is the ELL Honors Assembly: this is an activity in which we honor the highest achieving students of the previous 2018-19 SCEP-FF 55  year. We give honors for highest GPA, highest score in the NYSESLAT, highest score in the ELA Regents, highest score in the LOTE, highest combined score in NYSESLAT and ELA regents, etc. This is done in the month of November. The third event is the Award Night. Though this event is not particularly designed only for parents of ELLs, it is a great opportunity to have parents involved with other parents and share the celebration of students’ achievements, including ELLs. This year the school hopes to start a Celebration of ELL Heritage program for the involvement of parents in our school's culture. We plan to hold a whole a town-hall meeting during the last week of October. In this meeting we will inform parents on ELL related concerns. We will focus our presentations around some of the following topics: - “Programs we offer” - “Challenges we are facing with different populations” - “Parent involvement for student success” - “Benefits of passing the NYSESLAT” - “NYSESLAT preparation and dates” “NYSESLAT prepa ration and dates”, among other. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FF 56 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Naima Cook, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 57  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: MURRY BERGTRAUM School DBN: 02M520 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Naima Cook Title Principal Jeremy Daniel Assistant Principal Carmen Munoz Parent Coordinator Jesus Duran ENL/Bilingual Teacher Peggie Pennie Parent Leonidas Jimenez Teacher/Subject Area N/A Teacher/Subject Area Jonathan Gamarra N/A Coach Coach Raymond Peguero School Counselor Marisol Rosales N/A Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 6/30/17 6/30/17 6/30/17 6/30/17 6/30/17 6/30/17 N/A 6/30/17 N/A 6/30/17 6/30/17 N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FF 58  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 2M520 School Name: Murry Bergtraum HS Superintendent: The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. When parents arrive at school to enroll their child, the counselors are the first point of contact. Once the counselors have interviewed the parents they let the Language Access Coordinator know about the parent’s language needs. The Language Access Coordinator conducts the HLIS to determine what the language of preference for the parents is. This information is later entered into ATS. The LAC prepares a list of all home language preferences, other than English, and distributes it throughout school. the list is created from dat optained from the RAPL report on ATS. The LAC provides this information to persons in offices that work wioth students as well as to teachers and administrators. When someone prepares information for parents this list is reviewed to make sure that all language needs are satisfied. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 59  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language English, Spanish, Chinese, Bengali, Fulani, Arabic, and French . 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Every year the school sends a number of important documents for parents. The following is a list of all documents that are sent translated to the parents whose home language preference is not English: • School handbooks • Calendars • Regents exam sessions dates • NYSELSLAT sessions dates • Tutoring services announcements • Parent-Teacher conference announcements • Letters from teachers 2018-19 SCEP-FF 60  2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Parents meet face-to-face with counselors, administrators and teachers. In these meetings parents participate in conversation about the progress of the student or any other issues that might be of relevance to the visit. The some of these meetings are: • Parent-teacher conferences • IEP meetings • Parent-teacher meetings • Parent-Administration (A.P) meetings • Parent-Counselor meetings 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any: 2018-19 SCEP-FF 61   Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) At the entrance of our building posters are posted that state the Transaltion and Interpresattion rights of parents. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? We conduct a bi-annual survey to find parents' satisfation in relation to the translation and interpreattion services provide through our school. This survey is condcuted during the month of January and the month of May. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 62 
