 03M860 School Name: FREDERICK DOUGLASS ACADEMY II SECONDARY SCHOOL Principal: OSEI OWUSU-AFRIYIE 2018-19 SCEP-P 1  School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Section 4: SCEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Section 7: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 8: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 9: Title I Program Information Section 10: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 SCEP-P 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Frederick Douglass Academy II Secondary School 310300011860 6 - 12 School Number (DBN): 03M860 214 West 114 th Street NY, NY 10026 212-865-9260 212-865-9281 Phone Number: Fax: Osei Owusu-Afriyie Oowusua@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: Email Address: Osei Owusu-Afriyie ElizabethEspert(district rep) UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: Rosa DeSoto Harrison Persia Plaza SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: DeloresRoberts GeraldoReid Adams Guerrero Catherine Hogg District Information Geographical District: 3 Superintendent’s Office Address: Richard Cintron Superintendent: 335 Adams Street, Brooklyn, NY 11201 rcintro@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 212-356-7518 Phone Number: 718 923-5145 Fax: Manhattan Affinity FSC: Field Support Center (FSC) Executive Director: AlexandraAnormaliza 2018-19 SCEP-P 3  Executive Director’s Office Address: 131 Livingston Street, Brooklyn, NY 11201 AAnorma@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: (718) 935-5618 Phone Number: N/A Fax: 2018-19 SCEP-P 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the SCEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Osei Owusu-Afriyie KarimaHughes Rosa DeSotoHarrison Persia Plaza Barbara Lyn Adams Guerrero GeraldoReid Catherine Hogg Martha Guzman Delores Roberts Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Parent Member/ Parent 2018-19 SCEP-P 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) VerithiaHood Sharon Smith Member/ Staff Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 SCEP-P 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) is a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. The process of developing and implementing the SCEP is aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding SCEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and SCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 SCEP-P 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: 2018-19 SCEP-P 8  Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the SCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the SCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for SCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you 2018-19 SCEP-P 9  monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 5: Build consensus around activities, strategies and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 6: Step 6: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 7: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 SCEP-P 10  Section 4: SCEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? We are a community of learners that encourages every Scholar to be an active participant in their education. Fostering a safe, consistent environment, we celebrate each Scholar’s individual identity and success. Through a rigorous curriculum, cultural enrichment opportunities and experiential learning, we prepare our Scholars to achieve academic and personal excellence. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. FDA II Scholars are challenged intellectually and allowed to develop their character and work ethic so that they become successful in their post-secondary plans. They are caring and effective citizens. To achieve this vision, the school seeks to create a nurturing environment where there is patience for Scholars – understanding that they develop at different rates – but simultaneously holds all Scholars to high expectations. Throughching model. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. 22.58% of our students receive special education services. Additionally 12.61% of our students are English Language Learners. 63.64% of our special education population are in an integrative collaborative teaching model. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. According to the School Quality Snapshot data, our school demonstrated the most growth and progress in the Framework for Great Schools elements of Effective School Leadership (5D) and Collaborative Teachers (5C). Overall positive responses for both of these elements increased by 7%. In terms of Effective School Leadership, overall positive responses increased from 67% to 74%. The greatest increase was in the percentage of “teachers say that the principal communicates a clear vision for this school”, which improved from 55% in 2015-2016 to 74% in 2016-2017 - an increase of almost 20%. With respect to the Framework for Great Schools element of Collaborative Teachers, our school demonstrated an increase in the overall positive responses from 58% to 65%; the greatest increase is evident in the percentage “of teachers say that they have opportunities to work productively with colleagues in their school”, which improved from 50% to 63% - an increase of 13%. An area of focus for our school this year is related to the Framework for Great Schools element of Rigorous Instruction (5A), which decreased by 2% between 2015-2016 and 2016-2017. We believe that by addressing the instructional needs of our teachers, students, and school community, we will achieve positive benefits that impact and strengthen the other elements of the Framework. 2018-19 SCEP-P 11  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 03M860 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08,09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 354 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 14 17 11 5 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 47 37 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 80.0% % Attendance Rate 78.5% % Reduced Lunch 11.6% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.6% 31.1% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 1.1% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 8.18 22% 44% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 29.4% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 66% 44% 68.4% 1.3% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A YES No N/A 85 85 4 83.5% 1.1% 24.3% 63.8% 2.8% 1.1% 4 72% 3.8 26.9% 40% 57% 47% 76.6% 3% N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YES NO N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A YES 2018-19 SCEP-P 12  2018-19 SCEP-P 13  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed x x x x Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. School leaders and Coaches from Teachers College conducted a Learning Walk in October 2017, visiting a range of classrooms to provide evidence of instructional practice and inform professional development plans. Findings from this Learning Walk were shared with the school community: LEARNING WALK FEEDBACK Glow 1: Lessons show evidence that teachers are implementing the FDA II Workshop Model. Grow 1: Even though discernible elements of the FDA II Workshop Model were present, the time allocations were either too much for a given activity or the Educator did not consistently adhere to the establish time allotments. This led to uneven pacing where parts of the lesson, such as the Summary or Work period, were rushed or an element of the lesson such as the Do Now or Mini-Lesson, meandered; resulting in low Scholar engagement and in an increase in off task behaviors. 2018-19 SCEP-P 14  Next Step 1: In your lesson plans allocate appropriate times for each learning activity you have planned to ensure students are actively engaged throughout the lesson. Write the times for each the section of the BBC on your board. Use your timer to accurately track that the time is being used. Examples Within our School of the Next Step in Action: Ms. Shewmake and Ms. Williams ICT English 9, Ms. Sailor Reading Intervention Class, Ms. G’s Algebra 2 Trigonometry class Glow 2: Students are grouped in different structures aligned to their learning needs and the purpose of the lesson; for example, students were sitting one-on-one to conference with a teacher for feedback on their writing task, or small groups in order to collaboratively solve a problem and present to the class. Grow 2: Though many tasks were supposedly collaborative, most were individual tasks that Scholars worked on in parallel while sitting together. Few opportunities were designed by Educators for Scholars to make their thinking public and receive feedback from their peers on their work. This resulted in low cognitive engagement (Rigor) in Scholar performance and the resulting work. Moreover, Scholar to Scholar discussion was minimally observed in the walkthroughs. Next Step 2: To increase the rigor of the lessons and to increase the use of truly collaborative activities design learning tasks where Scholars engage in protocols and/or activities that do one or more of the following:  require Scholars to share their understanding and questions publicly or with each other in different ways, for example Literature Circles, Socratic Dialogues, Scholar to Scholar Discussions.  experience the content in a different modality besides sitting at a desk just writing or typing. You can do this by incorporating movement and/or hands on activities Examples: Labs, Gallery Walks, Cooperative Games Examples Within our School of the Next Step in Action: Mr. Lopez’s AP Literature class., Ms. Vernuille/Mr. Coleman’s Global History 10, Mr. Ubell’s 8th Grade Living Environment, Ms. Kivell/Ms. Conway 7th Grade Humanities These strengths were further confirmed by our Superintendent Donald Conyers, during his visit in late October. In his feedback, Superintendent Conyers provided evidence of effective practice: "within most of the classrooms observed, Scholar’s working cooperatively with one another and maintaining a positive rapport with their teachers and classmates." In a review of lesson plans, Superintendent Conyers "found that the overwhelming majority of Educators prepared detailed lesson plans that were coherent." In terms of a high priority area in need of improvement, Superintendent Conyers emphasized the need for students to engage in structured discussions. Preliminary feedback shared by Principal Afriyie to staff stated the following Grow: "Scholar Discussion, Scholar Discussion and more Scholar Discussion in lessons to increase a Scholar’s cognitive engagement in their learning. As identified in our 10/19/17 walkthrough we must intentionally plan activities in our lessons that allow Scholars to engage in robust discussions with one another about their work and the work of others. This will make the learning more sticky and lead to greater engagement." As a school community, we believe it is essential for students to engage in frequent discussions, as these are opportunities for students to clarify and explain their thinking, which will inform and improve their written responses. 2018-19 SCEP-P 15  The need to focus on student constructed response is further confirmed through June 2018 Regents Exam data analysis, discussed in detail below. The average Final Score for students who passed the ELA Regents Exam was 74.86%. On the Part 2 Argument portion of the Exam, these students earned an average of 4.11 points out of a possible 6; the lowest score was 2.5 points, and the highest was 5.5 points. On the Part 3 Text-Based Response question, the average score of those who passed the Exam was 2.96 points out of a possible 4; the lowest score was 2.0 points, and the highest was 4.0 points. Of students who did not score above a 65% on the ELA Regents Exam, the average Final Score was 40.15%. On the Part 2 Argument portion of the Exam, these students earned an average of 2.94 points out of a possible 6; the lowest score was 0 points, and the highest was 4 points. On the Part 3 Text-Based Response question, the average score of those who passed the Exam was 1.76 points out of a possible 4; the lowest score was 0 points, and the highest was 3.5 points. This data indicates that constructed response questions are an area of focus for struggling students. Average scores for those who passed the ELA Regents Exam are 19.5% higher (a difference of 1.17 points) on the Part 2 Argument question and 30% higher (a difference of 1.2 points) on the Part 3 Text-Based Response question. Additionally, the data shows a conditional relationship between points earned on the constructed response questions and students Final Score: in order to pass this Regents Exam, students must have earned at least a 2.5 (41.67% of the points possible) for Part 2 and at least a 2.0 (50% of the points possible) for Part 3. Without meeting these benchmark scores, students fail to score above a 65%. The results of the Algebra I (Common Core) Regents Exam further reinforces the need for improvement in students constructed response scores. For instance, the Common Core standard cluster A-REI.B (“Solve equations and inequalities in one variable.”) is assessed multiple times on several questions. On two multiple choice questions aligned to this standard (questions #2 and #12), 42% of students answered correctly. However, when this same standard was assessed on two constructed response questions, the results were drastically lower: on question #27, 1.4% of students earned 1 point out of a possible 2; the remaining students earned 0 points. On question #30, 4.1% of students earned 1 point out of a possible 2, and 1.4% of students earned 2 points; the remaining students earned 0 points. This large discrepancy in scores on multiple choice versus constructed response questions demonstrates this an area of high leverage and high priority. An initial review of student test booklets from the June 2018 Regents Exam administration indicates that more students attempted to fully answer constructed response questions. Social Studies teachers also reported that students essay scores were higher than in previous years according to the available score reports. However, we are eager to analyze the breakdown of student scores on the Item Skills Analysis Tool when it is released by the Department of Education. We hope to see a confirmation of these preliminary observations reflected in students overall constructed response scores. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 SCEP-P 16 By June 2019, students’ constructed response scores will improve by at least 5% on NYS Tests and Regents Exams as compared to June 2018 data as a result of targeted teacher support and strategic classroom practice. 2018-19 SCEP-P 17  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Create a sequence of professional learning, and required resources and materials, for whole-staff and team-based data-driven instructional process by collaborating to: Department Team Leaders August 2018 - June 2019 Instructional Coaches  Develop targeted, subject-area goals for student learning aligned to constructed response performance on standardized assessments to be tracked and monitored over the school year  Design formative and summative assessments to be administered across classrooms to measure student learning progress towards learning goals  Clarify expectations for all team members  Communicate the long-term and short-term data-driven instructional process goals to teachers on a regular basis  Revise and modify plans as needed based on evidence of teacher team work reviewed at Instructional Cabinet meetings Assistant Principals Model Teachers Peer Collaborative Teacher Principal Engage in Data-Driven Instructional Process, including the following steps: Teachers September 2018 - June 2019 Department Team Leaders  Analyze student data and work products to determine  evidence-based learning gaps Select instructional strategies and practices to intervene and remediate learning gaps  Create formative and summative assessments to measure students progress towards goals  Develop a time-bound action plan for strategy implementation  Co-plan, share, and revise lesson plans for classroom implementation  Conduct inter-visitations with colleagues in the same department and grade level to norm strategy implementation and identify areas of strength and growth in teacher practice Look at student work to inform instructional planning and enhance lessons  Instructional Coaches Assistant Principals Model Teachers Peer Collaborative Teacher Principal 2018-19 SCEP-P 18   Present findings and outcomes periodically to the school community Provide teachers with differentiated, strategic instructional support and guidance by collaborating to: Teachers September 2018 - June 2019 Instructional Coaches  Conduct initial classroom walk-throughs to establish a baseline for teacher practice and professional learning needs Support teachers to develop individual goals for improving classroom practice informed by and aligned to Danielson’s Framework for Teaching   Arrange for strategic, evidence-based partnerships between teachers and administrators, instructional coaches, Model Teachers, and Peer Collaborative Teacher  Monitor teachers progress towards goals through classroom observations, coaching and debriefing sessions, Mid-Year Individual Professional Development Conferences (IPDCs), and End-of-Year IPDCs Assistant Principals Model Teachers Peer Collaborative Teacher Principal Communicate student progress towards goals on a consistent basis with all members of school community by: Teachers Students September 2018 - June 2019 Instructional Coaches  Using assessment tools and systems such as Skedula and Kinvolved to inform students, parents, and guardians of their current level of performance  Conference with students to provide actionable feedback and next steps for improvement  Utilize rubrics and Learning Targets to accurately evaluate areas of success and challenges  Celebrate progress and work products for individual students, small groups, classes, and grades at school-wide events including Curriculum Night, Parent-Teacher Conferences, and Town Halls Student Family Members & Guardians Assistant Principals Model Teachers Peer Collaborative Teacher Principal Parent Coordinator Scholar Support Team Guidance Counselors Implement systems and structures to ensure all teams and teachers are engaging in the Data-Driven Instructional Process with fidelity and alignment through such methods as:  Conduct regular Learning Walks of classrooms and Department Team meetings  Norm expectations for instructional planning and lesson  delivery Schedule teachers to visit Model Teachers and Peer Collaborative Teacher classrooms  Arrange for teachers to attend off-site professional development to support and improve practice Teachers Department Team Leaders Instructional Coaches Model Teachers September 2018 - June 2019 Instructional Coaches Assistant Principals Model Teachers Peer Collaborative Teacher Principal 2018-19 SCEP-P 19   Provide opportunities for Department Leads to collaboratively plan professional learning activities for their teams and vet their meeting Agendas and Outcomes with peers and school leaders prior to implementation Peer Collaborative Teacher Mentors 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will engage with families to support their understanding of high-quality, rigorous, CCLS-aligned instruction, and our school’s goal, at several points during the school year. Families will learn about classroom instructional practices and how they can support their children at home in person during our fall Curriculum Night (September 28) and parent-teacher conferences held in the fall and spring semesters. With support from representatives from our Scholar Support Team and Community Team leaders, teachers of students in grades 6-9 will conduct Student-Led Conferences to augment and enhance parent-teacher conferences. Families can also access their student's’ assignments, grades, and other classroom materials digitally by logging into Skedula and/or Google Classroom. Our PTA President and Parent Coordinator will provide opportunities for family members to learn how to navigate and utilize these online systems on an ongoing basis. Attendance is taken for every class period using the Kinvolved system. Parents are informed of their students presences, preparation, and performance - both academic and behavior - in real-time. Additionally, members of our Guidance Team will also support family engagement around rigorous instruction by addressing the needs of ELL students and those with IEPs through parent outreach. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Described below are the resources needed to implement the action plan. ● Teachers ● Assistant Principal ● Principals ● Secretary ● Data Specialist 2018-19 SCEP-P 20  ● Instructional Coaches ● Teacher Team meeting time during the school day and Afterschool ● Substitute Teachers to provide coverage for Educators attending training ● Assessment construction and data processing resources ● Per Session Funds to support training and other professional learning experiences. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded X P/F Set-aside SIG Grant X 21st Century School Achievement Funding X X C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, all students will demonstrate the use of a planning or pre-writing strategy for constructed response question(s) on their Fall Final Exams. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Fall Final Exams test booklets/planning page Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 21  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. SOP(s) Addressed X N/A N/A X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Strengths: Scholar support team has been established to support scholars engagement with the school community. It consists of a social worker and their interns, three school counselors, a Community School Director, a Parent Coordinator, a dean, and mental health clinicians from New York Foundling and SCAN’s. The team uses attendance and STARS academic data to monitor students and ensure they accumulate credits and pass regents exams. We offer extended learning opportunities and connect them to additional resources within our school community. We will improve student attendance through ELO and SST interventions by matching scholars with appropriate interventions, improving our parent engagement activities and monitoring the effectiveness on chronically absent students In 2015- 2016 and 2016 – 2017 school year 24% of our students fell into the chronically absent category. In the 2017 – 2018 school year 26% of our students were in this category. Students with attendance rates between 80% - 90% will be identified using the RCUA report in ATS. We will increase the level of communication with their families through parent engagement events and ensure that students are matched with at least one ELO activity during the school year. 2018-19 SCEP-P 22  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools –Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of instructional staff will be trained in the effective implementation of FDA II’s restorative practices to support the social-emotional growth of scholars and improve the learning environment as measured by mediation requests, Kickboard data, decline in chronic absenteeism by 5%, and reduction in suspensions by 15%. 2018-19 SCEP-P 23  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Train staff in using KickBoard as a positive behavior reinforcement tool Staff August 2018 - June 2019 Dean Regular celebrations and awards for students accumulating notable amounts of behavior merits Use CBO partners to provide training on group circles and other restorative practices to develop staff capacity Staff Staff Host a community-building trip for each grade-level in order to build student-to-student, student-to-staff, and staff-to-staff camaraderie Students Continue to develop counselor capacity to facilitate student-student and student-teacher mediation sessions Staff Students Staff School Counselor Sept. 2018 - June 2018 Scholar Support Team September - November 2018 September - October 2018 September - June 2018 CBO staff Cohort Leaders School Counselors School Counselors Social Worker Scholar Support Team 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight.  Parent workshops  Parents as Curriculum Partners events  Parent meetings with School Counselors, Teachers, or member of Scholar Support Team  Kinvolved messages   Newsletters  Family counseling services (based off referral from School Counselor) School Website Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 SCEP-P 24  Described below are the resources needed to implement the action plan. ● Teachers ● Assistant Principal ● Principals ● Guidance Counselors ● Possible CBO partnerships ● Community School Director ● ELL Coordinator ● Dean ● Data Specialist ● Teacher Team meeting time during the school day and afterschool ● Office Supplies ● Instructional Supplies Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant X 21st Century School Achievement Funding X C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Bench Mark Credit accumulation 6 - 8 credits earned in the fall semester of 2018. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Students transcripts, student attendance ( Kinvolved) Data from Kickboard ( Merits) Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 25  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. SOP(s) Addressed X 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards N/A (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. N/A 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. X 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our school has continued to strengthen our practices around collaborative, inquiry-based team work by creating shared, common Agendas and benchmark outcomes for all educators to achieve, as well as a public share-out of each Department’s progress in the middle of the cycle. The following data sources were reviewed in developing and informing our school-wide goal for Collaborative Teachers: Analysis of June 2018 Social Studies Regents Exam scores shows that for first-time test-takers, ELL students and students with disabilities perform lower than their General Education peers. On the June 2018 US History Exam, ELL students average score was 62%; student with IEPs average score was 56.4%. General Education students average score was 68.3%. Only 33% of ELL students and 33% of students with IEPs passed the US History Regents Exam, compared to 63.4% of General Education students. The fact that pass rates for these subgroups of students are half that of General Education students demonstrates the severity and urgency of this issue. Similar findings are evident on the June 2018 Global History Regents Exam in terms of average scores: ELL students average score was 56.4%; those with IEPs average score was 53.5%; General Education students average score was 67.4%. Only 20% of students with an IEP passed the Global History Regents; 60% of ELL students earned passing scores, but 63% of General Education students passed the Exam. 2018-19 SCEP-P 26  During his visit to our school in October 2017, Superintendent. Conyers "observed two teacher team meetings and found that Educators were well prepared and engaged in a collaborative critical examination of teacher and student artifacts to refine collective instructional work to improve Educator and Scholar performance," as noted in preliminary feedback shared with staff from Principal Afriyie. This spring semester, our school engaged in several rounds of Learning Walks to look for evidence of instructional practices and strategies to support our ELL students and those with learning disabilities. These inquiry cycles were facilitated by a Coach from Teacher's College in collaboration with our school-based coaches, Model Teacher, and Peer Collaborative Teacher. The majority of classroom teachers participated in at least one Learning Walk, where they visited between 8 and 12 classrooms over several periods. Findings were collected from participants and was disaggregated into a quantitative set of data points and next steps. Teachers who attended each Learning Walk were trained to act as table facilitators during whole-staff meetings to analyze the results and inform instructional planning. Over the course of three Learning Walks, conducted over six weeks, the following improvements were seen:  The percentage of classrooms demonstrating evidence of "Writing in class" increased by 24%  The percentage of classrooms demonstrating evidence of "Annotation, coding, or notes while reading" increased by 16%  The percentage of classrooms demonstrating evidence of "Informal writing for thinking" increased by 38%  The percentage of classrooms demonstrating evidence of "Use of leveled texts" increased by 10% While these gains are impressive, one specific indicator that was consistently missing across all classrooms visited on each Learning Walk was "Deliberate access points for ELLs." This is due to the fact that teachers need training and professional development focusing on strategies to support ELL students and instructional practices to increase access for all learners. One of our school's most powerful achievements - both in terms of teacher collaboration and student learning outcomes - was evident in the successful implementation of literacy strategies with middle school students who demonstrated independence in applying the strategy after scaffolds were gradually removed. The ICT pair who piloted this work, in collaboration with our school-based literacy coach, presented their process and student work products to the Special Education Team; these educators then applied their learning to their own partnerships, resulting in other teachers implementing a similar instructional model in their own classrooms. As a result, more students attempted to answer constructed response and multi-step questions on their Regents Exams as they had internalized strategies and approaches that worked best for them as learners to these high-stakes assessments. We are eager to further refine these practices and structures for teachers to enhance their collaboration and increase access for all students in the next school year. Based on Advance data reports, classroom observations, and findings from informal walk-throughs and non-evaluative classroom visits conducted by instructional coaches, teachers need additional support in improving their ability to tailor their instructional plans, materials, and resources, and classroom lesson delivery for ELL students and those with IEPs. These needs were also reinforced when teachers reported a high level of interest around improving their practice to better support ELL students in coaching sessions and during their Individual Professional Development Conferences with administrators. Lastly, a thorough inventory of teachers curriculum documents for each course they taught this year indicates areas for growth in teachers ability to design curricula that accounts for students varied learning needs and incorporates a range of materials, sources, and activities that are accessible for all learners. Performance Tasks, formative assessments, discussion strategies, and selected texts would benefit greatly from being augmented and enhanced. 2018-19 SCEP-P 27  This year we intend to hone our inquiry-based teacher team collaboration, using the Data Into Action model, and focus our professional development on Universal Design for Learning practices, strategies to support ELL students, and the use of goals and relevant learning needs from students IEPs to inform accessible and flexible curricula. Findings from our inquiry work and learning from our professional development will be applied to curricular decisions, resulting in a positive impact on student learning outcomes and increased student achievement for all learners. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the pass rate of first-time test-takers on Regents Exams for courses they are enrolled in will increase by 5%, including ELLs and students with disabilities, through teacher collaboration to implement accessible and individualized instruction. 2018-19 SCEP-P 28  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Plan and facilitate professional learning sessions focusing on building teacher capacity to: Teachers August 2018 - June 2019 Special Education Team  Utilize Individual Educational Plans (IEPs) to inform instructional planning  Apply Universal Design for Learning framework and  principles to curricula Incorporate a range of instructional strategies and techniques to support ELL students  Design assessments, lesson plans, and learning activities that are accessible to all learners ELL Teachers Peer Collaborative Teacher Model Teachers Instructional Coaches Assistant Principals Principal Regularly revise and enhance curricula to: Teachers August 2018 - June 2019 Special Education Team  Develop students learning goals and Learning Targets based on information from IEPs  Reflect findings from looking at student work in our Data Into Action inquiry process sessions  Create formative assessments that align to and measure  Learning Targets and IEP goals Indicate a range of multiple entry points built-in to each unit and/or Performance Task  Demonstrate how and when scaffolds and supports will be introduced and removed over time  Provide leveled, differentiated texts, sources, and media so that all students have access to the core content and skills for each Unit ELL Teachers Peer Collaborative Teacher Model Teachers Instructional Coaches Assistant Principals Principal Special Education Team ELL Teachers 2018-19 SCEP-P 29  Monitor, share, and celebrate successful implementation of UDL practices into classroom instruction: Teachers September 2018 - June 2019  Norm and collaboratively plan lessons and learning activities informed by UDL Guidelines  Provide feedback for lesson plans using UDL Guidelines  Conduct non-evaluative classroom walkthroughs to identify areas of strength and areas for growth to inform collaboration and targeted professional development  Arrange inter-visitations with Model Teachers and Peer Collaborative Teacher Track student progress towards goals in order to: Teachers  Adjust instructional plans and maximize each students learning outcomes  Capitalize on and share strategies and practices that have proven effective  Provide targeted instruction to intervene and extend student learning  Develop actionable feedback and next steps to share with students and their families September 2018 - June 2019 Peer Collaborative Teacher Model Teachers Instructional Coaches Assistant Principals Principal Department Team Leaders Peer Collaborative Teacher Model Teachers Instructional Coaches Assistant Principals Principal Department Team Leaders Peer Collaborative Teacher Model Teachers Instructional Coaches Assistant Principals Principal Streamline and enhance IEP writing process to include steps such as: Teachers August 2018 - June 2019 Special Education Team  Develop tools to gather and organize anecdotal and Students  assessment data from teachers Facilitate and coordinate the calendaring and scheduling of IEP meetings  Analyze formative assessment data on a regular basis  Confer with students about their recent performance on formative assessments and engage them in the process of setting next steps and learning goals  Expedite the IEP writing process for struggling students  Improve outreach to parents and school community Scholar Support Team Guidance Team Instructional Coaches 2018-19 SCEP-P 30   Increase the number of parents and/or guardians to attend Parent-Teacher Conferences 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Assistant Principals Principal How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will engage with families to support their understanding of high-quality, rigorous, CCLS-aligned instruction, and our school’s goal, at several points during the school year. Families will learn about classroom instructional practices and how they can support their children at home in person during our fall Curriculum Night (September 28) and parent-teacher conferences held in the fall and spring semesters. With support from representatives from our Scholar Support Team and Community Team leaders, teachers of students in grades 6-9 will conduct Student-Led Conferences to augment and enhance parent-teacher conferences. Families can also access their student's’ assignments, grades, and other classroom materials digitally by logging into Skedula and/or Google Classroom. Our PTA President and Parent Coordinator will provide opportunities for family members to learn how to navigate and utilize these online systems on an ongoing basis. Attendance is taken for every class period using the Kinvolved system. Parents are informed of their students presences, preparation, and performance - both academic and behavior - in real-time. Additionally, members of our Guidance Team will also support family engagement around Collaborative Teachers and Strategies by addressing the needs of ELL students and those with IEPs through parent outreach. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Described below are the resources needed to implement the action plan. ● Teachers ● Assistant Principal ● Principals ● Secretary ● Data Specialist ● Instructional Coaches ● Teacher Team meeting time during the school day, afterschool and during the Summer 2018-19 SCEP-P 31  ● Teacher team meeting supplies and refreshments ● Substitute Teachers to provide coverage for Educators attending training ● Curriculum development supplies, materials and resources ● Per Session Funds to support training and other professional learning experiences in teacher team facilitation, and questioning and discussion techniques Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP X Title I TA Title III PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant X 21st Century School Achievement Funding X C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 75% of students will earn passing scores in their core courses, and accumulate at least 5 credits. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Scholarship Reports for the Fall Semester Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 32  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). SOP(s) Addressed N/A N/A X N/A Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. We have several strong practices related to strategic goal-setting, leveraging resources, and monitoring systems for improvement. According to the preliminary draft of our Quality Review, we earned ratings of Well-Developed in Indicator 3.4: High Expectations and 1.4: Positive Learning Environment. We earned ratings of Proficient in Indicators 1.3: Leveraging Resources and 4.1: Teacher Support and Supervision, and 3.1: Goals and Action Plans. According to feedback from our Superintendent, Donald Conyers, the following findings were highlighted as Areas of Celebration: "The high expectations that you communicate to your staff, students, and families are clearly evident. For example, throughout the building I observed the Scholar Creed that begins with “The community of scholars at Frederick Douglass Academy II is dedicated to the personal and academic excellence” as well as the FDA II Non-Negotiables that begin with “I will respect myself, my school, and my community through living the Scholar Creed.” Scholars observed the uniform policy and conducted themselves appropriately in classrooms and during the passing of classes. Teachers across classrooms visited were prepared to teach and immediately began lessons and taught bell to bell. In the review of your Educator Handbook, you clearly have communicated your expectations regarding the delivery of instruction using the 2018-19 SCEP-P 33  Workshop Model, the Black Board Configuration, lesson planning expectations, and other routine and rituals necessary for teachers to succeed. Captured in your in Parent Handbook is critical information that supports parents in understanding information regarding student feedback (e.g.,. Goals, report cards, mid-marking period progress reports, and grading policies). "You have aligned the usage of available resources to support your instructional goals and strategically coordinate partnerships to support students social-emotionally and to promote college and career readiness. To wit; the Columbia University School of Social Work supports high-need students; iMentor supports students on their journey to college; Institute for Family Health provide access to high quality, patient-centered primary health care; New York Cares provides SAT tutoring services. With over ten different partners, you have created the wrap around supports with a community school approach to meet the needs of your school community." Based on a site visit to our school, Superintendent Dr. Donald Conyers provided the following Next Step related to improving teacher practice: “Ensure that you are setting clear goals (2-3) aligned to DFT in collaboration with teachers. As you, your APs, and coaches go in to support teachers, ensure that feedback and supports are aligned to identified areas for growth and professional development is targeted to areas of need. Use your mid-year and end of year conferences to reflect with teachers on their progress toward meeting their professional goals to refine your systems of support." **See SCEP Google Doc for additional text (indicated with **) to be added. As school leaders, our goal is to develop and implement a system to track constructive and instructive feedback from observations that hold administrators and staff accountable for continuous improvement, including to provide supplemental professional development as indicated, for staff in identified areas. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART– Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, administration will complete 3 iterations of the FDA II Individualized Professional Development Cycles, including data-based conferences, goal setting sessions, and strategic instructional supports to build on areas of success or strengthen areas in need of intervention (ie, coaching, guided inter-visitations, structured professional learning), resulting in at least 80% of teachers achieving their Professional Development goal. 2018-19 SCEP-P 34  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Collaboratively develop a suite of tools, resources, and materials to be used by administrators in Individualized Professional Development Conferences (IPDCs); calendar dates for beginning-, middle-, and end-of-year IPDCs Teachers August - September 2018 Principal Assistant Principals Norm and calibrate the process to ensure alignment and consistency in implementation across school leaders by conducting Mock IPDCs and observing one another engage teachers in IPDCs so that protocols and norms are adhered to by all Teachers September 2018 - November 2019 Periodically, tier teachers according to their most recent Advance ratings and observation reports to determine common strengths and needs for groups of educators; analyze these results and use findings to determine extensions and interventions as needed on a regular basis with all available instructional support providers Teachers September 2018 - June 2019 (ongoing) Conduct a minimum of three formal, evidence-based Individualized Professional Development Conferences (IPDCs) with each educator; conduct additional IPDC sessions on a more frequent basis for those Teachers September 2018 - June 2019 (ongoing) Instructional Coaches Principal Assistant Principal Instructional Coaches Principal Assistant Principal Instructional Coaches Peer Collaborative Teacher Instructional Cabinet Providers of professional development Representatives from New Visions Principal Assistant Principal 2018-19 SCEP-P 35  educators with Teacher Improvement Plans, are new to the profession, and/or untenured to better support their learning needs Plan and implement strategic, differentiated levels of support to strengthen teacher capacity and improve areas of instructional practice in need of intervention Teachers September 2018 - June 2019 (ongoing) Principal Assistant Principal Instructional Coaches Peer Collaborative Teacher 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will engage with families to support their understanding of understanding of Effective School Leadership and Strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home at several points during the school year. Parent leaders will receive support from the Principal and Assistant Principal at their Executive board meeting in building effective meeting structures and activities to increase participant engagement at their monthly parent meetings. The Parent coordinator will be responsible to support the Executive Board in reflecting on the effectiveness of meetings as evidenced through surveys and observations. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Described below are the resources needed to implement the action plan. ● Teachers ● Assistant Principal ● Principals ● Secretary ● Data Specialist ● Observation Software ● Instructional Software ● Technology ● Instructional Coaches 2018-19 SCEP-P 36  ● Teacher Team meeting time during the school day, afterschool and during the Summer ● Teacher team meeting supplies and refreshments ● Substitute Teachers to provide coverage for Educators attending training ● Curriculum development supplies, materials and resources ● Assessment Resources ● Per Session Funds to support training and other professional learning experiences in classroom management, lesson delivery, assessment, and instructional planning. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant X 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, administration will complete 1 iteration of the FDA II observation cycle, resulting in 80% of Educators making progress towards meeting their 2018-19 PD Goals . Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Observation data, Individual Teacher PD Action Plans Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 37  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their SOP(s) Addressed N/A high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. X X X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to initial data from our School Learning Environment Survey, 92% of parents indicated that they feel welcomed to visit their child’s classrooms, whereas only 59% of teachers agree with that statement. 98% of parents agree or strongly agree that our school communicates with them in a language and in a way that they can understand. 59% of parents responded that since the beginning of the school year, they have been asked or had the opportunity to volunteer time to support their school sometimes or often. 77% of parents responded that they are somewhat or very likely to attend a general school meeting or school event (open house, back to school night, play, dance, science fair, etc). Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 SCEP-P 38  By June 2019, at least 40% of families in each cohort will attend two or more Parent as Partners Curriculum events focused on empowering families to support the learning and academic success of their children. Parent as Partners Curriculum Events include but are not limited to Scholar Led Conferences, Curriculum Night, Curriculum Workshops, Academic Celebrations, School Trips and/or ELT showcases, resulting in our "Parent Involvement in School" score on the School Survey increasing from 2.55 to 2.75. 2018-19 SCEP-P 39  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Establish and embed effective communication systems to be utilized throughout the school year - both reaching out to parents and taking in information from parents and students. These systems include: Students Families  Community class calendars  Newsletters to inform parents of upcoming events  Use email to keep in touch with parents and families  Create flowcharts that visually display the methods of  communication Frequent meetings between Parent Coordinator and other members of the school community/stakeholders (weekly or biweekly) Formalize our process for Open School Week and ensure we provide a range of opportunities for parents to attend so that they feel welcomed to visit their student's classrooms Students, Parents September 2018- June 2019 Increase the response rate for parents and family members completing the School Learning Survey: Students, Parents September 2018- June 2019  Set up laptops in classrooms for parents to use in completing the form when visiting the school;  Teachers and/or other delegated staff members will send messages via the Kinvolved app with the link to the survey as well as their students ID number required to fill it out. August 2018 - June 2019 Guidance Counselors Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Administrators Scholar Support Data Specialist Parent Coordinator Parent Teacher Association Guidance Counselors Scholar Support Data Specialist Parent Coordinator Parent Teacher Association Middle School Grade Team Parent Coordinator Guidance Counselors Administrators 2018-19 SCEP-P 40  Increase methods of communication between teachers and families so that parents receive and access regular, up-to-date information about their childs learning: Students, Parents September 2018- June 2019 Parent Coordinator Guidance Counselors  Teachers will link their assignments for students in Google Classroom to Skedula to better inform parents of the types of tasks and assignments their student completed.  Teachers will provide actionable feedback on a frequent basis to ensure students are making progress towards their learning goals. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. 1) REACH (Teachers College) 2) New York Foundling 3) iMentor 4) Achievement Initiative(Teachers College- School of social work) Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Described below are the resources needed to implement the action plan. ● Teachers ● Assistant Principal ● Principals ● Guidance Counselors ● Secretary ● Parent Coordinator ● Data Specialist ● Data processing supplies ● Technology ● Communication Software 2018-19 SCEP-P 41  ● Instructional Coaches ● Refreshments ● Translation equipment and supplies ● Per Session Funds to support Teacher outreach to families and participation in workshops. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant X 21st Century School Achievement Funding X X C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By end of January 2019, 30% of our families will have attended at least one Parents as Partners event (during the first semester). Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Paper sign-in sheets at Parents as Partners events will be manually logged into online spreadsheets. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 42  Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Program Description Directions: Expanded Learning Time activities are directly aligned to the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, Rigorous Instruction, Supportive Environment, and Strong Family and Community Ties. ELT provides enriching educational experiences that happen outside of the traditional school day and blend skill acquisition, relationship-building and fun to foster academic and social-emotional growth. Summer learning, afterschool programming, and extended-day ELT models, when well-implemented, play a critical role in supporting students in all grades and ensuring that they graduate from high school, college and career ready. SED requires that Priority schools offer a minimum of 200 additional student contact hours as Expanded Learning Time in addition to the current mandated length of 900 hours of instruction per year (25 hours per week) in grades K-6 and 990 hours of instruction per year (27.5 hours per week) in grades 7-12. Effective ELT models will blend school staff with community partners, and will provide a balanced curriculum that can include ELA, Math, STEM, arts, physical activity, and leadership development. Complete the sections on this page to demonstrate how the school will meet these requirements. Part 1 – ELT Program Goal(s) Describe the summative goal(s) of the ELT program for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 80 % of the target group Scholars in each cohort, will have participated in at least 30 contact hours of ELT programming and would have shown 5% increase in attendance and met the Credits/Course and Exam benchmarks in their cohort. Part 2 – ELT Program Type Is the ELT program voluntary or compulsory? X Voluntary Compulsory If the ELT program is voluntary, indicate how you will actively encourage the participation of all students, with the goal of serving at least 50% of students. Through the leadership of the Expanded Learning Opportunities Associate, provided by Teachers College, students will be invited to participate in ELT activities by being engaged in their advisory classes, town hall forums, school-wide ELT program fairs, and by identifying targeted students for specific program via Scholar Support Team meetings, Grade-team meetings, and Department-team meetings. Part 3 – ELT Program Description The ELT program will be offered to all students eligible for Academic Intervention Services (AIS), with the goal of serving a minimum of fifty percent of AIS-eligible students. Describe how the school will meet the following SED requirements for an ELT program in a Priority School:  Integrate academics, enrichment, and skill development through hands-on experiences that make learning relevant and engaging.  Offer a range of activities that capture student interest and strengthen student engagement in learning so as to promote higher attendance, reduce risk for retention or drop out, and increase the likelihood of graduation.  Actively address the unique learning needs and interests of all types of students, especially those who may benefit from approaches and experiences not offered in the traditional classroom setting.  Contain components designed to improve student academic, social, and emotional outcomes, including opportunities for enrichment programs such as in music and art.  Ensure instruction in any core academic subject offered in the program will be delivered under the supervision of a teacher who is NYS certified in that particular content area.  Engage in outreach activities made to families. 1. All academic ELT programs at FDA II are aligned to the CCSS, including culminating performance tasks reflecting Depth of Knowledge (DoK) skills. 2018-19 SCEP-P 43  2. All ELT programs at FDA II are delivered through hands-on project-based learning strategies that are typically not offered in the traditional classroom setting. 3. Specific lessons from the ELT program will be provided to FDA II by TC and Columbia University’s School of Engineering and Applied Science (CU SEAS) with the intent to ‘bridge’ the after school to the school day, incorporating many of the project-based learning strategies into the regular school day. These lessons are developed by TC faculty and graduate students, CU SEAS faculty and graduate students, and TC’s Office of School and Community Partnerships’ Instructional Specialist. 4. All youth development ELT activities at FDA II are aligned to social-emotional standards released by the Collaborative for Academic, Social and Emotional Learning (CASEL). CASEL’s standards are aligned to the NYSED guidelines for social and emotional development and learning. Additionally, youth development ELT activities are based on best practices document in Conley (2007) Redefining College Readiness . 5. All TC graduate student instructors receive professional development in research-based instructional strategies and activities throughout their employment, including planning through use of Understanding By Design, instructional strategies researched and reported by Fisher & Frey, and use of research-based protocols for viewing and discussing student work. Part 4 – ELT Program Implementation and Oversight Part 4a. Who will implement the ELT program? Who will oversee the program? 1. Indicate the key personnel that will be responsible for implementing and overseeing the ELT program, including school-based staff and any high-quality community partners that will be involved. If applicable, describe the scope of involvement of all community partners and how the joint ELT program is structured. 2. 3. Explain how you will evaluate the program to assess impact on student achievement. FDA II is in partnership with REACH at Teachers College, Columbia University, through the Office of School and Community Partnerships. In addition to receiving support for teachers, leadership and parents, TC provides support to FDA II in establishing and maintaining their primary ELT program. These efforts are led by the Expanded Learning Opportunities Associate. There will be a team of individuals that will be implementing and monitoring the ELT programming at FDA II for the 2018-19 school year. The team will be led by the Expanded Learning Opportunities (ELO) Coordinator, a graduate student from Teachers College. The ELO coordinator will be the main point staff responsible for communicating information regarding ELT program between external providers and school staff. Conversations will occur at grade-level and department team meetings to match scholars to programs according to their academic interests and strenghts. Additionaly, the Scholar Support Team (consisting of the Dean, Guidance Counselors, Parent Coordinator, Social Worker, and Community School Director) will work in ensuring that targeted students are connected to specific ELT programs that will develop particular academic [shown through credit accumulation, Regents pass rates, and completion of school work] and/or social-emotional [OORS data and increases in average daily attendance] competencies. Part 4b. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. ~ September 24, 2018: first-round of ELO recruitment campaign ~ October 1, 2018: second round of ELO recruitment campaign ~ 2nd week of October 2018: ELO programs begin ~ 3rd week of November (and each month) 2018: enrollment review; targeted-student adjustments & referrals 2018-19 SCEP-P 44  ~ 2nd week of December 2018: Winter ELO showcase ~ 2nd week of February 2019: ELO recruit campaign (Spring Semester; targeted student hours accumulation check) ~ 2nd week of May 2019: Final showcase; end of ELO programming Part 5 – ELT Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the ELT program. ● Principal ● ELO Association at TC REACH ● ELO Coordinator ● Guidance Counselors ● Community School DIrector ● Dean ● Teachers  Teacher Team meeting time during the school day and afterschool ● Office Supplies ● Instructional Supplies ● Data processing resources ● Per Session Funds to support the hiring of staff to facilitate, manage and/or supervise the ELO Program. ● Postage ● Student Workers ● Funding to hire external providers to provide programming ● Creating time in daily schedule for ELO programming. ● Incentives and awards for program participation Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support the ELT Program. Note: If the program is funded by 21st Century Community Center Learning Funds, it must be offered in conjunction with a high quality, high capacity community partner. X 21st Century X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA P/F Set-aside X C4E 2018-19 SCEP-P 45  Title I 1003(a) X Title III PTA Funded SIG Grant School Achievement Other Funding Part 6 – ELT Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 50% of Target Group Scholars will have participated in ELO Activities for at least 15 contact hours. Part 6b. Indicate the instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The New Visions Data Portal will be used to record and track enrollment and participation hours in ELT programming. Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 46  Section 7: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Tutoring Small Group Instruction Individualized Computer instruction Lunch & Learn Teacher Office Hours SaturdayAcademy English Language Arts (ELA) Students who are below 5th grade reading level on the EdPerformance Series Reading Assessment High School students who score below 70% on Regents exams Students who failed midterm PLATO LEARNING is an online academic support program implemented at helping At-Risk/ High Needs scholars with skill remediation and to recover lost academic credits. Learning is self-paced and put in real-world context. It is coupled with offline activities and Internet resources that reinforce learning in areas of greatest weakness. The Plato course is given to scholars during their instructional day and they work independently with the support and guidance of their teacher. Scholars can also access Plato Learning from any computer so they can continue to log in hours from home. When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) PLATO- during school day, before school, after school Achieve 3000 Regents Prep- during school day, before school, after school Teacher Office hours- before school, after school Lunch & Learn - during school Peer Tutoring- 2018-19 SCEP-P 47 during school Saturday Academy and final exams with 65% Students who are failing two or more courses with an 80% + attendance rate Students who are have not meet criteriafor creditaccumulation on for their grade(10+) on course for not meeting Middle school students who performed at a level 1 or 2 on their 5th- 8th grade ELA exams REGENTS PREP is a program that is offered to students who have previously failed a NYS Regents exam or need additional test preparation support for an incoming Regents examination. This program is offered in the Fall and Spring school semesters to offer additional testing preparation to students taking any Regents exam in January or June. ACADEMIC SKILLS classes offer small group instruction to students who performed at a level 1 or 2 on their 5 th -8 th grade ELA and/or Math test at least twice a week. CriticalReading Class: High school students reading far below grade level receive intensive literacy instruction using the REWARDS intervention program. Teacher Office Hours: Students are offered an opportunity to meet with their teachers one on one or in small groups to work on assignments and receive tutorial 2018-19 SCEP-P 48  Mathematics Students who are below 5th grade reading level on the EdPerformance Series Math Assessment services from educators. Lunch & Learn: Scholars receive targeted instructional support, including descriptive feedback and next steps for improvement, in small small and individual conferences. Peer Tutoring- students receive academic support from trained student leaders in our current school and Teachers College Grad Students. Summer Packets Tutorial packets SAT Prep PLATO LEARNING is an online academic support program implemented at helping At-Risk/ High Needs scholars with skill remediation and to recover lost academic credits. Learning is self-paced and put in real-world context. It is coupled with offline activities and Internet resources that reinforce learning Tutoring Small Group Instruction Individualized Computer instruction Lunch & Learn Teacher Office Hours SaturdayAcademy PLATO- during school day, before school, after school Regents Prep- during school day, before school, after school 2018-19 SCEP-P 49 Teacher Office hours- before school, after school Lunch & Learn - during school Peer Tutoring- during school Saturday Academy High School students who score below 70% on Regents exams Students who failed midterm and final exams with 65% Students who are failing two or more courses with an 80% + attendance rate Students who are have not meet criteriafor creditaccumulation on for their grade(10+) on course for not meeting in areas of greatest weakness. The Plato course is given to scholars during their instructional day and they work independently with the support and guidance of their teacher. Scholars can also access Plato Learning from any computer so they can continue to log in hours from home. REGENTS PREP is a program that is offered to students who have previously failed aNYSRegents exam or need additional test preparation support for an incoming Regents examination. This program is offered in the Fall and Spring school semesters to offer additional testing preparation to students taking any Regents exam in January or June. ACADEMIC SKILLS classes offer small group instruction at least twice a week. Teacher Office Hours- students are offered an opportunity to meet with their teachers one on one or in small groups to work on 2018-19 SCEP-P 50  Middle school students who assignments and receive tutorial services from educators. performed at a level 1 or 2 on their 5th- 8th grade Math exams Science High School students who score below 70% on Science Lunch & Learn: Scholars receive targeted instructional support, including descriptive feedback and next steps for improvement, in small small and individual conferences. Peer Tutoring- students receive academic support from trained student leaders in our current school and Teachers College Grad Students. SummerPackets Tutorial Packets SAT Prep ENVision2.0 in grades 6-12 PLATO LEARNING is an online academic support program implemented at helping At-Risk/ High Needs scholars with skill remediation and to recover lost academic credits. Tutoring Small Group Instruction Individualized Computer instruction Lunch & Learn Teacher Office Hours PLATO- during school day, before school, after school Achieve 3000 2018-19 SCEP-P 51 Regents Prep- during school day, before school, after school Teacher Office hours- before school, after school Lunch & Learn - during school Peer Tutoring- during school SaturdayAcademy Regents exams Students who failed midterm and final exams with 65% Students who are failing two or more courses with an 80% + attendance rate Students who are have not meet criteriafor creditaccumulation on for their grade(10+) on course for not meeting Learning is self-paced and put in real-world context. It is coupled with offline activities and Internet resources that reinforce learning in areas of greatest weakness. The Plato course is given to scholars during their instructional day and they work independently with the support and guidance of their teacher. Scholars can also access Plato Learning from any computer so they can continue to log in hours from home. REGENTS PREP is a program that is offered to students who have previously failed aNYSRegents exam or need additional test preparation support for an incoming Regents examination. This program is offered in the Fall and Spring school semesters to offer additional testing preparation to students taking any Regents exam in January or June. ACADEMIC SKILLS classes offer small group instruction to students who performed at a 2018-19 SCEP-P 52  level 1 or 2 on their 5th-8thgradeELAand/or Math test at least twice a week. Teacher Office Hours: Students are offered an opportunity to meet with their teachers one on one or in small groups to work on assignments and receive tutorial services from educators. Lunch & Learn: Scholars receive targeted instructional support, including descriptive feedback and next steps for improvement, in small small and individual conferences. Peer Tutoring- students receive academic support from trained student leaders in our current school and Teachers College Grad Students. Summer Packets Tutorial Packets SAT Prep 2018-19 SCEP-P 53  Social Studies High School students who score below 70% on Global and US History Regents exams Students who failed midterm and final exams with 65% Students who are failing two or more courses with an 80% + attendance rate Students who are have not meet criteriafor creditaccumulation on for their grade(10+) on course for not meeting PLATO LEARNING is an online academic support program implemented at helping At-Risk scholars with skill remediation and to recover lost academic credits. Learning is self-paced and put in real-world context. It is coupled with offline activities and Internet resources that reinforce learning in areas of greatest weakness. The Plato course is given to scholars during their instructional day and they work independently with the support and guidance of their teacher. Scholars can also access Plato Learning from any computer so they can continue to log in hours from home. REGENTS PREP is a program that is offered to students who have previously failed aNYSRegents exam or need additional test preparation support for an incoming Regents examination. This program is offered in the Fall and Spring school semesters to offer additional testing preparation to Tutoring Small Group Instruction Individualized Computer instruction Lunch & Learn Teacher Office Hours SaturdayAcademy PLATO- during school day, before school, after school Achieve 3000 Regents Prep- during school day, before school, after school Teacher Office hours- before school, after school Lunch & Learn - during school Peer Tutoring- during school Saturday School 2018-19 SCEP-P 54  students taking any Regents exam in January or June. ACADEMIC SKILLS classes offer small group instruction to students who performed at a level 1 or 2 on their 5th-8thgradeELAand/or Math test at least twice a week. Teacher Office Hours- students are offered an opportunity to meet with their teachers one on one or in small groups to work on assignments and receive tutorial services from educators. Lunch & Learn: Scholars receive targeted instructional support, including descriptive feedback and next steps for improvement, in small small and individual conferences. Peer Tutoring- students receive academic support from trained student leaders in our current school and Teachers College Grad Students. 2018-19 SCEP-P 55  At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) IEP mandates Teacher referral Parent/ student request Attendance data Suspension data Summer Packets Tutorial Packets SAT Prep Achievement Initiative Vision Screening Other Community Based Organizations Referral to NY Foundling Individual and Group Counseling focused on effective communication and positive peer relationships Provides free glasses to students who exhibit vision challenges During school After School Possibly weekends if using Network resources One-to-one, small group. Other Network resources NY Foundling: Family short termtherapy(CognitiveBehavioralTherapy) on site and at home Peer Group Connection: Student to studentmentorshipprogram where 11th grade students mentors 9th graders to help with transitions to high school - meetings 2x per week 2018-19 SCEP-P 56  Peer Group Connection 2018-19 SCEP-P 57  Section 8: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) There are currently 50 Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending FDAII 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Services to the STH population that are being planned include but are not limited to:  In order to make sure that our database of STH is up-to-date, by Friday, August 17th, our Parent Coordinator will call the guardian of every scholar identified as a STH student to make sure that the contact information we currently have for them is correct and up-to-date. This means that the information we have on a Blue Card including Emergency Contact List and Health Info is up-to-date. A new Blue Card will be filled out by the Parent Coordinator based on feedback from the guardians/parents. This card will be saved in the school awaiting parent signatures during the Back To School meeting at the end of August or given to scholars to take home and sign during the first week of school.  During the last week of August, in the summer teacher professional sessions, our Parent Coordinator will ask the teachers and the Dean to identify the best approach that teachers can give in providing feedback on challenges they are facing with STH students. The methodology offered should be used by the SST (Scholar Support Team) in offering solutions to these issues.  By October 1st there will be an established, secure and specific portal/email account that STH parents/youth can access to present their specific needs. This portal will be easily accessible to all students/guardians, particularly STH students through a specific access area via the school web and through a secure email address assigned to the school. It would be a private email that would be accessible through the schools website. to the Parent Coordinator who would access the stated need and forward the information to the proper channels. This email account (ex. personalnote@fda2.net) will be offered to all parents/youth with a strong focus on presenting it to STH youth/parents and can only be accessed by specific staff...PC / Dean / Principal and Assistants / Guidance Counselors / Business Manager. 2018-19 SCEP-P 58   Starting in October, on the 2nd Monday (or the next available school day) of every month, and continuing on a monthly basis, an email/Kinvo will go out to STH parents concerning information that identifies resources in the city that provide social service resources (ex. food / clothing / housing / medical / dental/ mental health) resources. Even if this information is redundant, it will help to keep the information concerning social services available fresh in the minds of STH parent/guardians.  During the last weekend in October, the SST will meet to re-assess our approach to supporting STH  A workshop to discuss ways to address issues that youth/parents of STH may be experiencing due to their economic/social status will be held by the first week in October in the morning and evening.  By the beginning of November, we will hold a workshop for all parents, specifically STH parents, that gives information about ways to get back into the workforce. This workshop may include information on writing a resume, tips for interviewing for a job, using a computer and/or Internet to help find a job and ways to find resources which can help fit their personal needs.   In February, a workshop for all parents, specifically STH parents will be held that gives information on basic computer skills which will help strengthen their computer knowledge. Send to STH families, flyers or information concerning job or housing fairs, meetings or, conferences when we get information about such events throughout the year.  Send out a weekly quote of encouragement to STH families via Kinvo and email. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. NA 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. 2018-19 SCEP-P 59 NA 2018-19 SCEP-P 60  Section 9: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Activities - All teachers receive professional development (in partnership with New Visions and Teachers College) on the construction and implementation of effective CCSS aligned unit plans, pre and post tests, performance tasks and assessment analysis Activity - MS teachers will partake in a blended learning community study group. This partnership is sponsored by New Visions and works in collaboration, with other various middle schools. The professional development focuses on common core strategies, text complexities, and discussion techniques. Activity- All teachers work in grade and/or department level teams to assess units and provide feedback utilizing the UPDRAFT protocol developed in the 2013-2014 school year (Domain 4e) Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). 2018-19 SCEP-P 61  N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers participate in the selection of assessments in several ways, and engage in regular professional development to support their use of assessment results to improve their instructional practices.  Members of our MoSL Committee select Performance Series, an online, adaptive assessment to be used as   the metric to measure student learning progress. Individual classroom teachers develop Unit Tests (2 per year) for their courses. These Tests are reviewed collaboratively by Department Teams, then submitted to their respective supervisors for final review and approval. Final Exams (administered at the end the Fall and Spring semesters in all core classes) are developed in-house by instructional coaches and school leaders using questions selected from CASTLE Learning that align to the specified Common Core Standards and Learning Targets addressed and assessed each semester. Student data from these Exams is inputted, organized, and analyzed by teachers.  Humanities Performance Tasks, which are shared by ELA and Social studies teachers, are developed, revised, refined, and augmented by all team Humanities Team members in collaboration with our Literacy Instructional Coach and Assistant Principal. Teachers engage in professional development workshops to vet Performance Tasks for vertical and horizontal alignment, create Exemplars to use in classroom instruction, and develop supports, scaffolds, and extensions to improve student learning outcomes.   Whole-staff professional development is provided to all teachers to support them in using our Student Data Analysis Protocol and Template to adjust and inform their instruction. Teachers receive additional mentoring and support in this process in one-on-one conferences with their direct supervisors at their Individual Professional Development Conferences mid-year. Instructional Coaches and Instructional Cabinet members regularly engage in the analysis of student work and data; these teachers then lead their Grade Teams in the same process during our Data Into Action Inquiry Cycles. Teachers use a range of assessments and the resulting student work artifacts to triangulate student data and identify gaps in learning. In weekly Department Team professional learning sessions, teachers collaborate to adjust and enhance their instructional plans to better meet the learning needs of all students based on evidence from recent assessments. This practice is further supported through the administration of New Visions Mock Regents Exams; analytics and student profile reports from these Exams are used to develop descriptive and actionable feedback and next steps for whole-class, small group, and individual student instruction.  2018-19 SCEP-P 62  4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (SCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Title I Part A (Basic) Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 196,762 0 0 0 12,366 0 2,729,888 X N/A N/A N/A X N/A X Column B Section Reference(s) 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E N/A N/A N/A 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E N/A 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. 2018-19 SCEP-P 63  Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/SCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 SCEP-P 64  Section 10: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Frederick Douglass Academy II, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA) Act, is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Frederick Douglass Academy II will support parents and families of Title I students by:  providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology;  providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and  decision making in support of the education of their children; fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress;  providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments;  sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand;  providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; 2018-19 SCEP-P 65  The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will:  actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact;  engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills;  ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and  strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills;  maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home;   provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report;  host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help;    2018-19 SCEP-P 66  The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement  hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year;  holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference;  encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; supporting or hosting Family Day events;   establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents;  encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers;  providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress;  developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress;  providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) Frederick Douglass Academy II , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA) Act, is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards;  using academic learning time efficiently;    offering high quality instruction in all content areas;  providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the ESSA Act; I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: 2018-19 SCEP-P 67      conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education;  providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact;   providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information;  ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff Provide parents reasonable access to staff by:  ensuring that parents can meet with staff during school hours, after requesting an appointment with respective staff person. Teachers and counselor are available during their prep period and or lunch time to meet with parents on an emergency basis;  ensuring access to staff by email or telephone conference using the assistance of the Parent Coordinator; advising parents that they can schedule to join an SLT meeting to address any concerns and have access to  parent SLT members as a means to facilitate communication with such staff. All parent SLT member contact information is listed on the school website.  make available the contact information, on the school website, of all members on the SLT and Parent Association contact; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by:     creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; 2018-19 SCEP-P 68  ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as  described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the ESSA Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities  support my child’s education by reading the Frederick Douglass Academy II Handbook (“Handbook”) to ensure that my child abides by the policies set out in the Handbook. With the understanding that the SLT may change these policies with notifications to the parents making it our responsibility to abide by the changes. We are aware we may attend SLT meetings and suggest policies to the SLT team.  monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent;  provide a quiet place to study and do homework  ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games;     promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits;  encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child;   participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education;  communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested;   become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact;  participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child   Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities  We as students will share the responsibility to improve our academic achievement and achieve the State’s high standards. Specifically we act according to the Scholars Creed as follows: o Be dedicated to personal and academic excellence; o Respect the rights and property of others; o Demonstrate concern for others, their felling and their need for conditions that support their work and development; o Follow school dress code and rules of conduct 2018-19 SCEP-P 69  o Additionally. we will abide by the cell phone policy of the school (supra);  As well as those suggested by the Department of Education: o Attend school regularly, arrive on time and do our best; o Participate in class discussions and activities; o Complete my homework and submit all assignments on time o Follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions o Try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; o Study for exams and assignments 2018-19 SCEP-P 70  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 SCEP-P 71  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Rationale: The rationale for our supplemental program is to provide additional support for the ELL population. The program is geared towards advancing the basic academic English and literacy skills of FDA II’s ELLs that may need strengthening. It is a focused set of learning sessions that allow the ENL teachers in collaboration with and English and a Math teachers, in a team teaching format to work closely with ELLs in a more directed setting and provides supplemental activities to support core classes. Data has been examined from midterms, finals, formative assessments, state exams and NYSESLAT to ensure that the ELL teacher and the content area teachers are able to provide instruction grounded in data and aligns to students literacy goals set in the beginning of the school year. Data demonstrates that ELL students need additional support in reading, writing, meta-cognitive skill development, such as analysis of their own work across content areas including English and Math. Subgroups and Grade Levels: The ELL students at FDA II range from sixth grade to twelfth grade. Students will be split into three groups. At least 50% of ENL instruction for each student is received from certified ENL teacher. Group 1 : 6th, 7th, and 8th grade ELLs , Group 2: 9th and 10th grade, and Group 3 11th and 12th grade. Most ELLs are are at Transitioning and Expanding proficiency levels. Several ELLs in the program are Developing and Long Term ELLs who need focused support in order to succeed in core content areas. Program: Title III ENL after school program "Academic English through ELA and MathThe rationale for direct instruction is to provide supplementary instruction for the ENL students in Frederick Douglass Academy II. There are two certified ENL teacher who will co-plan and co-teach with two content area teachers.. The FDA II program will focus on aiding students to develop mastery in basic math and ELA and provide them scaffolded support through various strategies, using tests and materials that include: informational tests, fiction, online articles, websites, newspaper articles, and will be led by one ES certified teacher. and content teachers. Laptops available in the school will be used also for on demand essays, on demand writing prompts, style-specific writing (arguments, expository writing, and others) Scholars will participate in the Title III supplemental enrichment program Monday through Friday. Schedule & Duration Day, Grade, Time Monday, 6th and 7th grade, 3:45 pm - 4:45 pm Tuesday, 8th and 9th grade, 3:45 pm - 4:45 pm *Wednesday, Open Tutoring Session, 3:35pm- 4:35pm Thursday, 10th and 11th grade, 2:50 pm - 3:50 pm Friday, 12th grade, 2:50 pm - 3: 50 pm Educators will use a combination of team-teaching and flexible groupings to lead instruction. Instructional time will be split evenly between both content and ELL instruction. All educators are responsible for ensuring that materials are reviewed prior to teaching and supporting content. 2018-19 SCEP-P 72  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information ENL educator will ensure that scaffolds are created / available to support instruction during instructional and independent work. Materials necessary for ELL program are various fiction and non-fiction multilingual text that can be utilized as students silent sustained reading time ( only to be utilized during ELL after school program), phonics books to support beginner ELLs. Additionally, Internet based resources to support math enrichment will be used to run the supplemental ENL program effectively.In addition, the after school sessions students will use writing tools and resources to participate in activities, dictionaries to help with translations and vocabulary, and use online resources to support language acquisition and math content connections. ** All materials will only be used during the afterschool program** Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: The rationale for teacher professional development is to make teachers aware of the varying learning styles and cultural differences of ELLs. It is important for teachers to grasp who is a SIFE student, what length of time students have been in the country, what languages they speak, etc. This knowledge is necessary for all teachers and impacts students in every classroom. Professional Development will be held on every third Wednesday during educators Common Planning time to ensure that the information that educators participating in the Title III Language program can share the necessary information to ensure that as a staff we are servicing our ELL population. The information will be shared across content areas, additionally scaffolds use and created will be shared with the entire staff. PD Schedule Title III teachers will receive on going PD’s throughout the school year. The PD’s will be held on February 28th , March 7, March 14, March 28. PD’s are being held by the school leaders and NYC DOE. The topics are stereotypes for teaching ELL’s in core content areas, Co-teaching models for ELL’s, Integrated ENL - Best Practices , Best Practices for ELL’s with disabilities. In addition, the ENL teacher will participate in the following PD sessions: Nuts and Bolts of ENL programs on 2/28/2018, all day, ELL Strategies and Supporting ELLs with Disabilities on 1/10/2017 by Affinity ELL Specialist (all day). The ENL teacher will also provide professional development to to all staff on Engaging ELLs in content specific activities through effective strategies. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration  topics to be covered 2018-19 SCEP-P 73  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities  name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities Begin description here: Through a parent survey conducted by the school, ELL parents would like to feel more included in their scholars education, which is difficult due to the language barrier. The ENL teacher will provide an ENL class once a month for scholars parents. The session will be two hours. The first hour will consist of helping parents navigate daily activities that are essential for their interactions with FDA II staff and daily functions, such as Pupil Path, DOE website, and college materials. These events will be held, October 6, November 3, December 1, and January 12, from 4:30 pm to 6:30 pm. Parents will be provided a choice of what seminar they would like to participate in advance via mailing that parents will send back with students. The second hour will consist of parents meeting with ENL and Title III teachers to discuss their child's progress in the program and their academic courses. Educators will walk parents through how to read and review transcripts, schedules, and other pertinent documents. All materials will be translated into parents preferred language of communication and provided in English. Additionally, parents will be invited for a gallery walk to survey their child's work, ask questions, develop relationships with other parents and educators. Event is meant to provide students with the opportunity to choose the work they are most proud of and present their materials to their community. This will take place at the end of every unit. Students will present their work for parents at the end of unit 4 (12/15) and unit 8 (5/18), events will take place from 4:30-6:30. All events will be hosted and supported by Title III participating teachers and Frederick Douglass Academy II personnel. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. ENL after school program "Academic English through ELA and Math Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) 12366  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials. 2018-19 SCEP-P 74  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 2018-19 SCEP-P 75  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 03 School Name Frederick Douglass Academy II Borough select one School Number 860 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal N/A Coach Koranteng Ofusu ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher N/A Teacher/Subject Area Jasmin Miles Teacher/Subject Area Vernette Boncamper Related-Service Provider Clifford Simmons Superintendent Ana Vasquez Assistant Principal Osei Owusu-Afriyie Coach NA School Counselor Raven Blye-Branch Parent N/A Parent Coordinator N/A Field Support Center Staff Member N/A Other (Name and Title) Donald Conyers C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 N/A 2 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] o 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 0 2018-19 SCEP-P 76 Total number of ELLs 360 ELLs as share of total student population (%) %  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 3 4 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 0 K N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 0 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 0 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 0 5 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 0 6 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 0 7 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 0 8 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 0 9 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 0 10 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 0 11 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 0 12 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? N/A 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Students are being assessed using baseline assessments created by the teacher, Castle Learning, mock regent exams and Performance Series. The data collected from these materials is reviewed during our weekly inquiry team meetings, in which data is reviewed and interpreted to make modifications across grade and subject areas. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? 2018-19 SCEP-P 77  Teachers participate in inquiry cycles that range across grades and subjects. Each subject area determines strategies that they will like to implement. At the end of each week, each grade team meets to review the data and next steps for the following week. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Students take Performance series three times within the school year ( September, January, and May). Additionally, students are given 4 performance task within the school year, 2 midterms, and 2 finals. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Data collected from the summative assessments is present to staff in the form of a professional development. Data is then reviewed by educators and as a staff determine the most appropriate next steps with the assistance and support of TESOL Certified educator. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The School Instructional Cabinet and Inquiry Team (which includes the ENL teacher) continually review data from both formal and informal assessments to identify students who are struggling or academically at risk. We then use the data to guide instruction for ELLs, bearing in mind the need for appropriate scaffolds and other types of differentiated instruction that will aid in comprehension. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? We look at the Data Analysis section of the ELL Data Analysis Tool (EDAT) to evaluate the performance of the ENL Program and the ELL students on the various assessments (NYSESLAT, ELA and Math). This information is important to see which students are at risk and for what reasons. It also informs us about the risk level of each ELL. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Information is shared during grade team and or department team meetings. b. TBE program. If applicable. Our freestanding ENL course for Entering and Emerging students meet twice a day Monday- Friday for 48 minutes each period. Students additionally are joined with an ENL Teacher in their content English course for 48 minutes (Monday- Friday). This will result in students receiving 10 standalone classes a week and Students are serviced in heterogeneous groups of mixed proficiency levels, of no more than two contiguous grades.Integrated ENL students are heterogeneously grouped by their grade cohorts. integrated ENL services for Transitioning, Expanding, and Commanding students are taught by an English content teacher and certified ESOL teacher for 48 minutes (Monday-Friday). c. DL program. If applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 78  N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? N/A 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. The ENL teacher, guidance counselors, and principal meet as a team at the beginning of each semester to ensure that each ELL is provided their services and they are put in the proper class period to ensure that student is on track for graduation. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Standalone Model- Entering and Emerging students is taught in English with supports in student home languages- French, Wolof, Spanish and Arabic. Students receive vocabulary words in their home language and English at the beginning of each unit and for lessons that introduce new vocabulary. Students are provided the same rigours curriculum as their peers that is modified and provides additional 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status We will use home language survey data to tailor assessments to their needs. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? 5A) SIFE: • Provide academic intervention services as an extension of the regular school program for both push-in and pull-out services. • Make an individualized student needs assessment. • Differentiate instruction in all areas. • Provide grade appropriate instructional support materials that include home language materials. • Communicate closely with the parents to monitor their children’s progress. Once SIFE students are identified, students progress is monitored specifically their scores on the NYSESLAT, ELA and Math assessments, and Regents scores. Support is provided in all content areas, and instruction is differentiated for varying literacy needs. Students are provided additional supports through Saturday ENL Literacy Program and after school office hours that allow educators to provide additional supports in the areas that ELLś need most. 5b. Newcomers: When a new student is registered in our school, we provide the following resources to facilitate the transition: • An informal student orientation. • Encourage student to participate in After School activities. • An informal assessment is provided to identify possible Academic Intervention programs. • Home school communication is an important factor for our newcomers. * Meeting with parent/ caregiver and child The newcomers who have been in the US schools for less than three years are provided with a variety of strategies and materials are used to aid their instruction: scaffolding, picture dictionaries, photo cards, realia, manipulative. 2018-19 SCEP-P 79  5C. Developing Students that are still developing their English language skills will be provided * necessary scaffolds * Bilingual Dictionaries in home languages and English ( Spanish, Arabic, Wolof, French) * Reading Comprehension strategies In Skills and seldom need scaffolding in the native language. However, we do continue to make available to them dictionaries, content picture dictionaries and glossaries in the native language (i.e. for French, Spanish, Wolof and Arabic speakers ). 5d. Long Term ELLs: Our plan for servicing Long Term ELLs is as follows: • To monitor their progress in all content areas and differentiate instruction for literacy needs. • To communicate closely with the parents and collaboratively monitor their children’s progress. 5e. Former ELLs: Former ELLs attend their mandated 90 minutes a week course students are provided in the area that students need most after reviewing data from EDAT, Inquiry Team, and assessments completed across content areas. All activities and additional support offered to our ELL population is focused on their acquisition of language proficiency and academic progress. All ELL Populations: Overall, each level is provided Skills to help them to * develop scaffolds for them selves (during state exams, independent work, or homework that is completed at home to help prepare them for real world activities and college) * Provided bilingual glossaries NYS aligned assessments, teacher created assessments *Decode text through the teaching of reading strategies, vocabulary strategies * Vocabulary development activities created by educator Interpersonal/ Emotional supports All students are encouraged to participate in extra curricular programs to further support them in language development and the development of their interpersonal skills. Each level is required to reflect on their language development three times a year so that educators, parents and students are making the necessary adjustments to support ELLs in the areas that educators have identified through EDAT, Inquiry team, summative and formative assessments, and NYS mandatory exams (regents, state exam for grades 6-8) Testing accommodation/ Class Assessments Each student is provided their testing accommodation that reflects the ELL compliance CR Part 154.2 and IEPś as needed. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? During the regular school day, students are assigned to small groups to work with the different service providers who address the academic skills and goals specified on their IEPs. They are also taught the general curriculum skills required for their grade level. Additionally, ELL teachers meet once a week with the SPED team to specifically discuss ELLś with IEPś. Data is reviewed 2018-19 SCEP-P 80  during the meetings that aligns to the IEP goal needs of the student and language development of the student. Students that exhibit difficulty in meeting their IEP goals and/or language development actions plans are created that can assist the student in meeting goals in both areas. Furthermore, the ENL teacher is present at IEP meetings with demonstration of learning and materials to support areas of concerns. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Students programs are flexible to ensure they have instructional supports that meet their needs. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Students participate in lunch and learn activities, student led conferences, office hours and individualized scholar success plans. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? Based on June 2017 Regents data Ellś in grades 9-12 will receive more support in math, science, and social studies. Based on the data collected over the course of the school year (2016-2017) Ell students need more support in social studies surrounding writing thematic essays/DBQś and the recall of specific content area material. We will ocntinue to provided ELA support to ELLś after school, however we will focus two days a week on supporting ELLś in the social studies specific content and practicing these skills over the course of the year. In the past the after school program has been focused mainly on reading and writing stratgies. This year we would like to dedicate ELLś that need more support in the STEM department will be provided additional support during an afterschool program that will be held on a different day, 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. N/A 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. ELL's are encouraged to participate in our ELO (Extended Learning Opportunities) programs that are offered during students lunch periods. Additionally, students are encouraged to participate in *Street squash * SAT Prep * Office Hours * School Sports and Clubs that are offered * Book Clubs All students are encouraged to participate in school programs that take place during, after, and outside of school hours . 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Students are engaged on a multitude of levels such as *Images * Videos *Music *Graphic organizers 2018-19 SCEP-P 81  *Sentence Starters *Peer Editing *Peer note taking * Glossaries (home language and English) * Extended Time on assignments and assessments 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. In our ENL program each class is supported with dual language dictionaries, glossaries, and directions for students depending on their level. The ENL teacher speaks French and has a working knowledge of Spanish and Wolof and is able to provide additional support to the students that need it. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? ENL Teacher and content teachers during weekly meeting discuss what supports are most appropriate and aligned to the age, content area, and alignment to skills that students must acquire to be successful on NYS state exams. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). FDA II shares a building, however schools do not share resources in regards to ENL services. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Prior to students beginning in September new ELL's attend *Meeting with the ENL Teacher and pre-selected ENL students *Meeting with ENL Teacher, Parent (s)/Caregiver (s) and student to discuss expectations and concerns of the student and their family. Additionally, provide additional supports to the family if necessary. *Student is encouraged to attend summer school with the ENL teacher , we insist that we have one certified ESOL teacher on staff during the summer to ensure that ELL's are provided accurate services and to assist with acclamation to a new school. * Students who are unable to attend summer school are provided a reading list of books that are chosen based on proficiency level, age, and grade ELL's that enroll in the middle of the school year * are encouraged to Meeting with the ENL Teacher and pre-selected ENL students *Meeting with ENL Teacher, Parent (s)/Caregiver (s) and student to discuss expectations and concerns of the student and their family. Additionally, provide additional supports to the family if necessary. *Provide additional support to the student in becoming acclimated to the new school environment 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? All high school students grades 9-12 are offered Spanish. 2018-19 SCEP-P 82  Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? N/A 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. The ELL teachers receive professional development through the DOE and Affinity. This year each ELL teacher will be required to attend ELL specific PD once a month. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Professional development will be held on every third Wednesday that target specifically ELL students. These PD's will focus on ELL scaffolds, reading strategies, time for teachers to co-plan and create lessons that target the specific needs of the ELL students within their classes. All information will be stored and shared with staff members on school Google Drive account to ensure continue use and access of materials. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Parent Contact: ENL teacher backpacks a notice home for parents to determine time slots that are available for meetings regarding their students language development language development assessments, and additional supports to assist the student in their development across content areas. Parents are additionally the ENL teachers call home to confirm time slots and make appointments for parents that have not schedule yet. During the phone the ENL teacher determines if the parent needs translation and interpretation services services whether it is language or American Sign Language. Pre-Meeting Structures for Transparency: We asked that their content area teachers attend as needed, particularly if a student needs additional assistance in the subject. To provide content specific information. Additionally, forms are sent to educators that ask them to explain and provide evidence of the standards that the ELL has met, areas of strength, and areas that need more attention and additional comments that may assist in developing the students knowledge in the content area. Students fill out a survey that they discuss their language development and the supports that they have been receiving and provide feedback of what they would like to work on, what additional supports they need. Furthermore students analyze their progress in their content area courses and share what they believe they need to work on. Meeting Structure: Translation services are provided over the phone or in person by a staff member, all documents are translated and provided in English. The ENL teacher and parent meet prior to the student joining to discuss the parents concerns if needed. Additionally, the parent completes a survey regarding their interpretation of their students language development. Additional supports or 2018-19 SCEP-P 83  questions they believe they need or would like in supporting their student. During the meeting it is a student lead discussion in which the student tells the parent and ENL teacher the interpretation of their progress and what they need as a student. After the parent reflects and discusses supports they have notice their child needs. The educator discusses the data and next steps that the ENL teacher and content teachers have discussed based upon Inquiry team, Instructional Cabinet, EDAT, formative and summative assessment data to determine the best supports for continued success linguistically and content for the student. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Through a parent survey conducted 2015-2016, ELL parents would like to feel more included in their scholars education, which is difficult due to the language barrier. The ENL teacher will provide an ENL class once a month for scholars parents. The session will be two hours. The first hour will consist of helping parents navigate daily activities that are essential for their interactions with FDA II staff and daily functions, such as Pupil Path, DOE website, college materials and reading their students transcripts. Additionally, parents will be invited for a gallery walk at the end of each semester to survey their child's work, ask questions, develop relationships with other parents and educators. Event is meant to provide students with the opportunity to choose the work they are most proud of and present their materials to their community. 2018-19 SCEP-P 84 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, N/A, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 SCEP-P 85  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Osei Owusu- Afriyie School DBN: Frederick Douglass Academy II Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) 03M860 Title Principal 9/1/17 9/1/17 9/1/17 9/1/17 9/1/17 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Ana Vasquez Other N/A Other N/A Other N/A Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) Owusu Afriyie Osei Koranteng Ofusu Clifford Simmons Raven Blye-Branch Vernette Boncamper N/A N/A N/A N/A Jasmine Miles Donald Conyers Ana Vasquez N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 SCEP-P 86  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 03m860 School Name: FrederickDouglass Academy II Superintendent: Donald Conyers The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this Raven Blye-Branch LAC Coordinator N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No N N/A N/A N/A Y N/A N/A N/A * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Information culled from ATS, emergency contact forms and student surveys will be used to maintain and update families' preferred language. Through phone calls, text messages and emails during the September, language preferences will be regularly updated. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2018-19 SCEP-P 87  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral English Spanish French Arabic 399 71 16 11 77.48 13.79 3.11 2.14 397 71 N/A 11 N/A N/A N/A 2.14 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. English and Spanish Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Back to School Night flyer and letter Friday, August 17th Parent Association Meeting letter of notification Usually the third Tuesday of each month with alternating morning (8-9am) / evening times (6-7am) Parent-Teacher Conference letter of notification and sign-up November 1 March 8-9 Curriculum Night letter of notification September 18th Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Via Kinvolved (which translates information to parents) and a mailed letter using Kinvolved translation if needed. Via Kinvolved (which translates information to parents) and a mailed letter using Kinvolved translation. Calls one week prior to the meeting and letters mailed 10 days before the meeting. Via Kinvolved (which translates information to parents) and a mailed letter using Kinvolved translation if needed. Via Kinvolved (which translates information to parents) and a mailed letter using Kinvolved translation if needed. 2018-19 SCEP-P 88  2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Back to School Night Friday, August 31st Curriculum Night September 28th Parent-Teacher Conferences November 8-9 March 8-9 Parent Association Meetings Usually the third Tuesday of each month with alternating morning (8-9am) / evening times (6-7am) interpretation service(s)? Via Kinvolved (which translates information to parents) and a mailed letter using Kinvolved translation if needed. Via Kinvolved (which translates information to parents) and a mailed letter using Kinvolved translation if needed. Reaching out to parents via Kinvolved and email asking not only if those parents identified as needing translations service Via Kinvolved (which translates information to parents) and a mailed letter using Kinvolved translation. Calls one week prior to the meeting and letters mailed 10 days prior to the meeting. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In the event of a school emergency, parents will be contacted via a software program named Kinvolved which translates messages into the language of the recipient via the preferred language listed in ATS. Parents will also be called by school staff. There will be at least one staff person identified that speaks all languages specified on their intake forms (Blue Card) and if one is not found for a specific language, a DOE translator will be used Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 will be distributed and discussed during September 5-6 staff meetings. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services 2018-19 SCEP-P 89  Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) All limited-English Proficient parents will receive a text via Kinvolved notifying them of their rights. The parents that do not have texting access will receive a call with the assistance of DOE translators notifying them of their rights. Translated letters will also be sent home to each family. In all scenarios, parents will get another chance to receive their correspondence via the language of their choice or change the language on file. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? The main source of feedback from limited-English-proficient parents has been through the use of a software called Kinvolved. This software is used to translate message as per the language of the parents choice taken from ATS. This is the most effective way of keeping up-to-date on issues such as language used as home. Whenever a Blue Card is updated, the information is then updated to ATS which immediately updates the language used to send out texts via Kinvolved. 2018-19 SCEP-P 90 
