 27Q137 School Name: M.S. 137 AMERICA'S SCHOOL OF HEROES Principal: LAURA MASTROGIOVANNI 2018-19 SCEP-FL 1  School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Section 4: SCEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information America’s School of Heroes 342700010000137 6-8 School Number (DBN): 27Q137 109-15 98th Street, Ozone Park, NY 11417 718-659-0471 718-659-4594 Phone Number: Laura Mastrogiovanni Fax: Email Address: Lmastro2@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 27 Superintendent’s Office Address: Laura Mastrogiovanni Karen Ciliotta IvonneChavez Jennifer Manfreand Matthew Linden N/A N/A N/A N/A District Information Mary Barton Superintendent: 82-01 Rockaway Blvd, Room 460, Ozone Park, NY 11417 mbarton@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-642-5800 Phone Number: 718-642-5705 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 3  Queens South FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Marlene Wilks Executive Director: 82-01 Rockaway Blvd, Ozone Park, NY 11416 mwilks@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-642-5800 Phone Number: 718-642-5705 Fax: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the SCEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Laura Mastrogiovanni Eric Schmitt IvonneChavez Maria Ruoff Jennifer Manfre Matthew Linden Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Chairperson UFT (Teacher) Member/ Chairperson UFT (Teacher) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 5  Name Ashley Nicholes Elisabeth D'Antonio Marilyn Fernandez DulceTapia Michelle Gerig Rebecca Ferrer ArijanieRamdin Luisa Valentin Signature (Blue Ink) Position and Constituent Group Represented Member/ Secretary UFT (Teacher) Member/ Treasurer UFT (Teacher) Member/ PTA (Parent) Member/ PTA (Parent) Member/ PTA (Parent) Member/ PTA (Parent) Member/ PTA (Parent) Member/ PTA(Parent) Member/ Member/ 2018-19 SCEP-FL 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) is a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. The process of developing and implementing the SCEP is aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding SCEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and SCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 7  In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement 2018-19 SCEP-FL 8  NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the SCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the SCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for SCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 9   Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 5: Build consensus around activities, strategies and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 6: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 7: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 10  Section 4: SCEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Our mission at America’s School of Heroes is to provide every student with the support to grow emotionally, intellectually, and socially into a contributing member of society. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Middle School 137 America’s School of Heroes is a large, diverse, urban middle school in Ozone Park, Queens. Our mission is to provide every student with the support to grow emotionally, intellectually, and socially into a contributing member of society. It is made up of professionals dedicated to instilling in each of our diverse learners the importance of education, lifelong learning, and college and career readiness. Middle School 137 continues to provide its staff with a wealth of professional learning designed to encourage continued growth, incorporate best practices across all classrooms, and fully address each component of the Framework for Great Schools. Our instructional program is designed to meet the needs and interests of our diverse learners by providing both enrichment and support based on areas of student challenge. We continue to offer Regents classes in Algebra, Geometry, and Living Environment. During the 2018-2019 school year, we will continue to participate in Algebra for All, providing an opportunity for all eighth grade students to take the Algebra Regents. Additionally, we anticipate providing students with an opportunity to take the American History Regents. M.S. 137 encourages all students to participate in specialized classes in art, band, chorus, keyboard, dance, and technology. Technology is integrated in all classrooms through the use of SMART Boards, iPads for teachers, and digital programs. During the 2017-2018 school year, approximately 400 students had one-to-one iPads, enabling them to access curriculum resources and utilize technology to engage in instruction through the School4One platform. During the 2018-2019 school year, it is our goal to have 50% of students with one-to-one iPads to further integrate technology in instruction. We have upgraded four technology labs, inclusive of our library media center. Students are also offered academic support. This includes Academic Intervention Support (AIS) services provided during the school day through small-group instruction, as well as after school and Saturday school programs. Our state-of-the-art media library is filled with resources for all our students and staff and contains a computer lab and teacher resource area. Our librarian/media specialist collaborates with students and staff to support literacy throughout the content areas and the use of varied instructional resources in order to meet the Common Core Learning Standards and instructional shifts. We also offer an advisory class in 6th and 7th grades to support social and emotional learning. We continue to prioritize two-way communication between the school and students’ families. PupilPath is utilized as an online gradebook through which parents and students are able to view grades on assignments and class attendance. Parents and students have the ability to email teachers directly through this system. In addition to this, fifty-five minutes each Tuesday afternoon is dedicated to family outreach. During this time, teachers conference with parents and guardians, make phone calls, respond to emails, and maintain their online gradebook so parents have access to current scores on assessments, projects, homework, and class participation. Teachers also utilize online platforms like Edmodo, Google Classroom, and Learning Management Systems to communicate with students and 2018-19 SCEP-FL 11  parents, as well as upload course related materials. In addition, during the 2017-2018 school year, teachers implemented a school Twitter account to celebrate student achievements and to keep all stakeholders within the entire school community connected. During the 2018-2019 school year, teachers will be encouraged to utilize Twitter as a platform to foster a sense of community. We will continue to implement student-led conferences which provided opportunities for students to present their work to their parents and explain areas where they are doing well and areas where they have set goals to improve further. During the 2015-2016 school year, we were selected as a pilot middle school for the Virtual Enterprise Junior Venture (VEJV), one of three middle schools from across the city that participated in this prestigious program. We are currently in our fourth year as part of this program. VEJV simulates a real-world business that is created and operated by students. One of our classrooms was transformed into an office environment and outfitted with desks and cubicles for each student along with a conference table and flexible meeting spaces. Through this program, students assume all business roles, including that of the CEO, Administration, Human Resources, Accounting and Finance, and Marketing and Graphic Design. This program also includes an after-school component where students have the opportunity to further develop their knowledge of programs such as Adobe Photoshop, Apple iMovie and Wix.com. The program culminates in a trade show where students set up a booth and promote their business along with other VEJV companies from around the world. We are proud to continue the VEJV program this year. We have implemented a variety of after-school programs to support the diverse social and academic interests and needs of our students. For the fifth year in a row, we have partnered with Millennium Development. This program enhances the community by cultivating and challenging the minds of today’s youth, empowering families, encouraging and supporting the well-being of active adults, and advancing their participation in all aspects of community life. This is an outside program that runs from 2:30 pm to 5:30 pm, Monday through Friday. Students receive assistance with their homework and then have an opportunity to engage in extracurricular activities of their choice. These activities include dance, drama, basketball, technology, videography, robotics, archery, and bocce ball, among others. We have also implemented additional academic after-school programs to support students in ELA, math, science, and ENL. Students are provided with additional preparation for the Regents exams with after school programs that take place throughout the week and on Saturdays throughout the year. Additionally, students who are interested in taking the Specialized High School Admissions Test are invited to participate in a program that helps them to prepare for this exam. To support student participation in the school community, we continue to provide students with the opportunity to participate in our Student Government Organization (SGO). Elections for executive board positions are held each fall. The board meets with administration and their peers to lead grade activities and build ties with the community. We anticipate our continued participation in school wide events and look forward to implementing additional ideas from our SGO representatives who are elected each Fall. To further promote a supportive environment for our students, we continue to refine our instructional program and implement additional social and emotional programs with the support of grants. We continue to provide an advisory class for all 6th and 7th grade students. The focus of this class is conflict resolution, goal setting, and critical thinking. Additionally, we were chosen as a recipient of the School Wellness Works Grant in order to influence and inform teachers, staff, students, and families about the measures our school is taking to improve health and wellness and ensure the academic success of its students. Through this grant, we formed a School Wellness Council (SWC) as a way 2018-19 SCEP-FL 12  to guarantee that New York City school wellness policies are implemented and refined. In the past, this grant allowed us to have a visiting poet/motivational speaker work with our 7th grade students. This year, the School Wellness Council worked to promote community mental and physical wellness by inviting parents and students to participate in free yoga sessions at our school. To further support our students' social and emotional needs, we have a CCNS (Catholic Charities Neighborhood Services) Wellness Center, which provides counseling in support of our guidance department. During the 2018-2019 school year, we have also partnered with Wediko Children’s Services and 100 Schools Project to expand our Wellness Center. Wediko’s School-Based Program provides direct clinical services, program consultation, and professional development to students and staff. Wediko helps children and families with social, emotional, and academic challenges walk the path to fulfilling, productive futures. Additionally, in consultation with the New York City Department of Education and the Department of Health and Mental Hygiene, the 100 Schools Project works to make sure New York City’s teachers, guidance counselors, and administrators are better prepared to identify students who are grappling with social and emotional issues so they can get the help they need. The 100 Schools Project gives school staff support and professional learning. We continue to sponsor an annual Career Day where representatives from the local community and the students’ families present information about their careers. We have applied for and received several other grants. We have utilized Title 1, Title 3, and RESO A funding to update our three technology labs and add a new computer lab in our library, as well as purchase laptops for teachers, and iPads for student use. We utilize the School 4 One platform to share resources among students and teachers to effectively support the use of technology in all content areas. In addition to our Connected Education iPad initiative, we started two exciting initiatives during the 2017-2018 school year. We opened a dual language program beginning with our incoming 6th grade class. As part of this program, one class received 50% of their math and science instruction in Spanish and 50% of their math and science instruction in English. The goal of this program is to support full academic literacy in both the students' home language and English. During the 2018-2019 school, this program has expanded to include one class in grade six and one class in grade seven. In addition to this, during the 2017-2018 school year we were a Host School in the Learning Partners Program. We worked with two other schools to develop and refine promising practices in the areas of curriculum development and teacher collaboration. The 2018-2019 school year will be our second year as a Host School in the Learning Partners Program. Our key area of focus for the 2018-2019 school year is Rigorous Instruction supported by the use of technology. While we have continued to make progress on the State ELA and Math assessments and the NYSESLAT exam, we recognize that greater progress can be made by focusing on high-quality instruction in all classrooms, carefully designed assessments, and analyzing data to provide focused support in areas of challenge. This includes providing students with the social and emotional support needed to successfully navigate their middle school years. We are continuing to revise and refine our curriculum for all subjects to support greater alignment between instruction and the Common Core Learning Standards. During the 2018-2019 school year, training for staff will be provided with professional development for Next Generation Standards for ELA, math and science. We look forward to implementing further professional learning opportunities and supporting our teachers with high-quality feedback and opportunities to view best practices to support these next steps. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 13  English language learners comprise approximately 14% of our student population. These students represent diverse backgrounds and speak a variety of languages, including Spanish, Arabic, Dutch, Polish, Bengali, Urdu, Punjabi, and Hindi. An analysis of the NYSESLAT (New York State English as a Second Language Achievement Test) modality report has revealed that reading and writing remains a greater area of challenge than listening and speaking for a majority of these students. According to our 2016- 2017 School Quality Snapshot, we are rated "Good" for Closing the Achievement Gap for ELLs in ELA, and rated "Fair" in Math. The 2017 June Instructional Report for the New York State ELA exam revealed that standards relating to word meaning, nuance, and utilizing context clues are areas of challenge for our ENL students. Students with disabilities comprise approximately 15% of our student population. According to our 2016- 2017 School Quality Snapshot, we are rated "Excellent" for Closing the Achievement Gap for Students with Disabilities in ELA, and rated "Fair" in Math. The 2017 June Instructional Report for the New York State ELA exam revealed that overall, standards relating to "Key Ideas and Details" are an area of challenge for this group of students. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. The elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which we have made the most progress over the past year is Rigorous Instruction and Collaborative Teachers. To enhance collaboration between staff members, we have continued to implement and refine Teaching and Learning Community Planning (TLCP). Teams meet a minimum of three times each week, inclusive of Monday’s professional learning time. During these meetings, teachers create and refine lesson plans and assessments, modify curriculum to support diverse learners, analyze resulting student work, and share best practices for instruction. We have also implemented vertical teacher teams periodically during Monday professional learning time so that teachers from the same department can discuss trends across grade levels, instructional strategies and routines that have been successful in earlier grades, and areas of the curriculum where students struggle with foundational skills. An intervisitation schedule is distributed to teachers each week, inviting them to visit the classrooms of our Master Teachers, Peer Collaborate Teachers, and Model Teachers to observe best practices and a variety of instructional routines that support student engagement, effective questioning and discussion, and the use of assessment in instruction. This year, we were a Learning Partners Program Host School and worked with one school from District 27 and one school from District 21 to highlight best practices and systems relating to our work in these elements, specifically how we established and refined systems for common planning and ongoing curriculum review and revision. We look forward to continuing this work with our Learning Partners Triad during the 2018-2019 school year. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 14  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 27Q137 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 1890 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language YES Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 82 85 32 46 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 124 119 31 10 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 88.0% % Attendance Rate 80.6% % Reduced Lunch 9.7% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 3.4% 33.7% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 2.4% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 13.24 0% 6% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 53.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No No Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities YES YES YES NO YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS YES YES NO NO YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) YES YES N/A YES YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 185 196 92.9% 7.9% 15.7% 5.4% 55.0% 3.5% 10 23% 8.6 37.3% 44% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Yes No YES YES N/A NO YES YES NO N/A NO YES YES YES N/A YES YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 15  Economically Disadvantaged N/A ALL STUDENTS N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 16  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed X X X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. On our last Quality Review, we received a rating of Well Developed on Indicators 1.1 (Curriculum), and 2.2 (Assessment) and a rating of Proficient on Indicator 1.2 (Pedagogy). These indicators represent the instructional core. Our report highlighted our strengths relative to rigorous instruction, particularly our curriculum’s alignment to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS), the CCLS Instructional Shifts, and our plan for assessing and monitoring student learning. Similarly, on our 2017 Framework for Great Schools Report we received a rating of “Excellent” for Rigorous Instruction. To further support rigorous instruction across all classrooms and content areas, we have continued to refine our curriculum to meet the requirements of the Common Core Learning Standards and the needs of our students as identified through several assessments, including the New York State ELA, Math, and Science exams and assessments developed by teacher teams. We have identified supplemental resources and lessons that are required to address gaps in student understanding and have included these on our revised curriculum maps. This includes resources from EngageNY and Newsela. Teachers across the school community work in teams to develop and refine common assessments and tasks, and the resulting student work is analyzed to inform instruction and curriculum modifications. This inquiry work is supported by the Middle School 137 Cycle of Inquiry, which was developed in collaboration with administration and teacher representatives, and presented to the staff during professional learning. Evidence of teachers’ continued work to refine the curriculum and identify scaffolds and supplemental resources to support all learners is maintained in a binder and digital folder for each Teaching and Learning Community Team and includes sign-in sheets, minutes from team meetings, reflections, and samples of work products created and analyzed during team 2018-19 SCEP-FL 17  meetings. Administration meets with teams on an ongoing basis to support inquiry work and build trust and collaboration throughout the school community. Through this, it is our aim to communicate high standards in all classrooms and support student engagement in activities that promote critical thinking. Our students have continued to make progress on the New York State ELA, Math, and Science exams. On our most recent state report card (2016-2017), we made Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in seven of nine accountability groups in ELA and all accountability groups in Science. This year for the first time, each of our 8th grade students took the Algebra I Regents. On the January and June 2018 Algebra I Regents, out of 646 students tested, 11% scored between 85 and 100 and 58% scored between 65 and 84. 34% of students scored between a 78 and 100 on the the Alegbra 1 Regents, representing the revised range for levels 3 and 4. On the 2018 June Living Environment Regents, 55% scored between 85 and 100, 44% scored between 65 and 84, and 1% scored between 55 and 64. On the 2018 Geometry Regents, out of 58 students tested 33% scored between an 85 and 100 and 66% scored between a 65 and 84. For the 2018-2019 school year, we are continuing to participate in the Algebra for All program with the goal of every eighth grade student taking the Algebra I Regents again in June 2019. Because of this, we have identified math as a priority need area. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all teachers will design cognitively challenging lessons that support all students and subgroups in meeting state algebra and/or 8th grade math standards as evidenced by 75% of 8th grade students increasing their scores on quarterly departmental assessments aligned to the Regents Algebra exam and/or NYS Math assessment. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 18  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff)  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Research-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Mathematics teachers will participate in professional learning to build a shared understanding of the expectations of the Common Core Learning Standards for Algebra by unwrapping the standards and understanding the progressions and mathematical reasoning and skills required in earlier grades to support student understanding when they take Algebra. Teachers will analyze previous Regents exams and analysis data available to understand question types, vocabulary, and areas where students have struggled in the past. This information will be utilized to design instructional activities and assessments. Working in teams and in collaboration with coaches, teachers will create departmental assessments using Regents-aligned questions. These will be created in IO Assessments, which will allow teachers to collect data indicating how students perform on each question and standard, as well as trends across the grade, classes, and subgroups. Teachers will utilize the data collected from IO Assessments analysis reports to begin the cycle of inquiry by planning follow-up lessons, collecting data, and analyzing evidence of students progress. Math Teachers Sept 2018-June 2019 Teachers, Coaches, Administration Math Teachers Sept 2018-June 2019 Teachers, Coaches Math Teacher Teams Math Teachers Monthly Weekly Math Teachers, Coaches, Administration Math Teachers, Coaches, Administration Teachers will work in teams to create weekly review assignments to ensure that previously taught content is reinforced throughout the school year. Teacher Teams Weekly Teachers, Coaches, Administration Teachers teams will continue to utilize the results from formative and summative assessments and utilize the cycle of inquiry to determine desired student outcomes, identify priority need areas, and facilitate improvement of pedagogy. Teacher Teams Weekly Teachers, Coaches, Administration Master Teachers and Model Teachers will model effective strategies, intervisit colleagues, and engage in feedback conversations with pedagogues to improve overall teacher practice. Coaches/ Teachers Weekly Teachers, Coaches, Administration 2018-19 SCEP-FL 19  To foster trust and collaboration, teachers will continue to implement school-wide intervisitations to encourage the sharing of ideas. All teachers Weekly Teachers, Coaches, Administration Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English Language Learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). . . . ENL Saturday Academy and Small-Group Instruction (SGI) programs have been created to support student progress through reading, writing, listening, and speaking activities with an emphasis on providing scaffolds to build conceptual understanding, academic skills, and language development. English language learners and students in high-need subgroups Sept 2018-June 2019 Teachers, Administration Teachers of all high-need student subgroups will collaborate to assess the effectiveness of the curriculum and instructional strategies, make appropriate adjustments, and identify additional scaffolds and supplements to meet the needs of all students. Teachers of ELLs and Students with Disabilities Ongoing during the year Coaches, Administration, Teachers Master Teachers, Peer Collaborative Teachers and Model Teachers will support teachers by modeling and providing constructive feedback on the use of formative assessment techniques, as well as engagement and differentiation strategies for specific subgroups. Coaches, Teachers Weekly Coaches, Teachers For all high-need student subgroups, particularly English Language Learners, teachers will familiarize students with the domain-specific vocabulary that aligns with the Common Core Algebra Regents. Each unit of instruction Teachers, Administration Teachers of English language learners and students in high-need subgroups. To develop trust, native language support and additional arts programs will be provided through ongoing partnerships with Story Studio and Studio in a School to celebrate cultural diversity. English language learners October 2018 – June 2019 Teachers, Story Studio Liaison, Administration The Specific Considerations for Teachers of English Language Learners and Students with Disabilities will be utilized as a resource to support teachers in meeting the needs of student subgroups. Engaging families and supporting their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and the Common Core in order to support their children at home. To support transparency and trust, curriculum and instructional resources will be shared with parents during workshops along with strategies to support learning at home. English language learners and students in high-need subgroups . Ongoing throughout the year Science Teachers, Administration . . Parents Monthly Coaches, Administration, Parent Coordinator 2018-19 SCEP-FL 20  Teachers will utilize the designated parent-engagement time on Tuesday afternoons to communicate with parents, addressing aspects of student work habits and progress made as determined by ongoing assessment. Translation support will be provided. Parents, Teachers To continue a culture of transparency and trust, parents will have access to all student grades via Pupil Path, an online grading system, and be able to communicate with their child’s teachers and administration via e-mail. Parents Daily 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Once a week Teachers, Administration, Parent Coordinator Teachers, Administration, Parent Coordinator How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent meetings will be facilitated by teachers, coaches, and administration to introduce the curriculum, explain how students are being assessed, and share areas of celebration and next steps. Resources that students can utilize at home, such as Khan Academy, will be shared with parents. The Common Core standards addressed will be shared with parents along with examples of assignments that align to these standards. These will occur a minimum of once per quarter. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  New York State Algebra Regents from previous years will be analyzed to ensure alignment between assessments, standards, and curriculum. This work will occur during Teacher Team Common Planning and during Data Inquiry Team meetings (teacher and supervisor per session).  The NYSESLAT Modality Report will be analyzed to identify specific modalities where English language learners require the greatest support in the classroom.  The Danielson 2013 Framework and Advance Specific Considerations for Teachers of English Language Learners and Students with Disabilities will be utilized by teachers as a resource during planning.  Resources for instruction will include NYCDOE supporting documents, glossaries, and resources provided by EngageNY  Master Teachers, Peer Collaborative Teachers and Model Teachers will plan with teachers and model best practices to support effective instruction.  Administration, Master Teachers, Peer Collaborative Teachers and Model Teachers will plan and facilitate professional learning. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Title I 1003(a) Title III X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding X X C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring 2018-19 SCEP-FL 21  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, a minimum of 60% of 8th grade students will have demonstrated an increase in score on Regents and/or 8th grade math-aligned assessments from the baseline assessment to the benchmark assessment. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Teacher teams, in collaboration with coaches and administration, will develop, administer, and analyze the data resulting from assessments created from released-Regents questions and aligned to current units of study. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 22  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. X X X X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? According to the 2017-2018 School Survey, 90% of parents, teachers and students responded positively when answering questions aligned to Social-Emotional aspects of the school community. In order to create a supportive environment that meets the social, emotional, and academic needs of our students, we have identified practices and programs that create a culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged. Across our school community, we have worked to enhance collaboration between teachers in order to promote a more supportive, challenging environment for all students. We have adjusted our school program to provide teachers of the same subject and grade level with two common planning periods, which has been identified as a TLCP (Teaching and Learning Community Planning). Over the years, we have worked to refine the work of our teacher teams by supporting teachers in developing protocols for their meetings and norming how evidence of the team’s work is gathered and analyzed to more effectively address priority needs, including social-emotional aspects of the school community. Administration provides feedback to teams of teachers on an ongoing basis and frequently visits team meetings. This has supported a coherent set of instructional practices across classrooms that address our school-wide instructional focus and challenges students to take active roles in their own learning. Students also maintain portfolios to showcase their best work, and bulletin boards are utilized to celebrate both high-quality student work and instances where students have demonstrated improvement in effort and 2018-19 SCEP-FL 23  work habits. For the 2018-2019 school year, we are continuing to implement an advisory class for sixth and seventh graders that focuses on conflict resolution, goal setting, critical thinking, and collaboration. To further nurture a supportive environment for all students, we applied for and were awarded a School Wellness Works Grant to help us address the social and emotional needs of our students. As part of our grant, a visiting yoga instruction came to foster parent and engagement through small-group workshops. We plan to build on this work during the 2018-2019 school year. We host an annual Career Day where professionals from a variety of fields are invited to come and speak to our students and build a sense of excitement about college and careers. We also hold an annual “Respect for All Week” with poster contests, assemblies from our guidance counselors and deans, and classroom assignments related to this theme. This work contributed to our rating of Well Developed on Quality Review Indicator 3.4 (Establishing a Culture for Learning). Our greatest strengths relative to creating a supportive environment is the level of collaboration between teachers to plan and implement programs that address the varied social and emotional needs and interests of our students as well as the variety of programs that take place each year to ensure that students are challenged and feel included in our school community. Each year, we implement several programs, including a school musical and a multicultural extravaganza that highlights music and dances that represent the diverse cultures of our school community. For the second year our school has participated in a citywide school initiative, College Access for All, that allowed our students the opportunity to gain exposure to and visit various colleges and universities in our surrounding areas. Additionally, our Student Government Organization collaborates with teachers and administrators to plan school events. During the 2017-2018 school year, we started a dual language program to support full academic literacy in both Spanish and English. This program will expand to include a class in both sixth and seventh grade during the 2018-2019 school year. For the 2018-2019 school year, we have identified a reduction in principal suspensions as a priority need area. Minimizing the number of suspensions while supporting appropriate behavior will help to establish an appropriate learning environment for all students, ensure that students feel safe in their school, and allow students to focus on their academic, social, and emotional growth. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools –Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all teachers, student support specialists, and guidance counselors will implement and embed social-emotional learning and growth mindset principles throughout the curriculum and interventions to improve students’ academic and behavioral outcomes resulting in a 5% decrease in principal suspensions and other OORS reporting associated with mental wellness as measured from 2017-2018 to 2018-2019. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 24  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Research-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Student suspensions will be monitored on a biweekly basis, identifying the type of infraction and location of infraction. Students who have previously received principal and/or superintendent suspensions will have follow-up meetings with the Student Support Provider (dean) or guidance counselor. Administration will utilize data relating to the location of incidents and increase monitoring at key times throughout the day, such as passing, lunch, or dismissal. Data gathered from our Safe Spaces liaison will be utilized to support this work. All teachers, administration, deans, guidance counselors and other school personnel will read and discuss "Mindsets in the Classroom," a professional development book that presents strategies to build a growth mindset school culture. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Principal and superintendent suspension data will be analyzed for English language learners, students with disabilities, and other high-need subgroups. Student Support Providers will implement targeting interventions and support based on individual student needs as identified from Individualized Education Plans, feedback from parents and teachers, and other available qualitative data sources. Students Students, Student Support Providers Throughout the year Student Support Providers Throughout the year Student Support Providers and guidance counselors Administration Throughout Administration the year All faculty Throughout the year Administration, Coaches Students, Student Support Providers Student Support Providers Throughout the year Student Support Providers Throughout the year Student Support Providers 2018-19 SCEP-FL 25  Engaging families and supporting their understanding of “Supportive Environment” in order to support their children at home. The Citywide Behavioral Expectations to Support Student Learning will be shared with parents during open school night and Parent Teacher Association meetings. The School Leadership Team will review progress toward meeting this goal. Parents Sept 2017 Administration, Parent Coordinator School Leadership Team Throughout the year School Leadership Team 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Student Support Providers and guidance counselors will facilitate workshops for parents quarterly to discuss issues relating to student emotional and social health. Administration will share the Citywide Behavioral Expectations to Support Student Learning will be shared with parents during open school night and Parent Teacher Association meetings. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. - Master Teachers, Peer Collaborative Teachers, and Model Teachers will be utilized to facilitate classroom intervisitations and conduct peer feedback sessions focusing on Domain 2: The Classroom Environment. Specifically, strategies to support an environment of respect and rapport and appropriate behavior will be shared with an emphasis on utilizing positive behavior interventions. - Student Support Providers will support teachers in maintaining a positive learning environment. - Teachers, Student Support Providers, guidance counselors, and administration will monitor hallways and the areas surrounding the school during passing, intake, and dismissal. - The Danielson 2013 Framework and Advance Specific Considerations for Teachers of English Language Learners and Students with Disabilities will be utilized by teachers as a resource during planning. - Advance will be utilized to monitor teachers’ performance in component 2d across formal and informal classroom observations. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA P/F Set-aside 21st Century X C4E 2018-19 SCEP-FL 26  Title I 1003(a) Title III PTA Funded SIG Grant School Achievement X Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will be a 5% decrease in principal’s suspensions and other OORS reporting associated with mental wellness as measured from the same time frame in 2017-2018. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The number of principal suspensions will be tracked using data entered through the Online Occurrence and Reporting System (OORS). Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 27  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by SOP(s) Addressed X X X X using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Over the past three years, we have worked to refine the practices of our teacher teams, refocusing their work on the inquiry process and utilizing information revealed from this inquiry to refine our curriculum and instructional practices and inform professional learning. According to the 2017-2018 school survey, 100% teachers agree and strongly agree with the statement, "teachers talk with one another about instruction." We have developed a rubric through which teacher team work is viewed and have created supporting documents to promote a clear understanding of the inquiry process. We continue to utilize the Middle School 137 Cycle of Inquiry and accompanying graphic organizer to guide teachers through this work. Administration and coaches visit teacher teams to provide guidance and feedback. As a result of this work, Quality Indicator 4.2, Collaborative Teachers, was identified as an Area of Celebration on our most recent Quality Review. Across our school community, we have worked to foster a culture of collaboration and sharing between teachers. As part of this work, a weekly intervisitation schedule is provided to all staff members, inviting them to visit and observe promising practices implemented by Master Teachers, Model Teachers, and teacher volunteers. Teachers across grades and content areas visit the classrooms of this team and engage in feedback conversations that demonstrate a high level of trust and commitment amongst our staff. As indicated on the 2017-2018 School Survey, 96% of our teachers agree 2018-19 SCEP-FL 28  and strongly agree with the statement, "that at their school the principal, teachers, and staff collaborate to make the school run effectively.” Our greatest strengths relative to collaboration between teachers are the systems we have implemented to distribute leadership and support effective communication amongst teachers and between teachers and administration. Common planning time has been programmed into all teachers’ schedules, enabling teachers to meet in teams a minimum of three times each week. During Monday’s professional learning time, we also incorporate vertical team meetings to ensure that teachers of the same content areas but different grades communicate areas where students are struggling in higher grades and how these can be addressed earlier, as well as specific instructional strategies that have been effective in earlier grades and can be refined in the upper grades. We have also created a School Development Committee consisting of administration, coaches, and teachers of all content areas to assess professional learning needs, develop a professional learning calendar, and identify specific staff members who will facilitate sessions. A review of our June Instructional Report for the most recent ELA and Math exams has indicated that we are currently performing above the city average for the writing standards assessed on the New York State ELA exam. We credit much of this success with the highly effective collaborative practices of our teacher teams. We feel, however, that ELA is an area where we can demonstrate further growth by further supporting digital collaboration, lesson sharing, and data analysis. During the 2018-2019 school year, we are also continuing to implement the hallmarks of advanced literacy to support student achievement in literacy. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teacher teams will become proficient in applying the hallmarks of Advanced Literacy instruction as evidenced by 75% of 6th grade students increasing their scores on quarterly departmental assessments aligned to the NYS ELA Exam. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 29  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Research-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. . . . Teachers will work in teams to analyze the baseline assessment results and identify trends to determine areas of strength and challenge. Teachers will utilize this information to begin the cycle of inquiry to plan instruction and monitor student progress. Peer Collaborative Teachers and administration will provide professional learning on the Hallmarks of Advanced Literacy and implementing the necessary shifts in teacher practice. Working in teams and in collaboration with coaches, teachers will create departmental assessments using questions aligned to the New York State ELA exam. These will be created in IO Assessment, which will allow teachers to collect data indicating how students perform on each question and standard, as well as trends across the grade, classes, and subgroups. ELA Teacher Teams Monthly Teacher team facilitators, coaches, administration Teachers/ Coaches ELA Teacher Teams September 2018 - June 2019 Quarterly Coaches and administration ELA Teachers, Coaches, Administration Teachers will utilize the data collected from IO Assessmentanalysis reports to begin the cycle of inquiry by planning follow-up lessons, collecting data, and analyzing evidence of student progress. ELA Teacher Teams Monthly ELA Teachers, Coaches, Administration Teachers teams will continue to utilize the results from formative and summative assessments and utilize the cycle of inquiry to determine desired student outcomes, identify priority need areas, and facilitate improvement of pedagogy. Master Teachers, Peer Collaborative Teachers, and Model Teachers will model effective strategies, intervisit colleagues, and engage in feedback conversations with pedagogues to improve overall teacher practice. Professional learning on the Next Generation Standards will be provided throughout the school year to build teachers' understanding of these new standards, how they impact teaching and learning, and necessary shifts in curriculum and pedagogy. To foster trust and collaboration, teachers will continue to implement school-wide intervisitations to encourage the sharing of ideas. ELA Teacher Teams Weekly Teachers, Coaches, Administration Coaches/ Teachers Weekly Teachers, Coaches, Administration Teachers Throughout the school year Administration, Coaches All Teachers Weekly Teachers, Coaches, Administration 2018-19 SCEP-FL 30  Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., over-age/under-credited, SIFE, STH). . . . Assessments will be analyzed and trends identified for all high-need subgroups to determine areas of strength and challenge. Supporting documents and other scaffolds will be created and implemented to support English language learners and students with disabilities, as determined by the ongoing analysis of trends for subgroups. TLCP teams will utilize formative and summative assessment data in writing, particularly noting specific trends in subgroups on performance tasks and unit exams, to engage in the Middle School 137 Cycle of Inquiry. This will be used to determine desired student outcomes, identify priority need areas, and facilitate improvement of pedagogy. For all high-need students, particularly English Language Learners, teachers will familiarize students with the domain-specific and academic vocabulary that will support students in accessing complex texts and crafting evidence-based arguments. To support trust and collaboration, ENL and ICT Model Teachers will model best practices for assessment in the classroom. Peer Collaborative Teachers will support teachers by engaging in collaborative planning and facilitating professional learning. Teachers Teams/ Teachers of high-need subgroups Teacher Teams Teachers Teams/ Teachers of high-need subgroups Coaches and Model Teachers Specific Consideration for Teachers of English Language Learners and Students With Disabilities will be utilized as a resource to support teachers in meeting the needs of student subgroups. All teachers Ongoing throughout the year Strategies to promote teacher-parent collaborations to improve student achievement. . . To support transparency and trust, writing curriculum and instructional resources will be shared with parents during workshops along with the rubrics used to evaluate student writing and strategies to support learning at home. Teachers will utilize parent engagement time on Tuesday afternoons to communicate with parents, addressing positive aspects of student work habits and areas for improvement. Parents will have access to student grades via Pupil Path, an online grading system, and be able to communicate with their child’s teachers at their convenience. Parents Monthly Parents Weekly Parents Daily 3b – Parent and Family Engagement All teachers Ongoing Teachers, Administration Teachers, Administration during the year Ongoing throughout the year Ongoing throughout the year Teachers, Administration Ongoing throughout the year Teachers, Administration Weekly Teachers, Administration, Coaches Teachers, Administration . Coaches, Administration, Parent Coordinator Teachers, Administration, Parent Coordinator Teachers, Administration 2018-19 SCEP-FL 31  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Information relating to Collaborative Teachers will be shared with parents during Parent-Teacher Conferences and open-school nights with information being presented by administration and teachers. Each student's teachers will communicate with parents via PupilPath, which provides for two-way communication between teachers and families. Conversations will focus on student progress and strategies that can be implemented at home to support student success. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● The Looking at Student Work Protocol Forms and the Middle School 137 Cycle of Inquiry graphic organizer will be utilized to focus the work of teacher teams. Teacher team common planning has been included in teachers' programs two times each week with a third meeting occurring as part of professional learning time. ● Master Teachers, Peer Collaborative Teachers, and Model Teachers will support teachers in developing standards-aligned assessments and analyzing resulting student work. ● The Danielson 2013 Framework and Advance Specific Considerations for Teachers of English Language Learners and Students with Disabilities will be utilized by teachers as a resource during planning. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding X X C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, a minimum of 60% of 6th grade students will have demonstrated an increase in score on assessments aligned to the NYS ELA Exam from the baseline assessment to the second benchmark assessment. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Student results on departmental assessments will be analyzed for evidence of growth and to determine next steps for instruction. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 32  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). X X X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Effective school leadership is currently an area of celebration for our school community. The principal and administrative team develops a climate of inclusiveness, and inspires staff and students with a clear vision for student achievement. School leaders have key systems in place to support teacher development, including providing professional learning opportunities and meaningful feedback through the observation cycle and intervisitation program. School leaders and faculty currently use Advance and TeachBoost, a performance management platform, to engage teachers and administrators in an ongoing, evolving dialogue that fosters the development of effective educators and improved student outcomes. Teachers are able to view ratings and evidence for specific components of the Danielson Framework and administrators communicate ongoing feedback and suggestions for future development. We are also able to use this system to gain further insight on teachers’ areas of strength and challenge, and use this information to plan future professional development. Our school community prides itself on its distributive leadership model, and this was highlighted on our 2015-2016 NYC Quality Review Report. It was indicated in this document, “distributed leadership structures are embedded so that there is effective teacher leadership.” In addition, the report recognized the significant impact that effective teacher 2018-19 SCEP-FL 33  leadership has on student progress. It was stated, “Improvements in teacher practice and mastery of goals for groups of students is achieved through teacher team practices. Distributed leadership results in teachers playing an integral role in key decisions that affect student learning across the school.” Administrators work with a team of teachers to analyze Advance data to choose specific areas of practice to focus on through cycles of professional learning and intervisitation. In order to continue to build teacher capacity, we have identified Peer Collaborative Teachers and Model Teachers as part of our participation in the Learning Partners Program. Additionally, we plan on having two Master Teachers who will coordinate our teacher intervisitation program and liaise with administration and teachers to support the planning and facilitation of professional learning sessions for teachers. We will continue to utilize Google Docs and Drive to update our Teaching and Learning Community, which houses professional learning and curriculum resources. Over the past three years, we have focused on Danielson components in Domain 3: Instruction, and have noticed a significant impact on the quality of classroom instruction. This year, we look to provide additional professional learning and individualized support across these components to further support student achievement and progress. Based on the trends in observations, this is an area where we believe we can make further progress. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART– Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, school leadership will utilize Advance data from the Danielson Framework for Teaching to make informed decisions about professional learning and teacher leadership/mentoring that will result in 90% of teachers rated effective or highly effective in Danielson components comprising Domain 3, Instruction. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 34  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Research-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. . . . Administration will meet with Master Teachers, Peer Collaborative Teachers, and Model Teachers at the start of the 2018-2019 school year to discuss our school-wide instructional focus, Advance data from the 2017-2018 school year, and specific components of the Danielson Framework where additional growth can be made to support student progress. The School Development Committee (SDC) will meet in September to share feedback on professional learning from the prior school year and develop goals and additional areas to support professional learning during the 2018-2019 school year. This work will focus on providing differentiated professional learning where teachers will have the opportunity to select from different activities and sessions to support their professional growth. Teacher leaders will meet during their designated Teaching and Learning Community time and professional periods to plan weekly intervisitation schedules. These are designated periods where the teachers on the team will identify a specific intstructional strategy or routine that they will be implementing and invite staff members to visit their class to see the strategy modeled. Administration, Master Teachers, Peer Collaborative Teachers, Model Teachers School Development Committee Sept 2018 Administration, Coaches Sept 2018 Administration, Coaches Coaches and Model Teachers Ongoing throughout the school year Administration Administration will review Advance data following each observation cycle and reflective conversations with teachers to identify specific topics for professional learning. Administration, Teachers Administration will collaborate with teacher leaders to plan, facilitate, and evaluate the success of professional learning opportunities provided on Monday afternoons. Coaches, Model Teachers Administration Administration, Coaches Ongoing throughout the school year following each observation cycle Ongoing throughout the school year 2018-19 SCEP-FL 35  Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overaged/under-credited, SIFE, STH). . . . Teachers of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need subgroups are represented as Model Teachers. These teachers will model strategies for differentiation, scaffolding, and varied instructional strategies to support student engagement for all students. Model Teachers Administration, Coaches Ongoing throughout the school year Teacher Teams Ongoing Administration Teachers of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need subgroups will collaborate with teachers during common planning time to identify modifications that can be made to lessons to ensure that all lessons are appropriately challenging and support student progress. The Specific Considerations for Teachers of English Language Learners and Students with Disabilities will be utilized as a resource by teachers as well as by administration and coaches when developing professional learning sessions. Teachers throughout the school year Ongoing throughout the school year Administration, Coaches Strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement as a key level for school improvement . . . Parents will be informed of our school-wide instructional focus and school-wide instructional priorities during PTA meetings and parent workshops. Parents Teachers will utilize Tuesday's parent engagement time to share student progress with students' families and reinforce positive work habits that can be supported at home. Teachers will discuss the instructional strategies and routines that they are implementing in their classroom during Parent-Teacher Conferences and Open School Nights. Teachers, Parents Teachers, Parents Ongoing throughout the school year. Ongoing throughout the school year. Administration, Parent Coordinator Administration, Parent Coordinator Ongoing throughout the year Parent Coordinator, Administration 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. PupilPath will be utilized to support ongoing two-way communication between the school and students' families. Information relating to school goals, curriculum decisions, and progress will be shared at both School Leadership Team and Parent Teacher Association meetings. Additional parent meetings and workshops will be scheduled and facilitated by administration, teachers, and the Parent Coordinator. These will take place quarterly. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 36   Master Teachers, Peer Collaborative Teachers, and Model Teachers will collaborate during teacher team common planning to develop intervisitation schedules.  The Danielson 2013 Framework and Advance Specific Considerations for Teachers of English Language Learners and Students with Disabilities will be utilized by teachers as a resource during planning.  Teacher teams will collaborate during common planning time to discuss and modify instructional strategies presented during professional learning time. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding X X C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, all teachers will receive actionable feedback in each component of Domain 3 resulting in at least 75% of teachers receiving a rating of effective or highly effective in each component. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance will be reviewed throughout the school year to monitor progress toward meeting this goal. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 37  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. X X X X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our school community emphasizes the importance of strong family and community ties. We currently prioritize communication between the school and students’ families through student-led conferences (SLC). By the end of the 2017-2018 school year, we conducted SLCs at each of our Parent-Teacher Conferences and teachers scheduled additional conferences during Tuesday Parent-Engagement time. Due to the success of student led conferences this year, we agree that this contributed to strong family involvement. We believe a priority focus is to engage more parents through celebrations of student work, workshops, digital communication, and newsletters to get a higher participation rate in SLCs this school year. Our current systems in place for parent outreach and involvement have had a positive correlation with the results of the NYC 2017-2018 School Survey Report. 83% agree or strongly agree with the statement, “school staff regularly communicates with them about how families can help their child learn..” We also received a rating of Well Developed on our last Quality Review Report in Quality Indicator 3.4: School leaders consistently communicate high expectations to staff, students, and families, and provide supports to achieve those expectations. Part 2 – Annual Goal 2018-19 SCEP-FL 38  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teachers, administration, and the Parent Coordinator will continually engage parents through workshops, digital communication, and newsletters as evidenced by a minimum of 75% of parents participating in student-led conferences at least once throughout the 2018-2019 school year as documented on sign-in sheets. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 39  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Research-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. . . . Teachers will receive professional learning on systems to support effective student-led conferences, including student resources, tracking protocols, and digital logs. Student-Led Conference interest survey will be distributed to parents during the September parent-teacher conference. Teachers September Coaches/Administration Parents September Teachers A spreadsheet will be developed to track and utilize appointments. Conferences will be scheduled on Tuesdays as well as select Monday afternoons, Saturdays, and Parent-Teacher Conference Days. Teachers/ Coaches Ongoing Coaches/Administration Students will be invited to practice leading a conference during class time using prompts and referring to their work and portfolios. Teachers will reach out to parents who have not yet signed up to participate to determine alternate days when they would be available to meet. Students 1st Quarter Teachers Teachers Ongoing Teachers Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g. overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). . . . Prompts, guiding questions, sentence stems, and translations (when needed) will be provided to support English language learners. Translators will be identified and available for parents during these conferences. Students Ongoing Teachers Parents Ongoing Administration Strategies to promote stronger family and community ties and to increase parent involvement in support of improved student outcomes . . . The school community will communicate with students' families on an ongoing basis in their preferred language of communication Parents Ongoing Teachers/Coaches/ Administration 2018-19 SCEP-FL 40  and through multiple methods, including digitally via PupilPath and through School Messenger. School administration will share the results of student-led conferences with the School Leadership Team parents during PTA meetings and other workshops to provide input into how we can address key areas. SLT 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Administration 3rd Thursday of every month If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. We have a Catholic Charities Neighborhood Center that supports our guidance department. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Parents will be invited to attend student-led conferences on Monday afternoons, Tuesday afternoons, and at least two Saturdays depending on scheduling.  PupilPath will be utilized as a resource to support two-way communication between the school and students' families.  Translators will be utilized as necessary.  Our Parent Coordinator will remain in constant contact with parents to communicate upcoming events, workshops, and deadlines. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, teachers, administration, and the Parent Coordinator will continually engage parents through workshops, digital communication, and newsletters as evidenced by a minimum of 50% of parents participating in student-led conferences at least once. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. We will monitor participation in student-led conferences via sign-in sheets logged through a school-wide Google document that will be updated weekly by teachers and coaches. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 41  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Students are identified based on their performance level on the previous year’s state assessment, growth percentiles, classroom grades, and teacher recommendation. Students are identified based on their performance level on the previous year’s state assessment, growth percentiles, classroom grades, and teacher recommendation. Students are identified based on classroom grades and teacher recommendation. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Interactive writing, guided reading, guided writing, interactive web- based programs, vocabulary instruction, use of mentor texts in writing, NBC Learn, Newsela, and other digital resources. Modeled and interactive problem solving, mathematics vocabulary, discovery- based mathematics, graphic organizers, addressing prerequisite skills, NBC Learn, and other digital resources, Regents support for students after school Hands on inquiry, labs, use of scientific texts to build content knowledge, demonstrations, NBC Learn, and other digital resources, Regents support for students after school Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small group instruction, after-school programs, Saturday program During the school day, after-school program Small group instruction, after-school programs, Saturday program During the school day, after-school program Cooperative learning program, UA, Science Fair During the school day. Periodic off site events 2018-19 SCEP-FL 42 Social Studies Students are identified based on classroom grades and teacher recommendation. At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Students are identified based on their Individualized Education Plan and teacher recommendation. Interactive writing, rigorous non-fiction analysis, use of primary sources for forming and supporting arguments, NBC Learn, and other digital resources Behavioral Intervention Programs, at-risk counseling. Small group activities, small group instruction. During the school day. One to one, small group and individual sessions During the school day, after school programs. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 43  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) We currently have five students in temporary housing. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Students are invited to participate in after-school academic programs to support progress in ELA and math, as well as a Saturday academic program. They are also invited to participate in our Millennium after school program, which provides support with homework and recreational activities. Students in Regents classes are invited to participate in preparation classes after school and on Saturdays. For students interested in taking the Specialized High School Admissions Test, we offer preparation classes to familiarize students with format of the test and the types of questions that are asked. Students in temporary housing are also provided with school supplies, uniform polo shirts and school sweatshirts, and books. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 44  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 45  Section 8: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Administrative staff regularly recruits highly qualified teachers. These teachers are all licensed and assigned to teach in their certification area. Resumes are collected and reviewed throughout the year. As part of the interview process, candidates present a demo lesson that is observed by a hiring committee. Upon being hired, new teachers are assigned a building-based mentor and a “buddy teacher.” These staff members are used as instructional supports for the new teachers to assist in planning, understanding school procedures, and to address other questions as they arise. Mentoring interactions are logged using the NYCDOE Mentor Tracking System (MTS). They also receive ongoing professional learning through departmental study groups facilitated by assistant principals and coaches, as well as mentoring and professional learning through an outside consultant from Brienza Academic Advantage. Professional learning has focused on implementing the Common Core Learning Standards, the 2013 Danielson Framework for Effective Teaching, understanding the instructional shifts in Literacy and Math, Webb’s Depth of Knowledge, Hess’ Cognitive Rigor Matrix, and curriculum mapping. Additional supports are provided based on teachers’ individual strengths and areas of challenge. All teachers intervisit other classrooms and submit reflections on best practices. Teachers are assigned to teacher teams to analyze student work, share best practices, and align assignments and assessments with class data. Teacher teams meet a minimum of three times each week. Administration and the pupil personnel secretary work closely with the HR point person to ensure that HQT meet all required documentation and assessment deadlines. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). A School Development Committee consisting of administration, coaches, and teachers was formed and meets monthly to discuss building, departmental, and individual professional learning needs. Curriculum, observation results, feedback and conversations from teachers, and the school goals outlined in the CEP inform the choice of focus, topics, and delivery, as well as the personnel best suited to facilitate the professional learning sessions. During the 2017-2018 school year, professional learning topics included implementing the CCLS-aligned curriculum in all subject areas with a focus on strategies to engage all learners, including English language learners, Students with Disabilities, and other subgroups identified by analyzing the Framework for Great Schools Report and our New York 2018-19 SCEP-FL 46  State Report Card. Professional learning sessions were also developed to support our instructional focus for 2017-2018, which was supporting the acquisition of 21st century skills. For the 2018-2019 school year, we plan to continue implementing professional learning opportunities to develop a coherent set of instructional practices around our 2018-2019 school instructional focus: Teachers will encourage perseverance by creating and engaging students regularly in challenging academic tasks that require deep understanding of content and extended thinking. By modeling growth mindset principles, teachers and leaders will demonstrate the practices they foster in their students. To support this and ensure that professional learning sessions have a positive impact on student growth, we will continue to utilize IO Assessment to monitor student progress on standards across classroom assessments and disseminate data to the staff to support literacy across all content areas. Professional learning sessions will be developed to support teachers in implementing strategies to overcome areas of challenge demonstrated by students and to support an engaging and supportive classroom environment. School-based professional learning sessions are facilitated by administration, Master Teachers, Peer Collaborative Teachers, Model Teachers, and other staff members. This is supplemented by professional learning provided by outside consultants such as Brienza. Staff who attend district professional learning turnkey information to their colleagues in small-group meetings and during teacher team common planning. Feedback forms and staff interest surveys are utilized to inform future professional learning topics and delivery. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 47  Each year, teachers volunteer to serve as members of the Measures of Student Learning (MoSL) selection committee. This team receives training on the requirements of Advance and the selection of multiple assessment measures. The principal, assistant principals, testing coordinator, and coaches also serve on this committee. Options for measures of student learning are discussed; assessments are selected and then approved by the principal. These options are then recorded in Advance. For the 2017-2018 school year, assessments included Algebra, Geometry, and Living Environment Regents, the NYSESLAT exam, and the New York State Science Exam. Teachers receive ongoing professional development on MoSL selections and are aware of how the results of these assessments will be calculated in their ratings for the year. Teachers receive ongoing professional development on looking at student work and developing instructional strategies to address areas of challenge. This is conducted during Monday professional learning time, as well as during teacher team common planning to provide focus for the teams’ work of creating assessments and tasks, identifying multiple entry points to support diverse learners, and analyzing resources to meet student needs. Completed protocol forms are reviewed periodically by administration and the school’s main data inquiry team. Assessments are analyzed using IO Assessment and SchoolNet to identify standards that are areas of strength for students and those that are identified as areas of challenge. Assessment results are then communicated to all teachers along with specific strategies that can be utilized to address target standards. Progress on individual standards is monitored across assessments, and instruction is modified accordingly. Teachers participate in the development of departmental assessments and utilize the resulting the data to engage in the cycle of inquiry. This is supported by coaches and administration during team meetings and professional learning times. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (SCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) 5a, 5b, 5c, 5d N/A Title I Part A (Basic) Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Federal Federal 980,867 X 2018-19 SCEP-FL 48 Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 24,782 11,661,784 X X N/A N/A 5a, 5b, 5c, 5d, 5e N/A 5a, 5b, 5c, 5d, 5e 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/SCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not 2018-19 SCEP-FL 49  available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 50  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Middle School 137 America’s School of Heroes, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Middle School 137 America’s School of Heroes, will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 51  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 2018-19 SCEP-FL 52  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Elementary and Secondary (ESSA) Act; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Middle School 137 America's School of Heroes, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum 2018-19 SCEP-FL 53  Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Elementary and Secondary (ESSA) Act; Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 54  ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); 2018-19 SCEP-FL 55  ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 56  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): K 6 1 7 2 8 3 9 4 10 5 11 12 2018-19 SCEP-FL 57  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Begin description here: Middle School 137 first implemented a co-teaching program during the 2011-2012 school year, and we are continuing this model for the 2017-2018 school year. We have programmed six 6th grade co-teaching and/or push-in classes, six 7th grade co-teaching and/or push-in classes, and six 8th grade co-teaching and/or push-in classes, which include ICT and self-contained special education classes at each grade level. To address the needs of our students, most are placed by language proficiency level based on NYSESLAT/NYSITELL. To date there are 276 ELL students, including commanding, placed in these classes. There are 88 in Grade 6, 94 in Grade 7, and 94 in Grade 8. Out of the 276 ELL students, 41 currently are identified as SIFE (Students with Interrupted Formal Education), 145 are identified as Newcomers, and 10 are identified as Long-Term ELLs. We have 36 ELL students who have been receiving services for 4-6 years. We also have 51 ELL students who are also identified as Special Education. The NYSELAT levels of our ELL population indicate that more students are having difficulty with the reading and writing components of the test. In examining the school’s NYSESLAT and NYSITELL results, we have determined that 14 students out of 276 of the school ELL population is transitioning, 73 out of 276 is expanding, and 15 out of 276 are emerging, 89 out of 276 are entering and 85 out of 276 are commanding. We determined that students' reading and writing levels are lower than their speaking and listening levels. In order to address these results, we identified programs/strategies that would reinforce the weaker modalities and provide support and enrichment in listening and speaking in order to meet the demands of the more rigorous CCLS aligned NYSESLAT exam. Out of 165 ELL students who sat for the ELA exam, 33 scored at level 1, 13 scored at Level 2, 3 scored at Level 3 and 0 scored at Level 4 in Grade 6. In grade 7, 38 students scored at level 1, 20 scored at Level 2, 2 scored at Level 3 and 1 student scored at level 4. In Grade 8, 39 students scored at level 1, 16 scored at Level 2, 0 scored at Level 3 and 0 scored at level 4. Out of 195 ELL students who sat for the math exam, 36 students scored at level 1, 14 students scored at level 2, 8 students scored at level 3 and 1 student scored at level 4 in Grade 6. In Grade 7, 31 students scored at level 1, 19 students scored at level 2, 14 students scored at level 3, and 2 scored at level 4. In Grade 8, 46 students scored at level 1, 20 students scored at level 2, 2 students scored at level 3 and 2 students scored at level 4. We proudly acknowledge that MS 137 made our AYP for the 2014-2015 school year in ELA, Math and Science for our ENL subgroup on our state report card. We have not yet received our state report card for the 2015-2016 school year, however, we are now in the process of utilizing the AMAO Estimator Tool to determine the progress of our ELL population. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 58  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information As a result of this data analysis, our school goals for these areas concentrated on assessing our students: These goals also support our school-wide instructional focus: Teachers across disciplines will design and implement appropriate ongoing formative and summative assessment strategies to assess learning and provide students with substantive feedback that promotes academic progress. These are areas we plan to continue to address in our after-school ENL program as well as using the DOK and Hess's Cognitive Rigor Matrix to design rigorous tasks and high-level questioning to promote our students critical thinking skills and strengthen their proficiency levels. Our ELL students will be invited to attend our ENL Saturday Program. All ELL students in grade 6-8 will be invited, including students in all subgroups. This program will commence in November 2016 and run until May 2017 on Saturdays from 9:00-12:00 pm. for approximately 20 sessions. This program is exclusive to our ELL population. The four teachers working with the students are highly qualified and licensed in "ESL." There will be classes of approximately 25 students each. The materials that will be utilized are Go Math Enrichment activities and Math Coach Progress, Focused Reading - Student Guided Practice, Finish line for ELLs, Quickreads, leveled literacy book sets, and Language Power - Building Language Proficiency. Additionally, Imagine learning and Study Island online resources will continue to be utilized to support literacy, vocabulary, fluency. We plan on purchasing additional mini iPads and headsets to further support these programs as well have the PD provider retrain teachers using the program. Instruction will be delivered in English with the students’ native languages used as a support. We will also incorporate journaling activities and personal narratives to support the acquisition of artistic impression and academic vocabulary. Gates MacAntie and EngageNY assessments will be used as an assessment tool and will be administered at least three times over the course of the school year. Our ENL data coordinator and literacy coaches will plan curriculum and facilitate the implementation of the program. The ENL coordinator and the supervisor will act as a direct link to parents, regularly monitor attendance, and remain with students until all are dismissed. Student attendance is taken every Saturday and records are maintained by the ENL Coordinator and the parent Coordinator to contact parents to ensure regular attendance. Parents notifications are sent home in multiple languages. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 59  Part C: Professional Development Professional Development is ongoing throughout the year at MS 137 for ENL and content area teachers of our ELL students. The hours surpass the minimum requirement of 7.5 hours. After analyzing the NYSESLAT, NYSITELL, ELL periodic assessments and state assessment data, we determined that intensive professional development in data analysis of summative and formative assessments are vital in planning for differentiated instruction with multiple entry points for our ELLs to make progress. Our ENL coordinator and/or ENL assistant principal will continue to attend professional development through the Office of ELLs on topics such as the Common Core Learning Standards and turn-key to all teachers of ELLs. Professional Development workshops will be delivered to certified ELL teachers and content area teachers who work with our English Language Learners. It will be conducted by the ENL assistant principal, ENL coordinator and literacy coach. Workshops are scheduled and will continue to focus on differentiated instruction, inquiry team strategies and use of data. Workshops will be followed by a viewing of each teacher’s lesson followed by a discussion on how workshop information and strategies were introduced in the teacher’s classroom. The final session will serve as a summary and closure for the work covered with teachers. Professional Development Calendar: 100 Minutes Every Monday - School Year Calendar September/October - Certified ELL teachers, core subject area teachers of ELLs, coaches, administration -Analyzing and planning using the Bilingual Common Core Initiatives and CCLS -Analyzing NYSITELL Data/NYSESLAT Data - Building Vocabulary for ELLs-focus on strategies to improve their reading, writing, listening and speaking skills. Tiered vocabulary -Hess's Cognitive Rigor Matrix and DOK - Strategies to engage entering and emerging ELL students. - ELL Periodic Assessment - Teacher Team Common Planning -NEWSELA Leveled Texts November/December - Certified ELL teachers, core subject teachers of ELLs, coaches, administration - Teacher Team implementation of differentiated Instruction/Open-Ended Questions/Depth of Knowledge - Using Fountas and Pinnell results to support differentiation and utilizing appropriate resources. -Scaffolding techniques from the Bilingual Common Core Initiatives for CCLS Performance Tasks. -Close Readings for Comprehension & Language Development using NEWSELA -Engagement Strategies - Access for All January/February - Certified ELL teachers, core subject area teachers of ELLs, coaches, administration - Building Vocabulary for ELLs – Tiered vocabulary - Implementing quick writes/close readings - Pre-assessment data (NYS ELA practice test) March/April - Certified ELL teachers, core subject area teachers of ELLs, coaches, administration - Tiered Vocabulary-NYSESLAT/ELA/Math Test Prep to differentiate the instruction of test-taking skills and strategies. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 60  Part C: Professional Development - The new NYS ELA, NYSESLAT and Math test formats - Teacher Team Strategies continued - Cycle of Inquiry -Looking at Student Work May/June - Certified ELL teachers, core subject area teachers of ELLs, coaches, administration - Tiered Vocabulary - Analyzing ELA, ENL Periodic Assessments and Math summative and formative assessment data to create goals for the next school year. * Every Monday 100 minutes is dedicated to professional development. - TTCP is mandated three times a week ( 190 minutes). - One study group ( 45 minutes.) Professional Development agendas and teacher attendance sheets are all maintained and kept in our professional learning office in a binder. All records of professional development are copied for the principal for her record. Our PD providers include the following: - Elizabeth Orsini-Fox Assistant Principal - Michael Potwardski - Assistant Principal - Manal Moussa - Certified ENL Teacher/Coordinator - Diane Marzigliano - ELA/ESL Model Teacher - Maria Frangella - Peer instruction Coach - Elaine Cleary - Peer Instruction Coach - Melissa Onorato - Certified ENL Teacher - Dorothy Pierre - Certified ENL Teacher - Michael Roll - Certified ENL Teacher - Joe Cantara - Outside PD providers - Brienza Academic Advantage Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: We continue to dedicate our after school time, 2:30-3:25, on Tuesdays open for large group or one-to-one parent meetings. Twice a month,we have ENL orientation and parent workshops on best practices.The ELA department will continue to host ongoing workshops for parents. Many of these are designed to increase parental awareness of the new format of the state ELA assessment, the NYSESLAT exam, the New Language Arts Progressions and the Common Core Learning Standards. Parents of ENL students will attend these workshops where they learn strategies they can implement at home to promote literacy and academic success. These workshops to include both informational sessions and learning opportunities with translations. We will continue to work with parents to help them understand the new learning 2018-19 SCEP-FL 61  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities standards and how these will correlate to college and career readiness. We will provide them with support to understand the CCLS instructional shifts in ELA/Literacy and Math. We will also help parents to understand the curriculum their children are learning as well as how student work is assessed. We will also host workshops that focus directly on writing (which current state 2016 data shows an increase in proficiency), including the school-wide standards-based writing rubric as well as how to compose an essay. Once again, parents will be invited to participate in our annual Career Day and attend High School night where they can discuss opportunities for their children beyond middle school. The rationale behind each of these activities is to promote family engagement in learning and encourage parents to be equal partners in their children’s education. Parent meetings will be held approximately every six weeks and be conducted by the ENL/ELA assistant principal/ENL Coordinator, literacy and math coaches, and parent coordinator. Parents will be notified of these activities by letters sent home, school messenger as well as our school website @heroesofms137.org. We continue to implement parent surveys of preferred language of correspondence and will use the preferred language when sending notices. We have also identified staff and other volunteers capable of acting as translators for parents. This is a live document that we continually update with new translators. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 62 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 2018-19 SCEP-FL 63  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 27 School Name America's School of Heroes Borough Queens School Number 137 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Laura Mastrogiovanni Coach Elaine Cleary ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Manal Moussa Teacher/Subject Area Theresa Hanning/ELA Teacher/Subject Area Kimberlee Farrell/Math Related-Service Provider Hullah, Kelly Superintendent Jennifer Ambert Assistant Principal Elizabeth Orsini Fox Coach Diane Marzigliano School Counselor Lisa Fazzolare Parent Ivonne Chavez Parent Coordinator Lois Avellino Bruno Field Support Center Staff Member Other (Name and Title) Maria Frangella Master Teacher C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 2 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 2 0 5 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] D. Student Demographics 2018-19 SCEP-FL 64  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 1909 Total number of ELLs 266 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 13.93% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL Lang. Span Span School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 2017-2018 2018-2019 0 0 DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 1 1 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 1 1 0 2 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? We utilize several tools to assess the early literacy skills of our ELLs. These include The Gates-MacGinitie Reading Test for a standards-aligned assessment by grade. The Gates-MacGinitie Reading Tests assess student reading levels and determine the overall reading ability, specifically in the areas of decoding, phonemic awareness, phonics, vocabulary, and comprehension. Throughout the school year, the program allows teachers to assess their students’ progress and keep parents informed of their children’s progress. Teacher conferences and short writing tasks are administered early in the school year as well. The writing tasks revealed that overall, the students struggle with adhering to conventions of standard written English. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 65  Therefore, we purchased The Gates-MacGinite Test and MobyMax to support language development through technology. Our current Spanish dual language program is expanding to 7th grade. As a result of having many Spanish speaking students, we will continue offering a Dual Language Program for our incoming 6th graders in conjunction with our existing literacy program with MobyMax to support our long term ELLs. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? The LPT works alongside the ELA teachers to administer theThe Gates-MacGinitie Reading Test in the fall, winter, and spring to monitor student progress. Through our iPad initiative with Apple we purchased the School 4 One platform which will house student formative assessment results that will enable teachers to monitor student progress in all major content areas. Student portfolios will be maintained and monitored. For continuous progress monitoring we will utilize the MobyMax platform which enables teachers to monitor student progress in real time. Data can be analyzed for all Common Core Learning Standards through this platform. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? For the 2018-2019 school year we purchased The Gates-MacGinitie Reading Test to assess our students by skill and grade level standards for comprehension. We are implementing this technology-based program to identify baseline, progress and areas of need by standards. Content benchmark standardized exams, NYSESLAT, ELA, ENL Fall and Spring Periodic Assessments, ENL student evaluations, school wide assessments, and classroom assessments are additional assessments we utilize to identify students' baseline, progress and areas of need. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? All students will either rotate into computer labs or use classroom laptops/1;1 iPads to take the Gates-MacGinitie Reading assessments periodically. The results are then disseminated to all teachers of ELLs on Excel. The MobyMax platform is then utilized in the classroom daily to inform instruction with an adaptive curriculum to support differentiation within our ELA curriculum. MobyMax offers individualized instruction based on student formative assessment results in addition to our ELA curriculum. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] We are a grade 6 to 8 Middle School. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. We utilize the NYSESLAT, NYS ELA/Math state tests, Living Environment and Algebra Regents as our outcome assessments. This data is disaggregated using the ELL Data Analysis Tool (EDAT) and our school-wide spreadsheet. We use the data to identify proficiency levels in each modality and identify areas of strength and challenge, identify ELA and Math performance levels, years of service, at-risk levels, growth percentiles and SIFE information to inform our ELL programs. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? All of our findings are documented on a spreadsheet and on the EDAT report. All teachers of ELLs throughout every content area use the information to inform their instruction, use differentiation techniques and create multiple points of entry for students to have access to grade level curriculum. Part IV: ELL Programming 2018-19 SCEP-FL 66  Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. All ELL students receive ENL services using either a collaborative co-teaching, push-in model, or stand alone ENL. All general education ELL students are grouped by grade level and then further broken down into groups based on NYSESLAT proficiency level. Flexible scheduling is implemented to ensure that students receive the mandated numbers of ENL periods without losing content instruction. In addition they receive at least 8-10 periods per week of ELA instruction from a certified Common Branches, Language Arts or Special Education teacher in their grade level class. To maximize our ELLs learning potential, we are offering the following programs: Advanced Literacy Across Content Areas, Algebra for All, iPad Initiative, MobyMax, StoryBoard, Story Studio and The Gates-MacGinitie Reading Test .To meet the needs for students of all proficiency levels, we are sustaining our School 4 One platform using the grade level curricula on iPads. We are in compliance with the CR Part 154.2 instructional unit requirement for ELLs. We follow the ENL Units of Study and Staffing Requirements chart. Entering ELLs receive 360 minutes of instruction per week. 180 minutes in ENL and 180 minutes in ENL/ELA. Emerging ELLs receive 360 minutes per week. 90 minutes in ENL and 90 minutes ENL or integrated ENL/ Content area and 90 minutes in ENL. Transitioning ELLs receive 180 minutes per week. 90 minutes in ENL/ELA and 90 minutes in ENL or integrated ENL/Content Area. Expanding ELLs receive 180 minutes of instruction per week in ENL/ELA. Commanding ELLs receive 90 minutes of instruction per week of integrated ENL in ELA or content Area. Students receive explicit instruction using a collaborative co-teaching model, Integrated or Standalone ENL . Students do not receive formal Native Language Instruction. M.S. 137 implements the New Bilingual Common Core Progressions in students’ academic language development program and regular content area classes as well as the ELA Common Core Learning Standards. The New Bilingual Common Core Progressions specifically address listening, speaking, reading and writing in English for information and understanding, expression, critical analysis and evaluation, social interaction, knowledge and understanding. Furthermore, scaffolding strategies are utilized following the SIOP model in our ENL lessons and content area lessons. Modeling, bridging, contextualization, schema building, text re-presentation and metacognition are the six types of scaffolding that we implement from SIOP’s model. The English Language Learner Policy and Reference Guide (updated 2018) is utilized to support our ENL program. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. For the 2018-2019 school year we will have an English-Spanish Dual Language Program in grade 7 and we will continue offering an English-Spanish dual language program in grade 6 for our Spanish speaking students. All ELL students receive ENL services using either a collaborative co-teaching, push-in model, or stand alone ENL. All general education ELL students are grouped by grade level and then further broken down into groups based on NYSESLAT proficiency level. Flexible scheduling is implemented to ensure that students receive the mandated numbers of ENL periods without losing content instruction. In addition they receive at least 8-10 periods per week of ELA instruction from a certified Common Branches, Language Arts or Special Education teacher in their grade level class. We are in compliance with the CR Part 154.2 instructional unit requirement for ELLs. We follow the ENL Units of Study and Staffing Requirements chart. Entering ELLs receive 360 minutes of instruction per week. 180 minutes in ENL and 180 minutes in ENL/ELA. Emerging ELLs receive 360 minutes per week. 90 minutes in ENL and 90 minutes ENL or integrated ENL/ Content area and 90 minutes in ENL. Transitioning ELLs receive 180 minutes per week. 90 minutes in ENL/ELA and 90 minutes in ENL or integrated ENL/Content Area. Explanding ELLs receive 180 minutes of instruction per week in ENL/ELA. Commanding ELLs receive 90 minutes of instruction per week of integrated ENL in ELA or 2018-19 SCEP-FL 67  content Area. Students receive explicit instruction using a collaborative co-teaching model, Integrated or Standalone ENL . Students receive formal Native Language Instruction in Math and Science. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? All ELL students receive ENL services using either a collaborative co-teaching, push-in , or standalone model. All general education ELL students are grouped by grade level and then further broken down into homogeneous groups based on NYSESLAT proficiency level. Flexible scheduling is implemented to ensure that students receive the mandated numbers of ENL periods without losing content instruction. In addition they receive at least 8-10 periods per week of ELA/ENL instruction from a certified Common Branches, Language Arts or Special Education teacher in their grade level class. We are in compliance with The CR Part 154 instructional unit requirement for ELLs that mandates Entering ELLs receive 360 minutes instruction per week. 180 minutes in ENL and 180 minutes in ENL/ELA. Emerging ELLs receive 360 minutes of instruction per week. 90 minutes in ENL and 90 minutes ENL or integrated ENL/ Content area and 90 minutes in ENL. Transitioning ELLs receive 180 minutes per week. 90 minutes in ENL/ELA and 90 minutes in ENL or integrated ENL/ Content Area. Expanding ELLs receive 180 minutes of instruction per week in ENL/ELA. Commanding Ells receive 90 minutes of instruction per week of integrated ENL in ELA or content Area. Only our students enrolled in the Dual Language program receive formal Native Language Instruction in addition to the mandated number of ENL periods. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Currently, the MS 137 curriculum model ensures that students are exposed to all core-subjects while receiving their mandated ENL services. Our educational program incorporates challenging content and well-developed learning strategies that will prepare our ELL population to think critically, solve problems, and communicate in the languages of instruction. Our ELLs are actively engaged in standards-based curriculum. All teachers of ELLs are well-versed in the New Bilingual Common Core Progressions ENL in addition to their content area standards to promote language and literacy development using Common Core Learning Standards./Next Generation Standards, and Advanced Literacy skills.Students have been placed in classes based on NYSESLAT performance levels. Entering and Emerging level students are placed in a co-teaching class. Instruction is delivered in English with appropriate native language support when necessary to improve basic comprehension of vocabulary and directions as well as to activate students’ prior knowledge to help them make connections with the new content being delivered. Native language support is provided for our ELL students in addition to the dual language in grade 6 and grade 7. Our ENL model allows Entering ELL students to communicate in their native language, though the native language is not used as an instructional tool. The native language is allowed to promote a risk- free environment that is conducive to student language. The teachers have high expectations for all ELL students. Students receive explicit content standards-based instruction. Content instruction is modified for the ELLs when necessary. This year, in addition to our 7th grade English-Spanish Dual Language Program, we continue to provide an English-Spanish Dual Language program for grade 6 in which students develop academic literacy in both Spanish and English in mathematics, science and social studies . Our ELLs are serviced by NYS certified ENL teachers, and receive content instruction from teachers certified in those content areas. Professional development is approached by promoting job-embedded learning for ENL and content teachers and administrators. Teacher Team meetings and Professional Learning Mondays share ENL methodologies, language acquisition theories, classroom management and multicultural awareness. In addition, ENL teachers receive district training and content-specific (ELA and Math) professional development to ensure familiarity with curriculum. ENL strategy sessions are also coordinated to promote a consistent and unified approach for ELL instruction. We have developed a CCLS team that provides ongoing professional development to all teachers. Content area teachers of ELL students are scheduled to ensure common preparatory periods so they can identify and strategize to address specific student needs. Additionally, ENL teachers are invited to participate in these 2018-19 SCEP-FL 68  common planning sessions so they can suggest alternative methodologies which would improve content delivery and comprehension in the classroom. ENL teachers also collaborate with one another and content-area teachers on teacher teams. This school year, we are using our ELA curriculum with novels,The Gates-MacGinitie Reading Test, MobyMax and we will continue to use Milestones, which is a scripted curriculum. It comes with student textbooks, workbooks, and media. It addresses the four modalities assessed on the NYSESLAT and includes embedded test prep strategies and practice for the CCLS ELA assessment to support fluency development. Additionally, to ensure differentiation based on student needs, we are implementing a new program, The Gates-MacGinitie Reading Test to assess student reading levels and monitor student progress throughout the school year. We will continue to implement the following programs based on the positive impact: Algebra for All, iPad Initiative, MobyMax, and School 4 One. Our former ELLs are identified using RLAT to ensure that teachers continue supporting them with appropriate scaffolding where needed. Students continue to receive ENL service and testing accommodations for two years after reaching proficiency on the NYSESLAT. They are also invited to take part in after school programs that support them in social, emotional, and intellectual development. These programs are funded through Millennium and M.S. 137 Title I funding. ELL students are afforded equal access to all school programs.The parent coordinator actively reaches out to parents of ELL students to encourage the students to participate in all after school programs. We will host a multicultural day for parents to celebrate our cultural diversity and build a strong school community. We also have a dedicated ENL after-school program that all ELL students are invited to participate in. MS 137 also hosts a yearly Cultural Extravaganza which ELL students are always part of to help the school celebrate our diverse cultures. The rationale and goal behind this is to support the students social, emotional, and intellectual development, as well as improve learning outcomes and foster engagement in the school community. The smaller student to teacher ratio provided in after school programs gives the students a more focused support and greater opportunity for remediation, which supports their engagement with grade-level appropriate texts during the school day. Our ELL students take part in several after school programs and supplemental services supported through Title III funding. We have an academic intervention after school program specified for ELL Students. The students in this program are grouped by proficiency and serviced by an ENL certified teacher. In addition to their regular ENL hours, students will work with a reading specialist who focuses on first-time test takers to provide support and instruction of skills necessary to succeed on the ELA assessment. MS 137 utilizes a variety of instructional resources. All teachers of ELL students use visual stimuli, flexible groupings and a hands- on approach to make the content accessible for our ELL students. In Social Studies, the teachers utilize the Access History/My World History books which can be modified to allow ELLs to access content on an appropriate level. Access History/Passport is used by Entering, Emerging, Transitioning, and Expanding students. In Math, manipulative and hands-on activities are used by all subgroups of ELLs. These resources provide language-acquisition support and content knowledge crucial for academic success and literacy. Technology is used to make curriculum accessible to our ELL students. This gives the students visual context clues and aids, while reinforcing and strengthening their listening, speaking, reading and writing skills. Teachers use teacher/student created visual aids, such as charts, pictures, and graphic representations, creating a print-rich environment to provide students with alternative and supportive ways to comprehend content. We purchased a new software program in September, Storyboard That, which is a digital storytelling that enhances understanding through visual learning. Additionally, many of the content area teachers use Smart Boards, which help ELLs to interact, visualize and comprehend the content. Entering level students are encouraged to write in their native language so that the teachers get a clearer understanding of their level of comprehension and ability in their native language. This is then translated into English using Google translation tools and more proficient peers. All student writing is valued and used as an entry point to motivate student engagement and participation. ELL classes have been scheduled in the computer labs to support the use of our educational technology programs designed to improve speaking, listening, reading and writing abilities. We have also designated a computer cart with laptops and iPads for our ELL classes to use (from Title I grant). Content area instructional materials are utilized in the education of our ELL students as well. We use glossaries in all content areas. This is used in conjunction with the language support materials to give our ELL students access to content knowledge as they acquire English skills. All materials utilized by our ELL students are high interest, but tailored to their reading level and include age appropriate content. Additionally, native language libraries have been provided through the Office of ELLs and NYCDOE. Spanish is offered as a language elective for all students. Before the start of the school year, we host a parent orientation. All parents, including those of ELL students are invited and encouraged to attend. We also complete an inventory of materials to ensure that they 2018-19 SCEP-FL 69  are available. Our ENL teachers also meet prior to the beginning of the school year to identify potential ELLs. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? During the home language identification process, students are interviewed in English and their home language when necessary to assess their level of comprehension. Once eligibility is established, Spanish speaking students are administered the Spanish LAB-R as an initial evaluation of their native language as well as the DL periodic assessment in Spanish(Fall/Spring) Dual language students can also be assessed throughout the school year using Fountas & Pinnell Reading Inventory and NEWSELA and News-o-matic in Spanish which vary in text complexity. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status 1. Instructional Plan for ELL Subgroups: The teachers of ELLs throughout each content area regardless of proficiency level/subgroup incorporate learning and language objectives. a. SIFE, b. newcomersFirst, SIFE students are tracked and placed in classes receiving extra AIS support with a lower student to teacher ratio. Mpst of the time, our SIFE students are our newcomers. All teachers use the New Bilingual Common Core Progressions in students’ academic language development program and regular content area classes. The New Bilingual Common Core Progressions specifically address listening, speaking, reading and writing in English for information and understanding, expression, critical analysis and evaluation, social interaction, knowledge and understanding. Furthermore, scaffolding strategies are utilized following the Walqui and SIOP models in our ENL and content area lessons. Modeling, bridging, contextualization, schema building, text re-presentation and metacognition are the six types of scaffolding that we implement from Walqui’s and SIOP’s models. Students are encouraged to attend the ENL Saturday Academy. c. Developing/Expanding - These students are supported with using the Gradual Release of Responsibility model.d. Long term ELLs – Receive testing accommodations and specific instruction to NYSESLAT modalities . Test sophistication strategies are reinforced daily. Native Language Instruction: allows students to reflect and communicate in their native language and then translate for teachers to assess content acquisition. Our first time test takers are identified and tracked through our AIS program. These students receive small group instruction two to three days a week. These students are invited to participate in our Saturday ENL Academy which provides test preparation. e. Former ELLs – Students who reached proficiency level on the NYSESLAT are identified using RESI, RLAT, and teachers differentiate instruction according to their needs. ELA classes stress vocabulary development and fluency. Teachers use various strategies to develop the students’ critical thinking and comprehension skills, using fiction and non fiction reading selections. They practice different writing genres, such and personal narrative, fictional narrative, persuasive writing, and poetry. Students continue to receive all testing modifications. They receive extended time during testing. Students also receive 90 of ENL instruction from a certified ESL teacher. Saturday Academy is offered to our students to support and reinforce their reading and writing skills in ELA and mathematics. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Teachers of ELL-SWDs Scholastic Code X, Pearson anthologies are using CCLS Ready, CCLS Finish Line, NY ELA Rehearsal Plus to support ELL-SWD students. For progress monitoring we will implement The Gates-MacGinitie Reading Test, and Mobymax, to focus on monitoring progress of these subgroups. These programs addresses content, reading skills, fluency, word recognition, and comprehension for individual students. In addition, they incorporate audio components with visual stimuli to reinforce 2018-19 SCEP-FL 70  language and content acquisition. Many ELL-SWDs are long-term ELLs so we expand our pilot program, School 4 One, that has been designed to support language acquisition and maximize the learning potential for this population. Through this use of flexible scheduling, we ensure that these programs are meaningful and continuous for all students. In addition, we are purchasing more laptops and IPads to support the efficiency of these programs. As part of our normal school culture to support least restrictive environments, we will identify ELL-SWDs which can be mainstreamed into other classes for their ENL services. All materials are age and grade appropriate. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? ELL SWD receive ENL services using a push-in and stand alone/ pull- out model. Teachers of ELL-SWDs are using MobyMax with their students. Next year, they will implement the The Gates-MacGinitie Reading Test to assess their students' reading level and monitor their progress. These web-based literacy programs address content, reading skills, fluency, word recognition, and comprehension.They differentiate based on the students’ reading levels, while exposing them to more rigorous, grade-level appropriate instruction. The programs both incorporate audio components with visual stimuli to reinforce language and content acquisition. Through this use of flexible scheduling, we ensure that these programs will help our ELL-SWD achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency. As part of our normal school culture to support least restrictive environments, we will identify ELL SWDs whom we can mainstream into other classes for their ENL services. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. M.S. 137 implements the New Language Progressions (NLAP) in students’ academic language development program and regular content area classes as well as the Common Core Learning Standards. Content teachers build English language development into their instruction using both learning and language objectives. Teachers modify complexity in content so that students understand and can participate in classroom activities. Teachers do not rely solely on themselves as the sources of knowledge and learning, but encourage interaction among students and involve more proficient and less proficient students and involve paraprofessionals when applicable. The teachers encourage authentic and meaningful communication and interaction about course content amongst students, and between themselves and students. Information is presented in varied ways. Teachers place the information in a context that is more comprehensible to the students using multiple media. For the upcoming school year, We will continue using iPad initiative, School4 One and Algebra for All. We will offer new programs such as the Gates-MacGinitie Reading Test and Storyboard That to maximize our students learning potential and allow differentiation for all levels. All teachers of ELL students use visual stimuli, flexible groupings and a hands-on approach to make the content comprehensible for our ELL students. Teachers incorporate visual reviews with lists and charts, paraphrase points where appropriate, and encourage students to provide oral summaries. In Social Studies and Science, teachers modify content to allow ELLs to access content on an appropriate level. In Math, manipulatives and hands-on activities are used. Additionally, we have purchased content-specific bilingual glossaries that students will use in their Math class. We purchased a Go Math Parent Portal that will support parents and students with the math curriculum. We are offering a Saturday Academy for all our ELL students using Imagine Learning, content area instruction and MobyMax. For our ELL-SWD students, will be using MobyMax and the Gates-MacGinitie Reading Test , which are designed to improve fluency, word recognition, and comprehension for our long-term ELLs. We target these students in our AIS program for additional support two days a week. Student success is recognized overtly and frequently. ELA classes stress vocabulary development and fluency. Teachers use various strategies to develop the students’ critical thinking and comprehension skills using fiction and non-fiction reading selections. They practice writing in different genres, such as personal narrative, fictional narrative, argumentative writing, and poetry. Students continue to receive all testing modifications. Our ELLs are offered and receive extended time during testing. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? For next school year, we will be using The Gates-MacGinitie Reading Test , and Mobymax to track individual student progress more frequently throughout the school year. We will continue to incorporate technology in our ENL classrooms. SMART boards and IPads are used to meet students' needs and to make curriculum accessible to our ELL students. This gives the students 2018-19 SCEP-FL 71  visual context clues and aids, while reinforcing their listening skills. We will purchase a new software program,Storyboard That, which is a digital storytelling that enhances understanding through visual learning. We will continue Duolingo.com and Flocabulary to improve fluency and word recognition . Also, we will continue to use Readtheory.org to assess address specific student needs. This current data will be used to drive and differentiate instruction for specific skills. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELL students are offered equal access to all school programs. ELL students are identified using RESI and RLAT reports and placed in appropriate classes. They are also receiving AIS as a supplemental support, targeting students with low growth percentiles in ELA and math. The parent coordinator actively reaches out to parents of ELL students to participate in our after-school programs.They are invited to take part in after school programs that support them in social, emotional, and intellectual development. These programs are funded through Millennium and M.S. 137 Title I funding. Additionally, we We will host a multicultural day for ENL parents to celebrate our cultural diversity and build a strong school community and we will offer an ENL after-school program that all ELL students are invited to participate in. M.S. 137 also hosts a yearly Cultural Extravaganza, which ELL students are always a part of to help the school celebrate our diverse cultures. The students in our Saturday Academy academic programs are grouped by proficiency level and serviced by an ENL certified teacher. In addition to their mandated ENL hours, students work with a reading specialist who focuses on first time test takers to provide support and instruction of skills necessary to succeed on the ELA/math and NYSESLAT assessment. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. M.S. 137 utilizes a variety of instructional resources. All teachers of ELL students use visual stimuli, flexible groupings and a hands on approach to make the content comprehensible for our ELL students. In Social Studies and Science, the teachers utilize the Access ENL books, which are modified to allow ELLs to access content on an appropriate level. In Math, manipulates and hands-on activities are used. Additionally, we have purchased content-specific bilingual glossaries that students will use in their Math class. We offer an extended day program and after- school programs for all our ELL students. This year, we are continuing to use Milestones as well as a Code-X from Scholastic in conjunction with our existing anthology from Pearson. Milestones ensures that students are mastering skills and standards before being introduced to new ones. This research-based approach provides language-acquisition and content knowledge crucial for academic success. The Pearson literature anthology includes online and print resources to help teachers differentiate instruction for their ELL students. In addition to the iPad Initiative, School 4One, and MobyMax using the laptops we purchased from the grant funding as well as our computer labs and iPads, We will implement the Gates-MacGinitie Reading Test to assess our students' reading level and monitor their progress. We purchased a new software program,Storyboard That, which is a digital storytelling that enhances understanding through visual learning.We believe in the continued integration of technology within our curriculum. We will continue to incorporate technology in our ENL classrooms. Smart Boards are interactive and students are very involved in creating presentations using Google Slides and Power Poin . Smart Boards and iPads are used to meet students' needs and to make curriculum accessible to our ELL students. This gives the students visual context clues and aids, while reinforcing their listening skills. For our ELL-SWD students, we are also using the Gates-MacGinitie Reading Test and MobyMax , which are designed to improve fluency, word recognition, and comprehension. Some classes also utilize Duolingo.com, Storyboard That, and Readtheory.org for the beginner students to support them in their language acquisition. Student success is recognized overtly and frequently. ELL classes have access to the computer labs to support the use of educational technology programs designed to improve speaking, listening, reading and writing abilities. We have also designated a computer cart with laptops and iPads for our ELL classes to use (from Title I grant). 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? In our ENL program all instruction is given in English. However, students' native languages are supported with bilingual dictionaries and content based native language glossaries. A selection of native language independent reading books are also 2018-19 SCEP-FL 72  available to promote native language literacy. For the upcoming school year, our English-Spanish Dual Language program we will be offered for grade 6 and 7 in which the home language is supported and assessed using various learning strategies in mathematics, science and social studies. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Required services, support and resources correspond to the ages and grade levels of our ELLs in that all materials utilized are high interest, but tailored to their reading level and include age appropriate content. Furthermore, all materials ELL students are exposed to in content area classes are aligned with the Common Core Learning Standards and Bilingual Common Core Progression specified for each grade. M.S. 137 utilizes a variety of instructional resources. All teachers of ELL students use visual stimuli, flexible groupings and a hands on approach to make the content comprehensible for our ELL students. In Social Studies and Science, the teachers utilize the Access ENL books, which are modified to allow ELLs to access content on an appropriate level. In Math, manipulatives and hands-on activities are used. Additionally, we have purchased content-specific bilingual glossaries that students will use in their Math class. We offer an extended day program and after- school programs for all our ELL students. This year, we are continuing to implement the research-based learning program, Milestones as well as Code-X anthology from Scholastic in conjunction with the anthology from Pearson. Milestones ensures that students are mastering skills and standards before being introduced to new ones. This research-based approach provides language-acquisition and content knowledge crucial for academic success. The Pearson literature anthology includes online and print resources to help teachers differentiate instruction for their ELL students. To maximize our ELLs learning potential, we will be offering the following programs: Algebra for All, Flocabulary, Advanced Literacy Across Content Areas, CRE, iPad Initiative, MobyMax, Storyboard That, and the Gates-MacGinitie Reading Test .To meet the needs for students of all proficiency levels, we will continue offering School 4 using the grade level curricula. We will continue using the laptops we purchased from the grant funding as well as our computer labs and iPads. we believe in the continued integration of technology within our curriculum. We will continue to incorporate technology in our ENL classrooms. LCD projectors are used to display PowerPoint presentations. SMART boards and iPads are used to meet students' needs and to make curriculum accessible to our ELL students. This gives the students visual context clues and aids, while reinforcing their listening skills. For our ELL-SWD students, we are also using Mobymax , which is designed to improve fluency, word recognition, and comprehension. Student success is recognized overtly and frequently. ELL classes have access to the computer labs to support the use of Mobymax and other educational computer programs designed to improve speaking, listening, reading and writing abilities. We continue to designate a computer cart with laptops and iPads for our ELL classes to use (all content teachers) (from Title I grant). 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? N/A 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Before the start of the school year, we host a parent orientation. All parents, including those of ELL students are invited and encouraged to participate. We also complete an inventory of materials to ensure that they are readily available, i.e. glossaries. Our ENL teachers also meet prior to the beginning of the school year to identify potential ELLs. Guidance Counselors receive a list of newly admitted ELLs to follow up with them to ensure that they are adapting to the new school culture and teachers are providing them with culturally sensitive and engaging activities. Next year, we will host a multicultural day for ENL parents to celebrate our cultural diversity and build a strong school community. Parents are also invited to watch their children present their Story Studio culminating story-telling project at our Story Giants Festival in June. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Spanish language instruction is offered to all of our students. 18. For schools with dual language programs: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 73  a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? We offer a self-contained Dual Language program in grade 6 and 7 (Spanish/English) in math, science and social studies. The English proficient students and ELLs spend 50% of their instructional time in English and 50% of their instructional time in Spanish by alternating the language of instruction every other day. The languages are separated by time, subject and are not used simultaneously. Teachers alternate the language of instruction on a daily basis. Our curriculum model ensures that students are exposed to all core-subjects while receiving their Native language instruction. Our educational program incorporates challenging content and well-developed learning strategies that will prepare our students to think critically, solve problems, and communicate in the languages of instruction. Our English proficient students and ELLs are actively engaged in standards-based curriculum.Teachers are well-versed in the New Bilingual Common Core Progressions in addition to their content area standards to promote language and literacy development using Common Core Learning Standards. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Professional learning Opportunities are ongoing throughout the year at MS 137 for all ENL and content area teachers of our ELL population. This includes guidance counselors, paraprofessionals, secretaries, parent coordinator, administrators, coaches, psychologists and speech therapists. The hours surpass the minimum of 7.5 hours. They are currently receiving high quality staff and curriculum development through internal and external providers. The Office of ELLs provides monthly professional development, and selected staff members turn-key to build capacity. We are focusing on the CCLS, instructional shifts, UDL, differentiated instruction and collaborative data inquiry and teacher team practice in our study groups. Webb’s Depth of Knowledge and the Cognitive Rigor Matrix are utilized to ensure strategic and extended thinking activities. All members of the school community will be attending meetings and workshops offered for ELLs. Teachers will also be encouraged to attend professional learning opportunities available from the Office of ELLs. Study groups and book talks are offered at MS 137. Professional Learning Mondays focuses on using ELL and differentiating instruction resources, and all ELL personnel are committed and contribute to these PDs regularly. Teachers are also set up to intervisit classes across grades to build capacity as an ongoing practice of identifying and implementing different ENL strategies with ELL students. All teachers of ELLs meet for one common planning period two times a week and during the Monday 100 minutes professional learning time. For common planning periods, teachers share out ELL best practices, discuss individual student progress, and plan for interdisciplinary instruction. We have one ENL teacher that has been identified as a model teacher and one model ELA teacher that teaches ELA to our ELLs in 6 th grade that has also been recognized as a model teacher through the NYCDOE Career Development Team. In total our school has 10 recognized model teachers and 2 Master teachers through the NYCDOE Career Development Team. Therefore building capacity is our main goal to promote positive student outcomes and highly effective teaching and learning. ENL teachers are currently receiving high quality staff and curriculum development through internal and external providers. Our FSC, Fordham University, and the Office of ELLs provide ongoing professional development, and selected staff members turn-key to build capacity. We are focusing on the CCLS, instructional shifts, UDL, differentiated instruction and collaborative data inquiry and teacher team practice in our study groups. Webb’s Depth of Knowledge and the Cognitive Rigor Matrix are utilized to ensure strategic and extended thinking activities. All members of the school community will be attending 2018-19 SCEP-FL 74  meetings and workshops offered for ELLs. Teachers will also be encouraged to attend professional learning available from the Office of ELLs. Study groups and book talks are offered at MS 137. Professional Learning Opportunities using ELL and differentiating instruction resources embedded in Professional Learning Mondays, and all ELL personnel are committed and contribute to these PDs regularly. The following are topics for professional learning that have been covered this year thus far:- Power of Language Objectives- Instructional Moves to Support ELLs in the content areas- Effective Questioning and Discussion Strategies in an ENL Classroom- Effective Co-teaching in an ENL Classroom-The Blueprint for ELL Success- -Academic Language for ELLs 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Our school provides support for the staff to assist ELLs as they transition from one school level to another through open school night, Career Day, assemblies,a multicultural day for ENL parents, and support from the guidance counselor. Presenters from area high schools come and explain the various programs that are available at their schools. The parent coordinator and guidance counselor support parents in completing the high school application. Career Day takes place each year and supports the importance of college and career readiness and the importance of a strong high school education. Our guidance counselors participate in Monday Professional Learning activities that include ENL topics such as cultural sensitivity, reading and analyzing the RLAT, and examining the proficiency needs of our population. Guidance counselors access ELL and SIFE resources provided by the Department of Education, such as Dream, Believe, Succeed for college planning.All content teachers are considered teachers of ELLs, whether currently Commanding, former, or existing ELLs. Therefore ELL specific professional development is integrated into all Professional Learning Mondays. All certified ENL teachers also receive monthly Professional Learning provided by the Assistant Principal, the District, the Department of ELLs, and/or Fordham University. A professional development binder is maintained containing all of our ENL professional development logs that include teacher signatures and agendas. Also, the school has a record of all intervisitations among the staff so as to compile feedback that may be used for future professional development. Additionally, an outside professional development specialist, Joseph Cantara, mentors new teachers to reinforce ELL specific strategies.Our ENL Professional Development Monthly Calendar is as follows: September: • ELA Instructional Routines• Taking Apart the NYSESLAT• The Gates-MacGinitie Reading Test • ENL/ELA Curriculum Mapping • CR Part 154, CR Part 154.2 • CEP • LAP Plan • Quality Review • Math: Introduction to Connected Mathematics Program 3/ Navigating Through Math Dashboard • Technology – SMART Board and iPad training. • ENL Principles October: • CEP • LAP Plan • ELL Compliance, DELLS Professional Development• Fordham University Professional Development• Peer Instructional Coach Introduction • School-Wide Instructional Focus - Assessment• Scholastic Code X – Planning for Unit 1 and Curriculum Map (ENL Strategies)Revision • UDL/RTI – Planning for Success • Literacy in the Content Areas • Math: Student Led Conferences• Technology – SMART Board and iPad training. • ENL Principles/Dual Language • LAP Training . Story Studio November: • • CEP • LAP Plan • Quality Review • The Gates-MacGinitie Reading Test • ACE, CALI, EILI, ELL Content PD • Demonstration Teachers Inter-Visit • ELA Curriculum Unit Planning, Curriculum Map Revision, and Strategies for Success • Math: Lesson Sharing CCLS Lesson Plan Template/ Lesson Planning • Technology –School -Wide I-Ready Training• ENL Principles/Dual Language December: • CEP • LAP Plan • Imagine Learning Professional Development• ELA Curriculum Unit Planning, Curriculum Map Revision, and Strategies for Success • ENL Modality Analysis • Math: Teachability/ Math XL • Fordham University Professional Development• ENL Principles • Academic Language Development for ELLs in CCLS • BESIS TrainingJanuary: • ELA Curriculum Unit Planning, Curriculum Map Revision, and Strategies for Success • Math: Teachability/ Math X• Academic Language Development for ELLs in CCLS • NYSITELL Training • Fordham University Professional Development . Story StudioFebruary: • Test Sophistication • ELA Curriculum Unit Planning, Curriculum Map Revision, and Strategies for Success • Math: Lesson Planning SchoolNet – Benchmark Results/ Scoring with the Mathematics Holistic Rubrics • ENL Principles• Breaking Apart the NYSESLAT • NYSITELL Training• Fordham University Professional DevelopmentMarch: • ELA Curriculum • CCLS ELA and Math Assessment Procedures • ELA Curriculum Unit Planning, Curriculum Map Revision, and Strategies for Success • Math: Looking at Student Work/ Identification of Areas of Challenge 2018-19 SCEP-FL 75  for Test Prep • ENL Principles • Fordham University Professional DevelopmentApril:• Breaking apart the NYSESLAT• Teacher Team Planning• Unit Planning, Curriculum Map Revision for ENL, and Strategies for Success • Math: Preparation for the NYS 2019 Math Assessment • ENL Principles • MoSL• Breaking Apart the NYESLAT• ELA Curriculum Unit Planning, Curriculum Map Revision, and Strategies for Success • Math: Breaking Apart the NYS 2018 Math Assessment • ENL Principles • Fordham University Professional DevelopmentMay/June:• NYSESLAT Proctoring Review for Assessment • NYSESLAT Scoring Training June: • ELA Curriculum Year-End Review/Revise Curriculum Maps • Math: Revisiting/Revising Curriculum Maps • ENL Principles/Dual Language Reflection . Story StudioLAP PLAN SUMMARY/REVISIT and SET NEW GOALS Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Parents are invited to attend workshops with the ENL teachers. Parent Orientation meetings are ongoing throughout the year to support our enrollment. To evaluate the needs of our ELL parents, an oral interview is conducted at the end of the meeting to ascertain topics for future parent meetings and to inform them of school expectations. Translators are available to facilitate this process. The English Language learner Policy and Reference Guide is utilized to support any needs in our ENL department. The ENL Assistant Principals, ELL service providers, literacy and math coaches and parent coordinator conduct presentations guiding parents through the process of assessing their child’s progress, especially using Pupil Path, and teaching them about the programs utilized by our ELLs. Additionally, We will host a multicultural day for ENL parents twice a year to celebrate our cultural diversity and build a strong school community. In addition, we have published a monthly parent/student newsletter and calendar translated in different languages to keep parents abreast of current and upcoming information. All resources are available on our school website. Strategies and support are offered and provided in collaboration with administration, coaches, and the parent coordinator.Our school maintains a list of all staff members which fluently speak languages other than English. Access to the Language Line for translation is available in the Parent Coordinators office, the main office, and in all guidance counselor and administrator offices. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Our bi-lingual PTA President co-facilitates workshops with the Parent Coordinator to foster parental involvement for our parents of ELLs. They provide workshops and resources offered by NYCDOE, specifically learning English with their students at our Saturday Academy. They collaborate with administration and the language proficiency team. Our Parent Coordinator also attends all parent orientation meetings and provides pertinent information to ensure the success of their child. Parent brochures and videos are utilized at our meetings. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 76  2018-19 SCEP-FL 77 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Laura Mastrogiovanni, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 78  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: America’s School of Heroes School DBN: 27Q137 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Title Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) Laura Mastrogiovanni Principal Elizabeth D. Orsini-Fox Assistant Principal Lois Avellino Bruno Parent Coordinator Manal Moussa ENL/Bilingual Teacher Ivonne Chavez Parent Theresa Hanning Teacher/Subject Area Kelly Hullah Teacher/Subject Area Diane Marzigliano Elaine Cleary Coach Coach Lisa Fazzolare School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Michael Potwardski Other Assistant Principal Kimberlee Farrell Other Math Teacher Maria Frangella Other Master Teacher/ELA Coach 01/22/19 01/22/19 01/22/19 01/22/19 01/22/19 01/22/19 01/22/19 01/22/19 01/22/19 01/22/19 01/22/19 01/22/19 01/22/19 2018-19 SCEP-FL 79  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 27Q137 School Name: America's School of Heroes Superintendent: Jennifer Ambert The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Lois Bruno Elizabeth Orsini-Fox Parent Coordinator Assistant Principal Yes No Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. As was described in previous sections of this CEP, MS 137 has a very diverse population. Many of our parents are non-English speakers even if they have resided in the country for many years and their children are English proficient. It is well established that parental involvement impacts positively on a child’s academic development. In order to communicate effectively with parents we use several different methods to determine the language needs. Some of the methods are: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 80  a. Parent Entry Survey – Home Language Survey (HLIS) is completed by parents with a certified ENL teacher or administration to support parents in identifying the primary language spoken by each parent. Translators are available when we determine whether the parent requires language assistance to communicate effectively. Forms in languages other than English are available. The pupil secretary enters the home language preference in ATS for both written and oral communication and the emergency cards indicate the home language of the family. b. ATS Reports (RHLA) (RCPL) to identify all high need language areas c. Parent Coordinator logs of parent communication d. Teacher evaluations from Parent teacher conferences e. Teacher evaluations from student input and contact home f. A master list is created annually and updated regularly throughout the school year identifying translators in all languages of our diverse community. This document is reviewed, updated, and disseminated periodically. g. Emergency Contact Cards 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Arabic Bengali Chinese Cantonese Dutch Georgian Gujarati Hindi English Mandarin Pashto Pilipino Punjabi Polish Russian Slovak Spanish Urdu 37 63 18 0 1 2 0 19 1878 0 1 0 151 3 4 1 488 25 1.37 2.34 .68 0 .04 .07 0 .71 69.76 0 .04 0 5.61 .11 .15 .04 18.13 .93 35 68 12 2 1 2 1 18 1835 4 1 1 174 3 3 1 504 25 1.3 2.53 .45 .07 .04 .07 .04 .67 68.16 .15 .04 .04 6.46 .11 .11 .04 18.72 .93 2018-19 SCEP-FL 81  Ukrainian 1 .04 2 .07 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Language and Interpretation Unit, DOE ELL Resources Page, School-Wide Translators, Google Translate*, BIG WORD Parent Notification Letters - Entitlement and Non-Entitlement Letters (ongoing depending on enrollment) *Edited by Identified Bilingual Staff - Melissa Burgos - Bilingual Paraprofessional (predominant language Spanish) and update list of translators for other languages The school will translate all notices home that pertain to children’s academic and social needs, school-wide memos and calendars and Translation services are currently provided by staff and parent volunteers. In the case that a language is not able to be translated, then translation will be provided by DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit. As per Chancellor’s Regulations, "When the Translation and Interpretation Unit, a school, or a central or regional office is temporarily unable to provide required translation into one or more covered languages, it must provide, in addition to any other assistance, a cover letter or notice on the face of the English document in the appropriate covered language(s), indicating how a parent can request free translation or interpretation of such document." Our building attempted to provide translated information for these constituents through the use of in house translators. When in-house translation is not possible, we resort 2018-19 SCEP-FL 82  to non-staff translators or the DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit for services. The delivery of these services is determined by logistics, so they may be delivered by phone or in person. Continuation of Services Ongoing Placement Letters Parent Orientation September, Ongoing August, Every new enrollment Parent Teacher Conferences Language and Interpretation Unit, DOE ELL Resources Page, School-Wide Translators, Google Translate*, BIG WORD Language and Interpretation Unit, DOE ELL Resources Page, School-Wide Translators, Google Translate*, BIG WORD Language and Interpretation Unit, DOE ELL Resources Page, School-Wide Translators, Google Translate*, BIG WORD 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? We have a multitude of face-to-face meetings in our school throughout the year as follows: 1. 4 Parent-Teacher Conferences Dates 9/20/18 11/27-11/28/18 3/26-3/27/19 5/16/19 Cultural Events - TBD School-Wide Celebrations Language and Interpretation Unit, School-Wide Translators, Google Translate*, BIG WORD *Edited by Identified Bilingual Staff Members - Melissa Burgos - Bilingual Paraprofessional, and updated list of translators 2018-19 SCEP-FL 83  2. ENL Parent Orientations 3. New Admits Monthly Daily 4. Monthly ELA and Math Workshops last week of every month Parent Coordinator (Daily) 5.Cultural and Social Events and Performances 6. PTA Meetings Daily 5-8x a year monthly Language and Interpretation Unit, School-Wide Translators, Google Translate*, BIG WORD Language and Interpretation Unit, School-Wide Translators, Google Translate*, BIG WORD Language and Interpretation Unit, School-Wide Translators, Google Translate*, BIG WORD 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. All personnel has a copy of the Translation & Interpretation Unit phone number and copies of student home and parent cell phone numbers. Our school has a list of translators that work in our school community at hand to support all our language needs. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. To ensure that our staff members are aware of CR A-663: parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education, we include this regulation in our opening day packet as part of professional responsibilities. Additionally we disperse our school-wide list of translators. We distribute the LAC signs and posters. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services 2018-19 SCEP-FL 84  Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Our Parent Coordinator and ENL Assistant Principal, Elizabeth Orsini-Fox works closely with parents and guardians. We display and distribute all notifications to the T & I Unit in a timely manner to support translations for parent notifications. All of our offices have a Language Identification Guide with the phone number for language support and translations. Additionally we have purchased the translation program BIG Word to assure school-wide letters/brochures are prepared in advance and readily available. We hired a bilingual paraprofessional to support us in translating Spanish documents (our predominant language). Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? We always use the parent survey and feedback from our Parent Coordinator/LAC, assistant principal for ENL and our ENL Coordinator of the quality and availability of our services. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 85 
