 28Q182 School Name: P.S. 182 SAMANTHA SMITH Principal: ANDREW TODD TOPOL 2018-19 SCEP-FL 1  School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Section 4: SCEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information The Samantha Smith School 28Q182 342800010182 K-5 School Number (DBN): 153-27 88 th Ave., Jamaica, NY 11432 718-298-7700 718-298-7706 Phone Number: Andrew Topol Fax: atopol@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Email Address: Andrew Topol Nicole Schneider Griselda Mendoza BritannyWeber & JaimieGermann Ruth Ortiz NA NA NA District Information Geographical District: 28 Mabel Muniz-Sarduy Superintendent: 90-27 Sutphin Blvd., Jamaica, NY 11435 Superintendent’s Office Address: Msarduy@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-557-2618 Phone Number: 718-557-2623 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 3  Queens South FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Marlene Wilkes Executive Director: 82-01 Rockaway Blvd., Ozone Park, NY 11416 Mwilks@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 917-520-6743 Phone Number: 718-281-3509 Fax: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the SCEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Andrew Topol Nicole Schneider Griselda Mendoza NA Ruth Ortiz NA NA NA *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Brittany Weber Member/teacher 2018-19 SCEP-FL 5  Name Mary Gomez Cosse JaimeeGermann Jennifer Sclar Elena Callirgos JD Rose Heidi Yupe TBD TBD TBD TBD Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/ teacher Member/teacher Member/teacher Member/ teacher Member/parent Member/parent Member/parent Member/parent Member/parent Member/parent Member/ 2018-19 SCEP-FL 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) is a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. The process of developing and implementing the SCEP is aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding SCEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and SCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 7  In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement 2018-19 SCEP-FL 8  NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the SCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the SCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for SCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 9   Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 5: Build consensus around activities, strategies and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 6: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 7: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 10  Section 4: SCEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? The P.S. 182 vision is to cultivate students who thrive in our ever-evolving, dynamic learning environment that reflects the rich diversity of our wonderful neighborhood, and community, at large. It is our goal to develop curious minds and kind hearts. We are driven to empower our students to take responsibility for their learning and use their ever-expanding repertoire of tools to tackle any challenges they may face in life, allowing them the opportunity to flourish in our emerging world. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. P. S. 182 is a K-5 elementary school, with incredible diversity and breadth. Our 730 students come from every corner of the globe and from Jamaica itself, representing 15 languages and dialects. Our support for our significant English-Language Learners and special-needs students is as varied as are our students. We tailor our models and supports to fit the needs of our students. Delivering the best to our children means constantly striving to better everyone who works with them. Families must be empowered partners. At P. S. 182 parents and guardians join actively as volunteers, committee members, and learners. We support and draw involvement from our families with adult ENL classes, targeted and general workshops, Family Mornings, our school website, celebrations and performances and in a multitude of ways. Families are an essential part of our P. S. 182 learning community. P. S. 182 staff continually pushes forward in our own learning. We work intensively with such non-DOE learning and community partners such as Columbia University, St. John's University, ExpandED, NYU, the Child Center of New York, Little Kids Rock, Music and the Brain, and The Council of the Great City Schools. We collaborate with a myriad of educational, arts, and community organizations. Our teachers participate in wide ranging studies and pursuits, with these endeavors driving instruction and student learning forward. The fruits of our continual growth are taking strong form. P. S. 182 achieved four well-developed ratings and six proficient ratings on our last Quality Review (2017-18). In every category of the 2017 Framework for Great Schools Report, P. S. 182 attained a rating of good or excellent, either maintaining a strong standing or strengthening in every category. These strong practices are translating into rising student achievement on the New York State ELA and Mathematics exams, with increases of over 20% and 10% respectively in the number of students meeting or exceeding proficiency benchmarks over the last three school years. We believe that to support our children's growth, we not only need to nurture them academically, but socially and emotionally, as well. Through our vast and ever-expanded supports and partnerships--Restorative Circles, Peer Mediation, Sanford Harmony, Resiliency social-emotional assessments, targeted clubs and small-groups--we concentrate on developing and supporting the whole child. All of us at P. S. 182, adults and children alike, continually learn and develop. This is what a learning community does. And, this is why P. S. 182 will continue moving our students to higher achievement levels and ever-brighter futures. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. While P. S. 182 has made strides in proficiency levels across all populations, academic needs continue to be pronounced for all of these populations. For all groups, but particularly for our Hispanic English Language Learners and students receiving special-education services, the needs regarding literacy (phonics, phonemic awareness, comprehension, and writing) and language development are pronounced. These struggles combine with conceptual and skill deficits in mathematics to create great struggles in this area, as well. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 11  4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Our area of most-significant growth was in teacher collaboration, especially regarding our work around the Three L's (based on the work of Maryann Cucchiara), which is translating into significant gains in ELA, particularly with our ELL population. Our key focus area for this upcoming school year is supporting high-level student cognitive engagement by implementing school-based protocol (structures and systems) to ensure active transference of targeted skills and understandings from lessons to independent student application. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 12  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 28Q182 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 760 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual YES Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 85 82 30 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 18 5 30 35 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 97.0% % Attendance Rate 90.7% % Reduced Lunch 35.9% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 2.0% 55.5% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 1.1% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 10.83 0% 5% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 38.6% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 84% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No No Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups SWD, Hispanic Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities N/A NO N/A NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A YSH NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 53 48 35 93.5% 5.9% 15.8% 13.0% 27.5% 2.9% 4 3% 8.3 29.7% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No Yes YES YES N/A NO NO NO YES N/A NO NO N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 13  Economically Disadvantaged N/A ALL STUDENTS N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 14  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. While student proficiency levels on nearly every assessment, both school-driven and outside, from New York State Assessments to IRLs (Independent Reading Levels), have continued to rise each year, large number of our students continue to perform below grade-level expectations. P. S. 182 has repeatedly received positive evaluations and feedback on school-wide reviews, such as in our Quality Review and our PPOs (Principal Performance Observations). The area of least consistency, however, regards 1.2, classroom instruction. This corroborates teacher observations in the Advance system performed during the 2017-2018 school year by P. S. 182 administrators. About 20% of these observations fell into the ineffective or developing categories for the Danielson Domain 3, which deals most directly with instruction and learning. Of these areas, 3C, dealing with engaging students in learning, both actively and cognitively, was the area of highest need, with 21% of observations falling into the ineffective and developing ranges. The contributing factors in the gaps in student learning and performance certainly are myriad. Based on both the quantitative and qualitative feedback from assessments of classroom instruction, however, strengthening student engagement during lessons is an area that can have immediate impact on student learning. The primary target area for 2018-19 SCEP-FL 15  achieving this is strengthening the transference of learning targets from instruction in lessons (whole-class, small-group, and conferences) to actual student application. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all teachers will develop and implement structures, systems, and tools to support transference of learning objectives from instruction to student application, resulting in a 10% decrease in the number of observations rated either ineffective or developing in Advance Component 3C (Engagement) and a 10% increase in percentage of observations rated highly effective in Component 3C, when compared to observations from 2017-2018. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 16  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff)  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teachers will use data--assessments, student observations, conference notes--to craft instructional groups and individualized student goals. Teachers will craft lessons around specific strategies and skills to address targeted student needs. Instructional staff will dedicate planning and professional development to the development and revision of structures, systems, and tools to support the transference of learning objectives from instruction to student application. All students K-5 will engage in daily self and/or peer assessment of their work regarding the application and growth regarding learning objectives. Teachers will hold weekly conferences with each student focusing on these goals and review student work for evidence of application, maintaining progress notes for each child. Instructional staff will monitor and revise transference supports throughout the course of the school year, sharing best practices, resources, and learning through Google Drive and staff communications. Goals and actions plans will be shared with families monthly. Teachers, families, and students will collaboratively craft home action plans to support the transference of learning objectives. Teachers will participate in a minimum of three data-instructional meetings to review student data and progress in relation to student goals and related supports for transference. During formal and informal conferences, students will present to families how they are working on their learning objectives. Administration will provide targeted feedback on transference, through both the Advance observation process and informal feedback to teachers. K-5 K-5 K-5 3b – Parent and Family Engagement K-5 K-5 K-5 K-5 K-5 Sept 2018-June 2019 Teachers Sept 2018-June 2019 Teachers, paraprofessionals, coaches, administration Sept 2018-June 2019 Teachers, paraprofessionals Sept 2018-June 2019 Teachers Sept 2018-June 2019 Teachers, paraprofessionals, coaches, administration K-5 Nov 2018- Teachers, families June 2019 Nov 2018- May 2019 Nov 2018-June 2019 Sept 2018- June 2019 Teachers, Administration Teachers Administration 2018-19 SCEP-FL 17  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Monthly updates to families; conferences; instructional communications Invitations to families to participate in learning walks Family surveys Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. P. S. 182 instructional staff and administration leading instruction, professional learning, and monitoring 2. Weekly professional-learning sessions 3. Tuesday Parent Engagement bridging instructional supports to student homes 4. Vertical and horizontal teacher teams deepening pedagogical practices and understandings 5. PS182Q.org to share information and bridge learning supports to homes 6. Google Drive Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding X X C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January, 2019, we will achieve a pro-rated 10% decrease for ineffective and developing ratings and a 10% increase in highly-effective ratings in Component 3C, for observations completed. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance Observations Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 18  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. X X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? As per the results fo the 2016-2017 and 20-17-2018 School Quality Guides, student behavior and engagement continue to be pressing concerns of a significant number of teachers. To provide a quantitative baseline of students' social-emotional states, which feed directly into behavior, P. S. 182 administered fall (pre) and spring (post) social-emotional assessments to third- fourth, and fifth graders during the 2017-2018 school year. These Scholarcentric Resiliency Assessments measured student levels and growth in seven categories: valuing education, educational confidence, connections to teachers, connections to a supportive adult (outside of school), stress, health and well-being, and intrinsic motivation. Previously, while P. S. 182 provided myriad supports for students’ social and emotional growth--Primary Project, Restorative Circles, Sanford Harmony, Quest mentor groups, Girls on the Run, etc--our ability to precisely target students in need and to measure positive impact was limited by a scarcity of quantitative data. During the 2017-2018, however, P. S. 182 used this data in conjunction with other data to augment particular supports for students and to better connect particular students to particular supports. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 19  Post-assessment and growth data for the Resiliency Assessments show growth for targeted students. It shows that the area of greatest need for the largest group of students is in connections to teachers. Hence, we will train our focus on strengthening the connections to teachers (staff) for the students who are lacking connections to adults in school. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools –Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 5B- By June 2019, we will achieve a 10% decrease in the number of students falling into the lowest category (red) regarding "connections to teachers", when comparing June and October 2018 baselines to spring 2019 post-assessments on the Scholarcentric Resiliency Assessments, for students in grades 3-5. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 20  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Staff will analyze spring post-assessments in the Resiliency social-emotional assessments, identifying at-risk students and using the growth data to identify areas of support that had success and those in need of greater attention. P. S. 182 will administer the Resiliency Assessment to all third-grade students and new fourth and fifth-grade students. P. S. 182 will expand the number of small-groups available for student participation. P. S. 182 will connect targeted at-risk students to aligned supports, including enrichment groups. K-2 students will engage in daily Sanford Harmony activities in their classrooms. Students in grades 3-5 will participate in weekly Restorative Circles sessions. Staff will closely monitor alternative data sources—academic, attendance, behavioral—for students receiving Tier II and III social-emotional support. P. S. 182 will administer the post-Resiliency Assessment, measuring impact of supports on students and efficacy of the varied interventions. Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) 3-5 3-5 3-5 K-5 K-2 3-5 K-5 Summer 2018 Administration, guidance staff Oct 2018 Guidance staff Sept-Oct 2018 Sept 2018 All Staff Administration, guidance staff, teachers, paraprofessionals, CBO partners Sept 2018- June 2019 Teachers, coaches, administration Sept 2018- June 2019 Paraprofessionals, guidance staff Oct 2018- June 2019 All staff 3-5 June 2019 Guidance Staff P. S. 182 will engage in professional development and planning around growth mindset. K-5 All students will engage in explicit learning-experiences to build their awareness and development of growth mindset. K-5 Sept 2018-June 2019 Sept 2018- June 2019 All Staff All staff 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 21  Data will be shared with parents each marking periods. Intervention supports and updates will be shared monthly. Families will be invited to participate in events. Families will be invited to observe and to participate in events along with their children, particularly targeting those students with weak connections to adults in school and those participating in the small groups. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Instructional staff, guidance, administration participating in professional learning and student supports 1. Scholarcentric Resiliency Assessment 2. 3. Sanford Harmony & Restorative Circles curricula implemented 4. OSYD social-emotional training 5. Quest After-School Program 6. Per session for training and for staff-led engagement groups 7. Class schedules dedicating sacrosanct instructional time to social-emotional development Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant X 21st Century School Achievement Funding X X C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By the end of February, 2019, 80% of at-risk students in the "connections to teachers" category based on the Resiliency Assessment, will be participating in a targeted group or receiving targeted supports. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Scholarcentric Resiliency Assessment Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 22  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. X SOP(s) Addressed 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. X 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Teacher teams and teachers collaboration areas of strength noted during the 2017-2018 Quality Reviews and Principal Performance Observations. Yet, only 15% of teachers received an Advance observation-rating of highly-effective in Domain 4 (Growing and Developing Professionally) as per the Advance Danielson guidelines during the past school year. Very few teachers participated learning walks or intervisitations. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all teachers will participate at least five learning walks and/or intervisitations with the lens of our instructional focus of increasing students' cognitive engagement with stronger transference of learning objectives from instruction to student application, resulting in a 10% increase in the number of highly-effective observation-ratings in Domain 3, when compared to observations from 2017-2018. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 23  2018-19 SCEP-FL 24  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Administration will analyze Advance data and observations from 2017-2018 to identify teachers rated highly-effective in 3C (student engagement) and to identify those with particular strength in supporting transference. Instructional staff will develop and revise common understandings, expectations, and look-fors regarding transference and student engagement. K-5 K-5 Instructional staff will develop and continually revise structures, systems, and tools to support the transference of learning objectives from instruction to student application. K-5 Instructional staff will engage in learning walks and intervisitations focusing on transference, debriefing and creating action plans based on learning and feedback. K-5 Parents will be invited to participate in learning walks and workshops related to transference and support this at home. Administration will provide feedback based on implementation of action plans. K-5 K-5 Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Summer 2018 Administration Sept 2018--June 2019 teachers, paraprofessionals, coaches, administration Sept 2018-June 2019 teachers, coaches, administration Sept 2018-June 2019 Dec 2018-May 2018 Oct 2018-June 2019 teachers, paraprofessionals, coaches, administration All staff, families teachers, paraprofessionals, coaches, administration teachers, paraprofessionals, coaches, administration Employment of Google Drive & staff notes to share learning-walk observations and best practices. K-5 Sept 2018-June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Monthly updates to families regarding transference; parent/SLT learning-walks; instructional communications; parent workshops 2018-19 SCEP-FL 25  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. Professional-Learning Mondays, Common-Planning Periods 2. Professional-Development Days (Election Day, Chancellor's Day) 3. Per Diem coverage 4. Google Drive 5. Advance Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding X X C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, all instructional staff will have participated in at least 2 learning walks or intervisitations. By January, 2019, we will achieve a pro-rated a 10% increase in highly-effective ratings in Component 3C, for observations completed to date. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Participation attendance, debriefs, feedback, shares Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 26  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. During the 2017-2018 school year, every teacher received official written reports based on Advance observations within the system-allotted time frame. The range varied greatly, though. Even though all teachers received observation feedback within days of the actual observation, some did not have the actual, more comprehensive reports in-hand until weeks afterward. At times, though teachers received various other forms of administrative feedback, the time between Advance observations could be months. Though student performance is rising and P. S. 182 received proficient or well-developed ratings in all areas of the Quality Review and final Principals Performance Observation, classroom instruction remained an area of focus for both assessments. The learning gaps of our students remain daunting, and the urgency is tremendous. Accordingly, the frequency and rate of administrative feedback through Advance observations needs to reflect this urgency. Part 2 – Annual Goal 2018-19 SCEP-FL 27  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART– Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, school leaders will provide official written Advance observation reports within ten days of the observation date for 90% of Advance observations. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 28  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). All teachers rated under the Advance observation system will be observed at least once by the first week of November, 2018. Teachers will receive emailed feedback from the observing administrator within two days of the observation. Teachers will receive official written Advance-observation reports within ten days of observation. Teachers receiving a rating of ineffective or developing in any Advance component will receive additional support related observation feedback within two weeks of receiving the official written observation report. Administration will observe each teacher within one month of delivering the official written Advance-observation report, addressing pressing points of note and suggestions, from the prior observation, with the exception of the final observation. K-5 K-5 K-5 K-5 K-5 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Nov 2018 Sept 2018-June 2019 Sept 2018-June 2019 Sept 2018-June 2019 teachers, administration teachers, administration teachers, administration teachers, coaches, out-of-school professional support, administration Sept 2018-June 2019 teachers, administration How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. P. S. 182 will communicate areas of instructional focus through newsletters, via the school website, visits, workshops, and parent meetings. Parents will be invited to Family Mornings to learn alongside their children in their classrooms. Families will be invited on learning walks focusing on student engagement. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. Email 2. Advance observation system 3. Professional learning: coaches, staff developers, intervistiations, planning sessions, workshops 4. Google Docs to share resources Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 29  X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding X C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, all teachers under the Advance observation system will have at least two completed cycles of observations, with administrative compliance rates of 90% or higher.. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Email, Advance observations, instructional support logs and attendance Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 30  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. X X X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Year after year, feedback on the NYC School Surveys shows that the overwhelming percentage (above 90%) of parents feel like the school communicates about their children's learning and how they can participate. Yet, parent participation in school events, excluding November and March conferences related to report cards, lags greatly. During the 2017-2018, P. S. 182 surveyed parents as to the best times for them to join events at the the school, ranging from early morning to evenings. Also surveyed, amongst other points, were the best ways for the school to communicate with them. surveyed, were We received a 100% response rate on surveys. Parents received invitations to events tied to their preferred times and directly linked to the explicit needs of their children. During this past school year, P. S. 182 collaborated with NYU on a study regarding parent response and participation rates and the means by which the school communicated with them. This was done with the hope of adjusting to the most effective means of communicating with families. Yet, rates of parent responses to invitations and participation in events to which they responded positively was low, still. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 31  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June, 2019, parents for 70% of students will have a parent attend at least one academically-related event besides a November or March progress conference. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 32  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). P. S. 182 will conduct a survey of parent preferences for workshop times and means of communication with the school. K-5 Sept 2018 Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Data specialist, parent coordinator, administration P. S. 182 will craft workshops aligning to student needs and parent availability and language needs. P. S. 182 will make in-personal or phone contact to confirm parent attendance. P. S. 182 will advertise and distribute incentives for parent participation, including those that reward their children. P. S. 182 will follow missed appointments with letters and personal contacts. P. S. 182 will collaborate with BetaED at New York University to conduct clinical trials aimed at increasing parent attendance of academically-related school events, making adjustments to this action plan based on the results. K-5 K-5 K-5 K-5 K-5 Parents receive toolkits to support targeted learning and monthly updates aligned to targeted data. K-5 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Sept 2018-June 2019 Teachers, coaches, administration Sept 2018- June 2019 Sept 2018-June 2019 Sept 2018-June 2019 Oct 2018-May 2019 All Staff All Staff All Staff All staff, NYU BetaED, families Nov 2018-June 2019 Teachers, data specialist, administration If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. We will hold weekly parent workshops, send written communications, provide toolkits, and provide updates on targeted student growth. P. S. 182 will work collaboratively with our community-based partners at CCNY, NYU, St. John's, and Columbia University to offer opportunities for parental attendance and to increase attendance. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. Parent Surveys to gage areas of need 2. Parent Coordinator to liaison with families 3. EduTech (website company) to support PS182Q.org platform 2018-19 SCEP-FL 33  4. Tuesday Parent-Engagement Sessions 5. Per Sessions for morning, evening, and weekend events and workshops 6. OTPS for incentives Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding X X C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, 35% of students will have a parent who has attended an event other than the November progress conference. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Parent attendance based on invitations Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 34  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) TCRWP assessments, Fundations unit assessments, NYS ELA scores & item analyses, on-demand writing, teacher conference notes and daily assessments and observations NYS Math scores & items analyses, Investigations unit assessments, school computational fluency assessments and school-crafted assessments, teacher conference notes and daily assessments and observations teacher conference notes and daily assessments and observations TCRWP assessments, NYS ELA scores & item analyses, on-demand writing,teacher conference notes and daily assessments and observations Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Tiers I, II, & III: Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small group, individual Before, during and after school Fundations, Leveled-Literacy Intervention, guided-reading, shared & interactive writing, SPIRE, Imagine Learning Do-the-Mathprogram by Marilyn Burns, number strings, Prodigy Small group, individual Before, during and after school STEM investigations Small group Small group Guided-reading, read alouds, shared reading, interactive & shared writing During and after school During and after school 2018-19 SCEP-FL 35 Small group, individual During and after school At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) OORS, Primary Project Comet screening, Scholarcentric Resiliency Assessments, observations, referrals, teacher anecdotal records Restorative Circles, Sanford Harmony, Access program, Girls on the Run, art and music intervention groups, boys and girls Quest mentor groups, social-skills groups, Check-in/Check-out; Peer Mediation 2018-19 SCEP-FL 36  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) Seventy-four students are in temporary housing, either in shelters or doubling-up with other families. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Students in temporary housing receive school supplies from the school, so that they incur no out-of-pocket expenses. Our parent coordinator facilitates bussing. Our guidance team facilitates social-emotional support groups. Students’ housing status is a consideration for participation in our Quest after-school program (grades 3-5). Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). NA 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 37  NA 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. NA 2018-19 SCEP-FL 38  Section 8: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. At P.S. 182Q, we understand the importance of supporting teaching and learning so that what happens in our classrooms is highly qualified, as per our FY16 BEDS Survey, 100% of our teachers are highly qualified. All new teachers receive high-quality mentoring with individualized support in areas including, but not limited to: classroom management, effective planning, questioning and discussion techniques, as well as effective teaching strategies across content-areas. P. S. 182 supports newer teachers who have completed their mandated mentoring with continued mentoring through coaching cycles with literacy and math coaches. All teachers participate in regularly scheduled and on-going high-quality professional development that strengthens their knowledge of specific content areas, as well as focuses on effective planning, best instructional practices, and designing and using assessments. Teachers-College Reading and Writing Institute Calendar Days – select teachers participate in targeted workshops on specific literacy topics/areas. Mini-Institutes – select teachers participate in intense, differentiated, week-long workshops in one area of literacy and focus on: unpacking the curriculum; effective planning; best instructional practices; designing, giving, analyzing, 2018-19 SCEP-FL 39  and using assessments to guide instruction and meeting diverse learning needs through differentiation and modification In-House PD – highly-qualified staff developers work with groups of teachers on a specific focus. They meet together to analyze student work, plan, teach, observe and reflect. Teachers work in a group, but also receive individual support in their own classrooms to meet the individual learning needs of their specific class. Coaches P.S. 182 has a literacy coach who attends coach groups and institutes for their own development, as well as provide grade-level and individual teacher supports in any capacity needed. We have one math coach who attends coach groups and institutes for her own development, as well as provides grade-level and individual teacher supports in any capacity needed. Teacher Teams All pedagogical staff are members of a vertical team. Grade-level teams meet weekly to plan, as well as use inquiry, data and collaboration to improve instruction. Vertical teams will meet to develop content and pedagogical expertise to develop their own skills and to lead their colleagues. Lead teachers have been selected in every grade for literacy and math. They attend network and school-wide meetings and support their colleagues in whatever capacity necessary. All teachers and paraprofessionals participate in professional-learning cycles running in four-week cycles on Mondays. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). At P.S. 182Q, we understand the importance of supporting teaching and learning so that what happens in our classrooms is highly qualified, as per our FY17 BEDS Survey, 100% of our teachers are highly qualified. All new teachers receive high-quality mentoring with individualized support in areas including, but not limited to: classroom management, effective planning, questioning and discussion techniques, as well as effective teaching strategies across content-areas. They are included in additional coaching cycles with our math and literacy coaches. All teachers participate in regularly scheduled and on-going high-quality professional development that strengthens their knowledge of specific content areas, as well as focuses on effective planning, best instructional practices, and designing and using assessments. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 40  Teachers-College Reading and Writing Institute Calendar Days – Select teachers participate in targeted workshops on specific literacy topics/areas In-House PD – Highly-qualified staff developers work with groups of teachers on a specific focus. They meet together to analyze student work, plan, teach, observe and reflect. Teachers work in groups, but also receive individual support in their own classrooms to meet the individual learning needs of their specific class. Coaches P.S. 182 has 1 literacy coach who attend coach groups and institutes for their own development, as well as provide grade-level and individual teacher supports in any capacity needed. We have one math coach who attends coach groups and institutes for her own development, as well as providing grade-level and individual teacher supports in any capacity needed. All teachers participate in professional development to especially tailored to support our ELL students in reading. Though this work is based on ENL methodology, it supports all learners. P. S. 182 works closely with Maryann Cucchiara (staff developer) focusing on close readings, sentence construction and deconstruction, language acquisition, vocabulary development, and scaffolds to support accessibility to complex texts. The entire pedagogical staff is studying the use of Thinking Maps to help our students organize, analyze, and use information and thoughts, internally, orally, and in writing. All teachers are a member of at least one teacher team. Grade-level teams meet weekly to plan, as well as use inquiry, data and collaboration to improve instruction. Vertical teams will meet to develop content and pedagogical expertise to develop their own skills and to lead their colleagues. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. NA 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program 2018-19 SCEP-FL 41  Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). NA Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). P. S. 182 hosts visits from Pre-K schools and offers school tours to prospective parents during the spring. We hold open houses, where the children can visit the classrooms before the school year begins helping to acclimate them to the buildings and staff. We hold parent orientation sessions to familiarize parents with kindergarten. P. S. 182 will continue to provide services to kindergartens who are experiencing difficulty transitioning into school through our dedicated Primary Project facilitator. Administration and staff will continue to greet all kindergartens daily as they enter our Parsons building, 7:30-8:00 a.m. P. S. 182 will host monthly Family mornings and learning celebrations where parents can join their students in class for learning experiences. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. P. S. 182 uses assessments tied to the curricula we use. Through analysis of data, feedback from teachers, and co-planning with coaches, we hone the types and frequency of assessments, adding and subtracting as needed. Support for the administration of assessments comes through professional-learning sessions, grade meetings, individual meetings, and written directions. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (SCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 42  Title I Part A (Basic) Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Local school allocation amounts) 460,449 0 120,149 60,120 30,070 9,033 4, 508,851 Column A Verify with an (X) X NA X X X X X Column B Section Reference(s) Sections 5 NA Section 5 Section 5 Section 5 Section 5 Section 5 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH). 2018-19 SCEP-FL 43   Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/SCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 44  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. P. S. 182, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA) Act, is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students PS 182 will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ●providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 45  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 46  ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Elementary and Secondary School Act; ●schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent- Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ●developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 47 School-Parent Compact (SPC)  P. S. 182, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA) Act, is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA) Act; Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ●conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 48  ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 49  ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Elementary and Secondary School Act Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 50  ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 51  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): K 6 1 7 2 8 3 9 4 10 5 11 12 2018-19 SCEP-FL 52  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Supplemental Literacy Instruction Analysis of literacy data (including phonics, sight words, and reading levels) for students during the 2017-2018 indicate that a large number of ELL students in kindergarten through fifth grade have significant gaps in their phonics and phonemic awareness, struggle with comprehension, and are not reading on grade level. Their difficulties in decoding texts, gaps in vocabulary, and struggles to comprehend texts on a deeper level greatly impact student achievement across the content areas. Imagine Learning is an online, strategic, research-based literacy curriculum that differentiates for all learners. Students receive explicit, targeted instruction within an individualized learning path that continually adjusts to student needs. Students will learn critical language and literacy concepts such as reading and listening comprehension, academic language, grammar, phonics, phonological awareness and fluency. It is a standards-aligned rigorous program that will meet the needs of all ELLs. Students in grades K-5 who are identified as eligible for the supplemental instruction will be placed in instructional groups based on assessment data. Supplemental after-school instruction for students in grades K-5 will take place over 60-70 sessions, November 2018-June 2019. Sessions will last 80 minutes (2::20-3:40pm), three days a week (ranging from Tuesday through Friday). The language of instruction will be English. Each of 5-7 groups will include approximately 10 students taught by a certified ENL or bilingual teacher. Subgroups will be differentiated based on literacy and language needs determined by assessment data. Forty-five minutes of instruction will take place with Imagine Learning, with the balance of time dedicated to read-alouds and discussion tied to assessment needs. Materials will include I-Pads, laptops, and read-aloud texts. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered 2018-19 SCEP-FL 53  Part C: Professional Development Begin description here: ENL, common branch, and bilingual teachers who work in grades 2-5 have been studying instruction for ELL students around text complexity and academic language. We will focus on deepening the work in grades two through five. Much of the focus is on selecting and studying complex and compelling texts within the science and social studies content areas. Topics for the sessions are academic word play, sentence deconstruction and play, building robust talk sessions, and linguistic frames, in relation to these texts Teachers will deepen their understanding of using this knowledge to develop cohesive lesson and unit plans to support ELL students. Agendas, attendance and notes will be maintained by Assistant Principal Rosenbaum. Up to eight will meet twice weekly, 7:00-8:00 am, November 2018 through April 2019. This professional development will benefit our ELL students by further developing the teachers abilities to plan and to deliver instructional support and scaffolds tied to the varied ELL levels and needs, providing all of the students with access to rigorous tasks to be implemented during classroom instruction. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: To support engagement for parents of ELL students, P. S. 182 will offer various parent workshops throughout the school year targeted to the specific learning needs to their students as per NYSESLAT and school-based assessments and tethered to the instruction the students are receiving in school. This will include sessions focusing on online literacy programs our students use such as Imagine Learning and the online math program, Pearson Realize, which provides students with supplemental math supports aligned to the TERC Investigations curriculum, used at P. S. 182.. With more parent involvement and support, our students are more likely to use the lliteracy and math resources, at home, on a regular basis. Consistency of use will likely impact student achievement. We will provide at least one monthly parent workshop, October 2018-May 2019, to take place during Tuesday-afternoons, from 2:20-3:00. They will be provided by literacy coach, Laura Cobos, and math coach, Debbie Flaum, in conjunction with classroom and ENL teachers. School staff fluent in Spanish and Bengali will provide interpretation at events. Parents will receive notices in English, which also will be translated into Spanish and Bengali and posted on our school website. Our Parent Coordinator, Gloria Cahill, will provide additional outreach to parents. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 54 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 2018-19 SCEP-FL 55  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 28 School Name Samantha Smith Borough Queens School Number 182 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Andrew Topol Coach Laura Cobos ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Mary Ahern Teacher/Subject Area Luis Pelaez Teacher/Subject Area type here Related-Service Provider Bridgett Licata Superintendent Mabel Sarduy Assistant Principal Rachel Rosenbaum Coach type here School Counselor Laura Wrinkle Parent type here Parent Coordinator Gloria Cahill Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 3 0 4 5 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] D. Student Demographics 2018-19 SCEP-FL 56  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 900 Total number of ELLs 303 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 33.67% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 3 K 1 1 2 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 1 1 2 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 5 1 0 1 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 3 0 0 2 0 0 5 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Paste response to questions here: P.S. 182 Teachers use ongoing assessments from the TCRWP which include TC running records, PSI, sight word assessments, as well as ELL periodic assessments. We also use assessments from last year’s MoSL to help guide staff members in identifying goals and next steps for ELLs. The data has shown that the majority of our ELLs of all levels struggle with writing (specifically writing a well-designed constructed response with attention to focus and volume in the upper grades). We also disaggregate data from state exams and unit assessments and use this to help us inform our instructional plan. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 57  2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Paste response to question here: We use ongoing formal and informal assessments to guide us. P.S. 182 closely examines the school's "snapshot." The school has met AYP every year for the ELL population, for the last few years. ELLs have advanced and the gap continues to narrow. Also, as our school as a whole has continued to improve performance, our ELLs have improved accordingly. Periodic assessments, conference notes, running records and unit rubrics also help guide teachers in understanding the development of English Language Learners and identifying next steps in order to raise their achievement level. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Paste response to question here: P.S. 182 considers all data to guide instruction within RtI. We use the data to craft ELL academies, professional development and any instructional supports. Professional development has been and continues to be offered to ENL, bilingual, dual language and classroom teachers in order to strengthen Tier I supports for ELLs and all students. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Paste response to question here: Data patterns indicate that our ELLs generally excel in the speaking and listening modality, which is expected developmentally for the lower grades, but are limited in their writing. The NYSESLAT data shows that 9% of our grade 1-5 ELLs are entering, 13% emerging, 16% transitioning, 53% expanding, and 8% commanding. The largest number of ELLs resides in the fifth grade as this grade is by far the largest one in the school. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Paste response to questions here: All students in the freestanding ENL program at P.S. 182 receive ENL instruction within a push-in model. They receive integrated ENL from the certified ENL teacher and the certified common branch teacher in the classroom. Most ENL instruction takes place during the science, social studies, or shared reading blocks. Depending on scheduling, the integrated ENL will take place in a specialty class such as science, music, or visual arts. ENL teachers will pull small groups within the classroom to provide stand alone ENL 2018-19 SCEP-FL 58  instruction. Depending on the number of and level of ELLs in each grade, some students are grouped heterogeneously and others are grouped homogeneously. b. TBE program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: P.S. 182 currently has a K/1 12:1:1 and 5 th grade 12:1:1 Spanish TBE program. A certified bilingual teacher delivers both the stand alone and integrated ENL portions of instruction inside the classroom. They also provide home language arts instruction and the minimum alottment of bilingual content area subjects as per CR Part 154-2. Students are grouped heterogeneously. c. DL program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: The K/1 bridge dual language teacher provides both stand alone and integrated ENL instruction in one classroom. Students are heterogenously mixed based on profiency level. Students receive half of their instruction in English and half in Spanish. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Paste response to questions here: ENL teacher schedules are crafted around proficiency levels and mandated hours for each level. Each teacher provides the mandated support across one or two different grade levels within the classrooms. They are also responsible for providing 90 minutes of ENL to those students who have transitioned out within the last two years. Those students are often grouped with other ELLs in order to maintain all mandates considering the limited number of certified staff members. The bilingual teachers provide Bilingual instruction in at least two content areas, usually math and science. Integrated ENL is taught through social studies or shared reading at least 4 times a week, regardless of proficiency level. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Paste response here: Over the last three years, teachers at P.S. 182 have been working with Maryann Cucchiara in the development of academic language through complex texts within the content areas. Teachers teach science and social studies through shared reading. They guide students in deconstructing complex texts to make content comprehensible and foster language development. Students are using language frames to guide their writing, as well. All work within this initiative is aligned to the CCLS. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Paste response to question here:Bilingual and Dual Language ELLs receive running record assessments in their native language and El Sol assessments when appropriate. The testing coordinator arranges and monitors the timely evaluations and assessments. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Paste response to questions here: SIFE students need to build conceptual knowledge that they have not had the opportunity to attain in their native country. This is built with intense language supports such as visual aides, experiencial activities, and a great deal of repetition. Some SIFE students receive Fundations training to support phonemic awareness and decoding skills. Newcomers will receive similar support. Developing and long term ELLs receive a great deal of support through the 2018-19 SCEP-FL 59  study of complex texts and Tier 2 academic language. Teachers have and continue to be supported with professional development from Maryann Cucchiara and the assistant principal. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Paste response to question here: Teachers of ELL-SWDs use various strategies such as experiencial learning, strong audio/visual aids, books on tape, etc. to provide access to academic content. All Special Education teachers are trained in UDL and all teachers have received baseline training in UDL. These teachers have also received intense training from Maryann Cucchiara in building academic language and vocabulary through complex texts and word play. Teachers have also been trained in thinking maps which support the access to academic content areas. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Paste response to question here: P.S. 182 maximizes flexible scheduling as much as possible. After analyzing IEP goals, we are able to place students in varied classes based on their goals. For example, students are mainstreamed in particular content areas such as ELA or math based on their needs and mandates. Even with this flexible scheduling, the school makes certain that ELL-SWDs receive the mandated ELL services. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Paste response to question here: When certain needs are identified, ELLs receive AIS services in the areas of need. ELLs are invited to partake in small group instruction (i.e. math strings, writing, reading) before or after school. SIFE students may partake in small group Fundations instruction, as well. As part of the Title III program, second and third grade ELLs will partake in afterschool STEM work with a focus on literacy. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Paste response to question here: A Title III afterschool program will be available to all ELLs in grades 2 and 3. The program will focus on STEM (science, technology, engineering, and math) and literacy. The program is taught through the engineering design process which investigates real world problems by asking questions, testing hypotheses, creating structures, and analyzing results. The literacy conponent includes reading stories about problems that exist in the world and researching possible solutions. The work of Maryann Cucchiara will be embedded in this program as ELLs will need to use and learn academic language throughout. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? Paste response to question here: The Title III afterschool ELL reading "lounge" will be discontinued due to limited funding. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Paste response to question here: All ELLs in grades 3, 4, and 5 are given the opportunity to participate in the afterschool Quest program. Students receive homework help and participate in specialized classes with a focus on the arts. This year, second and third grade ELLs will be given the opportunity to participate in the Title III STEM program. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Paste response to question here: Over the last three years, we have been able to acquire and integrate various technology tools and resources such as ipads, Smartboards, updated laptops. Teachers have been able to incorporate audio and video strategies for ELL instruction. Also, all students receive a password to their individual Dreambox Math and Raz-Kids accounts which provide interactive math and reading programs tailored to each child's individual needs. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 60  13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Paste response to question here: In the free-standing ENL program, students have access to home language texts in the school library. We currently have texts available in Spanish and Bengali. Students are also grouped within classes based on a common home language. Teachers organize collaborative tasks that target content (such as social studies or science) and generate interactions in the home language among students. This year, ENL teachers will collaborate to compile a list of online resources in various home languages. We have an extensive amount of literature in Spanish to which all TBE and DL students have access. In our grade 1 DL class, students spend 50% of their day receiving instruction in Spanish. In our K/1 TBE program, most students spend about 75% of the day receiving instruction in Spanish. Those students in the grade 5 TBE program are heterogeneously grouped. Therefore, Spanish instruction must be differentiated. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Paste response to question here: The principal carefully reviews NYSESLAT results and crafts classes according to parent choice and proficiency levels. The assistant principal is responsible for providing teachers with access to materials and orders supplemental materials as needed. She is also responsible for developing and monitoring the Title III after school program. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Paste response to question here: Over the last three years, we have been able to acquire and integrate various technology tools and resources such as ipads, Smartboards, updated laptops. Teachers have been able to incorporate audio and video strategies for ELL instruction. Also, all students receive a password to their individual Dreambox Math and Raz-Kids accounts which provide interactive math and reading programs tailored to each child's individual needs. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Paste response to question here: The parent coordinator organizes orientation meetings for parents of ELLs new to the school. Parents are provided with resources for navigating all aspects of the school and their child's education. ENL teachers are on hand to help guide newly enrolled students who arrive throughout the year. The school counselors are also on hand for support should any adjustment issues arise. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Paste response to question here: No language electives are offered to ELLs at this time. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Paste response to question here: The self-contained DL model is used in our first grade class. EPs and ELLs are integrated for 100% of the school day, as the vast majority of students in the DL program are ELLs. Emergent literacy is taught simultaneously, especially since most ELLs in the DL class are at an advanced proficiency level. All content areas are taught in both English and Spanish. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 61  Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Paste response to question here: ENL, bilingual, and classroom teachers collaboratively partake in professional development to support content work and pedagogical growth. P.S. 182 provides extensive professinal development on collaborative planning and teaching, to support our push-in ENL model. Both ENL and classroom teachers partake in our extensive work with Teachers College in reading and writing and inclusive education. ENL teachers partake in weekly grade-level cohort planning with classroom teachers. They also meat regularly with individual classroom teachers to articulation on the particular children in each class. ENL teachers provide common branch teachers with best practices to support ELL students in their classes. ENL teachers meet regularly with the assistant principal to plan and discuss related matters. Paraprofessionals and service providers partake in PD with the teachers, as well. The assistant principal is responsible for supporting teachers in ELL instruction, coordinating ELL compliance matters, and workng with the parent coordinator to provide outreach to ELL families. Over the last three years, ENL, bilingual and common branch teachers have participated in PD on academic language and complext texts to support our instructional foci. The school has tapped into the expertise of Maryann Cucchiara who has led various PD workshops for all teachers. Teachers are provided with PD to learn new instructional techniques that align to the Common Core Learning Standards. The assitant principal continues to provide support and supplemental PD sessions for all ELL teachers. Paste response to question here: As mentioned above, all teachers of ELLs have and continue to receive PD on academic language and complex texts. The focus is on supporting the development of tier 2 vocabulary and academic language through sentence deconstruction, language frames, and word play. All aspects of this professional development support engagement in the CCLS. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Paste response to question here: The ENL teachers look at the CCLS (particularly the language standards) in the upcoming grades. We integrate those in instruction and think about more advanced academic language that students will experience and need in the content areas in middle school. Paste response to question here: P.S. 182 provides extensive ELL-specific professional development for all teachers and easily excedes the required number of hours. Teachers receive a combination of supports including district workshops, faculty conferences, in-house professional development, and workshops supported by outside organizations. One of the school's instructional foci is to increase students' ability to understand and use academic language. All teachers receive PD around academic language, and complex texts. The PD workshops are led by Maryann Cucchiara and the assistant principal, whose expertise is ELL language development. ENL teachers and classroom teachers who co-teach collaborate during all PD sessions and are given opportunities to practice new teaching methods together. Classroom intervisitations are a key component of the ELL professional development. Teachers observe each other and engage in best practices of co-teaching and ELL instruction. Agendas and attendance sheets for all PDs are kept on file by the administration. A log of this professional development is kept by one of the assistant principals. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? 2018-19 SCEP-FL 62  Paste response to question here: P.S. 182 provides parents of ELLs with mid-year meetings to discuss language development progress and results of informal assessments. ENL, DL and TBE teachers conduct these meetings. Parents are given the opportunity to review their child's work and ask any questions. They are also provided with recommendations for home support of language development. In addition to the monthly goal sheets that parents receive, parents discuss more extensive language goals at these meetings. The parent coordinator arranges translators to be present whenever a parent requests such support. If a translator of a particular language is not available, the school uses the Translation and Interpretation Unit for support. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Paste response to question here: It is our goal to provide support to all of our parents, in particular parents of our ELL students. Parent involvement and understanding of their child's educational experiences is key to greater student success. Our math and literacy coaches hold parent workshops at the beginning of each unit of study within math and ELA. The purpose of these meetings is to provide parents with a comprehensive knowledge of what their children will be studying in the upcoming unit of study. They are given the opporuntity to grapple with texts and mathematics. This provides them with the tools to support their child at home. The parent coordinator and other parent volunteers are on hand to provide translation services. Every month parents are invited into their child's classroom to learn about what they are currently working on in math, literacy, or the content areas. They are given the opportunity to see their children in action and it also provides parents with more insight into how best to support their child at home. Also, our parent coordinator offers workshops on various subjects including language arts, the content areas, and ESL strategies to be used in the home. Translation services are available. Parents of ELLs are invited to attend an orientation session to learn about the ENL, DL and TBE program options available in the school. Here they choose the program they'd like their child to be a part of for the school year. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 63 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Andrew Todd Topol, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 64  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Samantha Smith School DBN: 28Q182 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Andrew Topol Title Principal Rachel Rosenbaum Assistant Principal Gloria Cahill Parent Coordinator Karla Yandoli ENL/Bilingual Teacher Luis Pelaez Laura Cobos Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Laura Wrinkle School Counselor Mabel Sarduy Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 9/11/15 9/11/15 9/11/15 9/11/15 9/11/15 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 SCEP-FL 65 2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools School Name: Samantha Smith Superintendent: Mabel Sarduy DBN: 28Q182 The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Rachel Rosenbaum Assistant Principal Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. P.S. 182 uses the School Data Summary Report from ATS to help us identify our translation needs. We have identified 14 home languages in our student population. When parents register children, we ascertain the preferred language of communication (as identified on the Home Language Identification Survey). Emergency Contact cards also list preferred language which guides us for telephone communication. For parent-teacher conferences, we survey parent translation needs when distributing conference information. Through our PTA and School Environment surveys we have gathered additional information on needs. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 66  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Arabic Bengali Chinese (ANY) French Fulani Haitian Creole Hindi Mandinka Malinke English Spanish Tamil Urdu 5 183 3 4 0 2 0 1 2 419 446 2 8 .47 17.02 .28 .37 0 .19 0 .09 .19 38.98 41.49 .19 .74 5 192 3 3 1 2 1 2 2 405 449 2 8 0.47 17.86 .28 .28 .09 .19 .09 .19 .19 37.67 41.77 .19 .74 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families Parent Handbook September/1X PTA Meeting Notice Monthly How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Translated into Spanish by Parent Coordinator and Bengali, by classroom paraprofessional. Translated 2 weeks prior to dissemination. Translated into Spanish and Bengali by Parent Coordinator and classroom paraprofessional. Disseminated 10 days prior to meeting. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 67  Notification letters to parents of ELLs September (rolling basis as new students admitted to NYC DOE school) Translated by NYC DOE into all languages. Parent Surveys Varied throughout the school year Question program information (afterschool program) Varied throughout the school year Principal Letters Varied throughout the school year Translated into Bengali and Spanish by parent coordinator and classroom paraprofessional. Quest office coordinates with parent coordinator to have all materials translated into Spanish and Bengali. Parent coordinator and classroom paraprofessional translate into Spanish and Bengali one week prior to dissemination. Middle School Application Letters Spring Translated by NYC DOE. NYS Testing Notifications Spring Parent Curriculum Night September Translated by State Ed Department. Other materials translated into Spanish and Bengali by parent coordinator and classroom paraprofessional. Translated by parent coordinator and classroom paraprofessional one week prior to dissemination. School Closure Announcements Varied throughout the school year Translated by NYC DOE School Lunch Application Letters September/October and upon student enrollment CEC Meeting Announcements Varied throughout the school year Report Cards and Templates for Narratives Various marking periods Reading Levels and Support Sheets Varied throughout the school year Family Mornings Monthly Field Trip Announcements Varied throughout the school year Parent Workshop Notifications Varied throughout the school year Translated in ATS and translated by parent coordinator and classroom paraprofessional. Translated by parent coordinator and classroom paraprofessional. Translated in STARS and narrative templates are translated into Spanish and Bengali by parent coordinator and classroom paraprofessional. Have already been translated into Spanish and Bengali. Translated into Spanish and Bengali by parent coordinator and classroom paraprofessional. Translated into Spanish and Bengali by parent coordinator and classroom paraprofessional. Translated into Spanish and Bengali by parent coordinator and classroom paraprofessional. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 68  2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide PTA Meetings Monthly Attendance Meetings Monthly Parent Workshops Monthly Curriculum Night September Parent Teacher Conferences Fall/Spring Marking Periods ELL parent orientation meetings September and on rolling basis Middle School Application Process Spring interpretation service(s)? Parent Coordinator and Parent Volunteer interpret into Spanish and Bengali. Parent Coordinator and Parent Volunteer interpret into Spanish and Bengali. Parent Coordinator and Parent Volunteer interpret into Spanish and Bengali. Parent Coordinator and Parent Volunteer interpret into Spanish and Bengali. Parent coordinator and various staff members are available for interpretation services. The DOE interpretation unit is called when an on-staff interpreter is not available. ENL teacher and classroom paraprofessional provide interpretation. DOE interpretation unit is used when on-staff interpreter is not available. Parent coordinator and classroom paraprofessional provide interpretation services. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. The over-the-phone interpretation service provided by the DOE is used to reach out to families in the even of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 69  Our staff handbook clearly states that staff members have access to the over-the-phone interpretation unit. It provides detailed instructions on how to access this. Chancellor's Regulation A-663 will be provided to staff members in an upcoming PD session and the instructions for accessing the interpretation unit will be explained in detail. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) All parental notifications are accessible to parents and are provided in various languages. The parent coordinator arranges such translations and monitors the notifications and ensures that all requirements are met. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? The school distributes a parent questionnaire and survey every year. The information garnered from this is extremely helpful for decision-making in the school. The annual environmental survey and feedback during PTA and SLT meetings also provides us with valuable insight into the needs of parents. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 70 
