 27Q226 School Name: J.H.S. 226 VIRGIL I. GRISSOM Principal: RUSHELL WHITE 2018-19 SCEP-FF 1  School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Section 4: SCEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 SCEP-FF 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Virgil I. Grissom, Middle School 226 27Q226  342700010226 6, 7 & 8 School Number (DBN): 121-10 Rockaway Boulevard, South Ozone Park, NY 11420 718-843-2260 Phone Number: 718-835-6317 Fax: Rushell White rwhite11@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Email Address: Rushell White Lawrence Knight Ms. Sandra Buckley Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): Lucia Lengua Erika Joseph N/A CBO Representative: Monique Maitland Geographical District: 27 Superintendent’s Office Address: District Information Mary Barton Superintendent: 82-01 Rockaway Boulevard, Ozone Park, NY 11416 - Room 201 Jambert@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-642-5770 Phone Number: 718-642-5705 Fax: FSCQueens South FSC: Field Support Center (FSC) Executive Director: Marlene Wilks 2018-19 SCEP-FF 3  Fax 718-281-3509 Executive Director’s Office Address: 82-01 Rockaway Boulevard, Ozone Park, NY 11416 mwilks@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718) 281-3259 Phone Number: 718-281-3509 Fax: 2018-19 SCEP-FF 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the SCEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Rushell White Lawrence Knight Ms. Sandra Buckley Erika Joseph *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Monique Maitland CBO Representative, if applicable Erika Joseph Beverly Philips Milagreta Ramsumare Parent Parent Parent 2018-19 SCEP-FF 5  April Simpson ShawneThorne Margaret Premus TamikaHenry Lucia Lengua NicholaSobers Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Teacher Teacher Teacher Teacher Member/ Paraprofessional Parent Member/ Administrator Member/ Parent Member/ 2018-19 SCEP-FF 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) is a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. The process of developing and implementing the SCEP is aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding SCEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and informed by New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and SCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a 2018-19 SCEP-FF 7  comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality 2018-19 SCEP-FF 8  Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the SCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the SCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for SCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 9   Step 4: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 5: Build consensus around activities, strategies and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 6: Implement at least one USDE Turnaround Principle (e.g., redesign the school day, week, or year; modify the instructional program to ensure it is Evidence-based, rigorous, and aligned with State academic content standards; provide time for collaboration on the use of) beginning no later than the 2018-19 school year.  Step 7: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 8: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 10  Section 4: SCEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? MS 226, is a learning community that supports teachers in meeting the needs of students through innovative hands on experiences in small learning communities. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Middle School 226, named the Virgil I. Grissom Middle School, is located in the South Ozone section of Queens, and boasts a population of over 900 students. The school focuses on exploratory learning experiences, which allow our students to participate in hands-on learning experiences, Socratic seminars, STEM activities, and Literature Circles. MS 226 is organized into three learning communities – The Discovery and Explorations Academy, Humanities Academy for Performing Arts and the Renaissance Academy for Broadcast Journalism. These learning communities allow our teachers to better meet the needs of individual students while allowing maximum learning to take place in small learning environments. As a part of the Middle School Quality Initiative, there is an emphasis placed on literacy in all subjects, as well as hands-on experiential learning. Technology is integrated into every aspect of the curriculum, with each classroom being equipped with smart- boards or multimedia projectors and computers. A state of-the-art library allows students to conduct research and learn beyond the walls of the classroom. New science labs support students in their preparation for advanced high school science classes. Other high school preparatory classes offered are Algebra I Common Core, Living Environment and Spanish Proficiency. Following 3 years of study, students sit for the Regents exams and receive 3 high school credits as a result of their proficient performance. A new state of the art school yard equipped with tennis, volleyball, basketball, an outdoor stage, botanical garden, and a rock garden will bolster studies in all content areas as well as recreational engagement to support the growth and development of the whole child. In addition to the general education population, the school is comprised of approximately 7% English Learners, and 21% students with disabilities. Our Learning Communities: The Discovery and Exploration Academy – This hub for 6th graders, allows students to explore the Junior High School experience through rigor, discipline, creativity, and culture aligned to the Common Core State Standards. The Humanities Academy for Performing Arts – This academy showcases the talent in our youngsters with quarterly performances and displays in music, art, dance, poetry, drama while continuing to engage students in academic rigor around the Common Core Learning Standards. The Renaissance Academy for Broadcast Journalism – The academy engages students in print and digital media. Students utilize elements of print and digital media to develop projects and displays in student newspaper, video broadcast, student magazine, while continuing to engage students in academic rigor around the Common Core Learning Standards. Our Partnerships: PENCIL's Partnership Program builds and supports customized, long-term relationships between business volunteers and public school principals to inspire innovation and improve student achievement. We have been proud to be partnered with the JP Morgan Chase for the past seven years. Top executives, analyst an vice presidents of Chase have supported members of our Young Men's Leadership Program. These young men are mentored by Chase representatives who engage them in leadership strategies including financial literacy, self actualizing, business 2018-19 SCEP-FF 11  leadership among others. Our students have hosted representatives and visited their offices in Manhattan on several occasions. Our school was recognized for the Pencil Power of Partnership Award during the June 2014 Pencil Benefit Dinner and featured on the Pencil website. Our school also won the 2018 Veteran Pencil Partnership award and the 2018 Innovative Partner Award for our participation and 1st prize victory in the citywide Guppy Tank competition. Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater Arts in Education is a part of the M.S. 226 family where they often perform for our students and help them choreograph dance moves and routines in our after school club activity. RUSH Philanthropic Arts Foundation has been embedded into our curriculum for the past seven years and has produced our RUSH Art Gallery where student work is celebrated and displayed in our in-house art museum. This year, the RUSH artists will work exclusively with the 6th grade students, in class cycles, exposing them to different mediums of art. In addition, Rush contributes to the after school program to develop murals based on the theme being studied for that year. Jeffrey Gamble- leads the Photography Residency for 8th grade students. 8th Grade students in the Renaissance Academy are provided with photography workshops focused on how to utilize digital cameras to capture images to demonstrate chosen themes. Mr. Gamble also teaches students techniques used in photography. Student work is posted throughout the school and is currently displayed at the John F. Kennedy International Airport. Several local news media, including the Queens Chronicles, ABC News and New York 1 News have highlighted our students' success as well. The Debate Club was` initiated by Attorney Richard Celestin who has worked with our school for the past six years. The debate curriculum covers Supreme Court cases and is used to prepare our students to engage in an end of year debate competition against students in other middle schools in the City. Our students took home 1st place prizes, beating out all competition, in the debate competition held at CUNY School of Law in June of 2013, 2014, 2015, 2016, 2017 and 2018. Another layer of debate opportunities will be added through the Middle School Quality Initiative (MSQI) partnership this year. The New York Historical Society Museum - provides our school with rigorous and engaging curriculum for various classes bringing history to life. Representatives from the museum collaborate with classroom teachers to engage students in analyzing artifacts from the museum and creating artifacts for the school’s museum display. Noel Pointer is a music and theatre company that works with students in the school to put on a year end musical. Students engage in the art of theater and performance and have so far performed in full length plays. In 2017, students gave a stellar performance in the musical Little Shop of Horrors. In 2018, students presented the play Aladdin and short excerpts of Hamilton. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 12  Urban Advantage and the American Museum of Natural History - continues to be a strong partnership for our Science Department. Qualified Science teachers are trained by Urban Advantage specialists in providing students access to the Science Institutions in the city and provide support for science fairs. College Access for All- This is a Department of Education initiative that we embrace to meet the goal that 80% of our students graduate from High School on time by 2026. I Will Graduate is the consultant that helps to support this goal. In 2018, 7th graders visited colleges in Washington, DC on their one day overnight stay. Students toured sites in Washington including the Smithsonian Museum, the National Mall, the Lincoln Memorial, the Martin Luther King Exhibit, and Howard University. Many students took their first plane ride to Atlanta, Georgia in the spring of 2018 when they visited Spelman College, Morehouse College, the Savannah College of Art and Design (SCAD), Clarke University, Georgia State University, the Coca Cola Factory as well as the Atlanta Aquarium. Students also toured college campus' around the tri-state area. We continue to foster a college going mindset in our middle school students. Thrive NYC- this mental health initiative is focused on the social & emotional development of our students during their time at Middle School 226. This program will also be available to assist all the members of our staff as well. Herstory- is a female empowerment program that we offer to students in our school community. Supported by our consultant of seven years, Educational Alchemy, students engage in a 4 hour a week after school program around leadership training, civic development, and intense expressive and narrative writing. Students in this program publish a full book of poetry and has since published 7 books entitled Herstory at MS 226. Special Initiatives: By June 2019, all of the 6th and 7th grade students will be using a program called School 4 One where they will be using the IPAD in all classes for instruction. In 2018, we launched an exam review program that uses an app for cell-phones call "Check It." On a monthly basis, our students with perfect attendance and those earning Honor Roll status with a 90% or better Grade Point Average are celebrated at each Parent Association Meeting. The school creates strong family-community ties by including parents in the on-going celebration and fostering of students' academic and social success. It is customary that all award winning students take the stage for a group picture. Pictures are posted every month on the Perfect Attendance Bulletin Board outside of the main office. In order to continue to meet the needs of our students outside the classroom, we have recruited our teachers and consultants to teach and coach the following Club Activities after school:- Her Story, Debate , Indian Dance , Creative Dance, STEP, Choir "The Voice," Soccer, Boys and Girls Basketball, Student Government, Band,Technology/Gaming, Rockets Cheerleading , Young Men's Leadership, Journalism, Flag Football, Science, Anime, Art, Track and Field. The School Leadership team (SLT) and Parent Coordinator provide on-going workshops and outreach for parents as well as activities to bridge the school and community gap. These activities serve to increase parents' knowledge of academic and social strategies they can utilize to foster their children's success. Through the efforts of the team, parents participate in enrichment activities outside the school such as visits to cultural organizations through the school's partnership with the Urban Advantage Program. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 13  3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Realizing the importance of providing extra resources and support for our struggling students, we have created an Academic Intervention Service program to improve student achievement and improve proficiency levels. To assist us in providing specific intervention for our students we are using the program called I-ready to provide targeted instruction to struggling students. Progress Reports and Report cards are routinely reviewed and recommendations made for intervention or acceleration. English Language Learners( ELL) students and Students with disabilities(SWD) are provided with intervention geared toward their specific needs. This free program services our students for 2 hours two days a week and on Saturday for 3 hours. Parents of the ELL students are also invited to attend the Saturday sessions. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. The elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which our school made the most progress over the past year, 2017-2018 is Effective School Leadership. Progress was also made in the areas of Rigorous Instruction and Collaborative Teachers. However, to ensure that we make progress on the New York State report card we will focus on the areas of Rigorous Instruction and Collaborative Teachers. Challenges We Are Preparing To Meet: Our instructional focus is Danielson’s Rubric 3c: Engaging Students In Learning. This will result in classroom climate needed to not only bolster achievement in proficiency levels; building on the 32% improvement in student performance on the NYS ELA exam and 18% in student performance on the NYS Math exam, but to create a climate in which students are intellectually active in learning important and challenging content. This year as a school community we have been using a program called I-ready which diagnoses the instructional deficits of our students and then provides one to one instruction for each student so that they can be brought up to grade level. Professional learning opportunities (PLO) will be afforded to our teachers through the newly acquired Middle School Quality Initiatives (MSQI) grant allowing them to be collaborative partners and to provide them with the skills and strategies needed to improve Reading Comprehension levels at MS 226. Teachers will be given weekly common planning time; built into their schedules, to collaborate and share best practices. In addition, the Educational Consultant agency; CITE, will also be working with select educators to meet our school’s goals. Our Parent Association President has continued to vow her dedication to increase our community engagement through letters home, school wide phone calls, creating specialized workshops for parents, altering times of his personal work schedule to meet with parents and to attend all school functions. As a staff, teachers, the parent coordinator, and administrators continue to call and invite parents to attend all school functions and confer with staff during the open conference hours available on Tuesday afternoons. By continuing to alter our learning environment and embracing the needs of the community we feel that we will continue to maintain and/or increase parental attendance to school events over the course of the school year. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 14  During the 2017-2018 school year, staff assisted in developing, implementing, monitoring and evaluating formative & summative assessments. Teachers teams and administrators aligned the curriculum and the school wide administered assessments. The data from these assessments informed teachers of student performance allowing them to refine their curriculum and lesson plans in an effort to improve student achievement. Student improvement was also achieved through teacher planning as assessment data was used for student grouping and differentiation of instruction. For the 2018-2019 school year we will continue to deepen this work by ensuring the analysis of assessment results leads to highly effective teaching practices across the vast majority of classrooms. We have begun this work by examining the Instructional Reports from 2017-2018 and we will continue this work by making changes in our pedagogy so that we can improve in the weak areas highlighted in the Instructional Reports. Additionally, our SLT agreed that writing, a deficit area in our school and district, should be an additional focus this year. The team also concurred that math, an area in which our school saw the least growth last year, should be given priority. Subsequently, four teachers trained in the Hochman Writing Revolution Program designed to address basic writing skills, implemented the Program and created a classroom lab for inter-visitations. They turn-keyed the strategies in workshops and teacher teams. In the fall of 2017 our school started the Eureka MATH program which Is based on the Engage NY initiative and supports Mathematics instruction through the Algebra for All citywide initiative. 5. Identify at least one USDE Turnaround Principle (e.g., redesign the school day, week, or year; modify the instructional program to ensure it is Evidence-based, rigorous, and aligned with State academic content standards; provide time for collaboration on the use of data) to be implemented in the 2018-19 school year. The school week has been redesigned so that there is common planning by grade level every week. During this time teachers meet to collaborate and engage in Professional Development facilitated by the Principal, Lead Teachers and Science Coordinator with additional rotation by teachers involved. The instructional program has been modified so that academic intervention is given in English Language Arts (ELA) and Mathematics (Math) for all students in addition to the regular time scheduled for ELA and Math. During this time students are exposed to I-ready. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 15  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 27Q226 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 916 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 87 87 24 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 56 56 12 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 91.0% % Attendance Rate 83.3% % Reduced Lunch 6.3% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) 18.2% % Black or African American 16.6% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 1.9% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 8.09 0% 6% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 33.8% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No No Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No N/A 79 78 92.1% 7.2% 20.4% 38.2% 24.7% 18.7% 10 25% 7.8 21.5% 29% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No Yes Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School No Focus Subgroups SWD, Hispanic, LEP Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged YES NO N/A NO YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS NO NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) YES NO N/A YES YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A YES YES N/A NO NO NO NO N/A NO NO YES NO N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FF 16  2018-19 SCEP-FF 17  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed X x x x Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. We have achieved our goal of providing rigorous instruction in previous years and would like to continue propelling all members of our staff forward by continuing to establish high expectations for learning. In the Quality Review Report for 2016-2017 the school was rated proficient in Pedagogy. It was revealed that “Teaching practices across classrooms, including scaffolds, modeling, and the school’s explicit focus on student discussions, provide multiple entry points into the curriculum for learners, though there was inconsistent evidence of extension activities. This year all students have been using a internet based program called I-ready which diagnoses the instructional deficits of our students and then provides one to one instruction for each student so that they can be brought up to grade level. Majority of the classrooms possess technology (SMARTBOARD, movable projector & laptop, set of computers, rolling computer cart, etc.) that is readily available for teacher and student use. Teachers are given professional development opportunities that highlight the incorporation of this educational tool into their instructional practice. English Language Arts educators have been trained in the application and usage of the online reading program MyOn, which provides students with the opportunity to read independent novels on their reading level. Minor subject educators (Health, Physical Education, Spanish and Music) are also employing technology into their lessons and teaching practice. These additional elements in the curriculum have yielded an increase in the proficiency of the ELA State ELA exam from 27% in 2016 to 32% in 2017. In addition, there was an increase in the proficiency of the Math State Exam from 17% in 2016 to 20% in 2017. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 18  Administration continues to focus on 3c: Engaging Students in Learning. The goal is to provide professional development for all educators on the Danielson Framework and how it impacts student learning. These activities are enacted during Monday’s Professional Development period and various Lunch & Learns during the course of the day. A weekly common plan period has been embedded into each teacher's program to provide an additional opportunity for teaches to meet, share strategies, and engage in a common discourse around student learning. In addition, outside providers have been enlisted to continue to hone our teacher’s skills on this topic. Currently, almost 50% of our teachers are rated Effective according to Danielson's rubric. Our Next Step for Improvement: Even though the rating from our 2016-2017 Quality review, revealed that we are still ‘proficient’ in the area of pedagogy. The impact observed was that not all students were engaged in tasks that challenged and deepened their thinking and enabled them to take ownership of their learning at their appropriate levels.” Therefore the school administration will continue to focus on tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support. Teachers will continue to be involved in the process of devising professional learning opportunities and topics as administrators identify specific teaching/curriculum areas to address. Administrators will share best practices with staff, as they view the educators throughout the building. In addition, they will highlight and provide opportunities for sharing of these practices during workshops. Teachers will continue to attend summer professional learning opportunities available through the MSQI program and Word Generation . The Word Generation Program, designed to improve vocabulary, was piloted in the Discoveries Academy and was woven into all classrooms by the end of December 2016. An MSQI coach worked closely with teachers to ensure that the program was implemented with fidelity. A Degree of Reading Power (DRP) assessment was administered to all students and their Lexile levels ascertained. Teachers used this information to remediate or accelerate. This concentration in reading helped them to improve their ability to read complex texts in all disciplines. In 2017-2018 to strengthen academic practice the following programs will be implemented: Reading Apprenticeship Across the Disciplines (RAAD), and Learning Partners Program(LPP) . Science instruction will be remodeled to effectively implement the new New York State P-12 Science Learning standards. The method that will be used is the 5 E’s framework that was developed by the Biological Sciences Curriculum Study (BSCS) based on the constructivist view of learning. In the area of the Curriculum the school was rated Proficient in the 2016-2017 Quality Review. It was noted that the school's leaders and faculty make purposeful decisions to ensure that all curricula is aligned to Common Core and Content Standards and instructional shifts while making necessary modifications based upon student data and consistent formatting of planning documents. The impact is that all students have access to cognitively engaging curricula and academic tasks in all subject areas that coherently promote college and career readiness. The supporting evidence is that all documents reviewed, including unit plans and lesson plans, demonstrate alignment to Common Core and Content Standards. While Code X and Eureka Math are starting points in English Language Arts (ELA) and math, teacher teams use assessment and classroom data to refine curricula and academic tasks. The ELA team also modifies the curriculum through supplementing the curriculum with Word Generation and Hochman Writing across grades. The sixth grade math team was observed analyzing the grade-wide, mid-year math diagnostic exam and created a language-based curricular modification after noting that several ELLs were having difficulty with a specific word problem. Instructional shifts in ELA and literacy such as building academic vocabulary, writing from sources and text-based answers are integrated within humanities unit plans. In math classes, developing a deep understanding of a concept and the application of that concept were stressed across plans. In a grade eight math lesson plan, conceptual work around rotations, reflections, and translation was clearly mapped and included Webb’s Depth of Knowledge (DOK) level three alignment asking students to explain phenomena in terms of concepts. In addition to alignment to Common Core and Content Standards, all lesson plans noted common essential questions across grades and content areas. In a seventh grade ELA class, the text- related essential question was, “Do gender biases still exist today?” A sixth grade science class posed “What is temperature?” Lessons demonstrated tiered tasks to 2018-19 SCEP-FF 19  provide entry points for English Language Learners and students with disabilities, but limited extension opportunities for advanced students to engage more deeply. In the area of assessment the school was rated Proficient in the 2016-2017 Quality Review Report. It was found that teacher classroom practice reflects the use of assessments, task-specific rubrics, and grading policies aligned to school curricula. Across classrooms, teacher assessment practices consistently reflect the use of ongoing checks for understanding. It is clear that teachers provide actionable feedback to students, informing them of their next learning steps, and enabling teachers to monitor student progress. Teacher practice reflects checks for understanding and regular opportunities for student self-assessment that lead to adjustments that effectively meet the learning needs of all students. Supporting Evidence All teachers observed and interviewed adhere to the school-wide grading policy in all classes, and use assessments and rubrics that are aligned to curricula. All student projects are aligned to grading policy and receive peer feedback, student self-assessment, and teacher feedback, all based on task-specific rubrics. A schoolwide norm of all task handouts containing the rubric on the reverse side is adhered to in all classes for consistency. In math, all rubrics contain categories for conceptual understanding, computation and implementation, strategies for reasoning, and communication. Teachers offer clear and actionable feedback. For example, for a social studies task which involved analyzing a political cartoon and establishing the artist’s purpose, a teacher wrote “you have clearly taken a position on the cartoonist’s viewpoint, so next steps would be using the evidence you cited to draw a conclusion that reflects a deep understanding of the message in the cartoon.” · Across classrooms visited, teachers used checks for understanding at some point in daily lessons. While one sixth grade teacher had table groups actively use red, orange, or green cards to signify levels of understanding or the need for assistance at multiple points throughout the class period, other teachers used simple statements such as, “Everyone got that?” or “Who needs help?” and looked to a show of hands or thumbs up/thumbs down to make on-the-spot adjustments in the classroom based on checks for understanding. For example, a sixth grade science teacher directing a lab experiment on the flow of heat modeled the lab and then asked if there were any questions. She then directed students to begin in their lab group. After a few minutes of checking in with table groups and seeing some confusion, she did thumbs up/thumbs down check for the whole class and found four out of eight table groups were unclear as to next steps. The teacher then broke the lab down into smaller steps on the board to assist the four. Also, multiple classes used exit tickets as a final check to adjust subsequent lessons. Across classrooms, rubrics and post-it based assessments are used as tools of support for student academic growth. Rubrics have been individualized to specific assignments as well as the different target audiences for which they are designed. For example, rubrics used in all ELA classes are standardized for the department and aligned to Common Core, but modified according to grade level, task, and student needs. Across grades, rubrics were used for students to self- assess. All students asked could speak to and explain the use of rubrics and elaborate the specifics of each rubric as it related to their class or assignment and how it informed their next instructional steps. In a sixth grade math class, as students self-assessed using the specified class rubric for the day, a student responded, “I should be a level 3 because I was able to recognize patterns in the work and needed no assistance in getting the final answer. To be a level 4, I would need to better justify and explain the work I did in getting that answer.” 2. The school will continue to work on pedagogy. Assessment will continue to be focus as the 2016-2017 Quality Review revealed that “not all students were engaged in tasks that challenged and deepened their thinking and enabled them to take ownership of their learning at their appropriate levels.” The Principal Performance Review of 2016-2017 revealed that Teachers and students need to be trained into writing student friendly learning objectives. Frey and Fisher (2011) states that in a classroom “the answer to the “Where am I going?” question should be jointly shared by teacher and student.” 2018-19 SCEP-FF 20  We have achieved our goal of providing rigorous instruction in previous years and would like to continue propelling all members of our staff forward by continuing to establish high expectations for learning. In the Quality Review Report for 2016-2017 the school was rated proficient in Pedagogy. It was revealed that “Teaching practices across classrooms, including scaffolds, modeling, and the school’s explicit focus on student discussions, provide multiple entry points into the curriculum for learners, though there was inconsistent evidence of extension activities. This year all students have been using a internet based program called I-ready which diagnoses the instructional deficits of our students and then provides one to one instruction for each student so that they can be brought up to grade level. Majority of the classrooms possess technology (SMARTBOARD, movable projector & laptop, set of computers, rolling computer cart, etc.) that is readily available for teacher and student use. Teachers are given professional development opportunities that highlight the incorporation of this educational tool into their instructional practice. English Language Arts educators have been trained in the application and usage of the online reading program MyOn, which provides students with the opportunity to read independent novels on their reading level. Minor subject educators (Health, Physical Education, Spanish and Music) are also employing technology into their lessons and teaching practice. These additional elements in the curriculum have yielded an increase in the proficiency of the ELA State ELA exam from 27% in 2016 to 32% in 2017. In addition, there was an increase in the proficiency of the Math State Exam from 17% in 2016 to 20% in 2017. Administration continues to focus on 3c: Engaging Students in Learning. The goal is to provide professional development for all educators on the Danielson Framework and how it impacts student learning. These activities are enacted during Monday’s Professional Development period and various Lunch & Learns during the course of the day. A weekly common plan period has been embedded into each teacher's program to provide an additional opportunity for teaches to meet, share strategies, and engage in a common discourse around student learning. In addition, outside providers have been enlisted to continue to hone our teacher’s skills on this topic. Currently, almost 50% of our teachers are rated Effective according to Danielson's rubric. Our Next Step for Improvement: Even though the rating from our 2016-2017 Quality review, revealed that we are still ‘proficient’ in the area of pedagogy. The impact observed was that not all students were engaged in tasks that challenged and deepened their thinking and enabled them to take ownership of their learning at their appropriate levels.” Therefore the school administration will continue to focus on tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support. Teachers will continue to be involved in the process of devising professional learning opportunities and topics as administrators identify specific teaching/curriculum areas to address. Administrators will share best practices with staff, as they view the educators throughout the building. In addition, they will highlight and provide opportunities for sharing of these practices during workshops. Teachers will continue to attend summer professional learning opportunities available through the MSQI program and Word Generation . The Word Generation Program, designed to improve vocabulary, was piloted in the Discoveries Academy and was woven into all classrooms by the end of December 2016. An MSQI coach worked closely with teachers to ensure that the program was implemented with fidelity. A Degree of Reading Power (DRP) assessment was administered to all students and their Lexile levels ascertained. Teachers used this information to remediate or accelerate. This concentration in reading helped them to improve their ability to read complex texts in all disciplines. In 2017-2018 to strengthen academic practice the following programs will be implemented: Reading Apprenticeship Across the Disciplines (RAAD), and Learning Partners Program(LPP) . Science instruction will be remodeled to effectively implement the new New York State P-12 Science Learning standards. The method that will be used is the 5 E’s framework that was developed by the Biological Sciences Curriculum Study (BSCS) based on the constructivist view of learning. In the area of the Curriculum the school was rated Proficient in the 2016-2017 Quality Review. it was seen that Schools leaders and faculty make purposeful decisions to ensure that all curricula is aligned to Common Core and Content Standards and instructional shifts while making necessary modifications based upon student data and consistent formatting of planning documents. The impact is that all students have access to cognitively engaging curricula and academic tasks in all subject areas that coherently promote college and career readiness. The supporting evidence is 2018-19 SCEP-FF 21  that all documents reviewed, including unit plans and lesson plans, demonstrate alignment to Common Core and Content Standards. While Code X and Eureka Math are starting points in English Language Arts (ELA) and math, teacher teams use assessment and classroom data to refine curricula and academic tasks. The ELA team also modifies the curriculum through supplementing the curriculum with Word Generation and Hochman Writing across grades. The sixth grade math team was observed analyzing the grade-wide, mid-year math diagnostic exam and created a language-based curricular modification after noting that several ELLs were having difficulty with a specific word problem. · Instructional shifts in ELA and literacy such as building academic vocabulary, writing from sources and text-based answers are integrated within humanities unit plans. In math classes, developing a deep understanding of a concept and the application of that concept were stressed across plans. In a grade eight math lesson plan, conceptual work around rotations, reflections, and translation was clearly mapped and included Webb’s Depth of Knowledge (D.O.K) level three alignment asking students to explain phenomena in terms of concepts. · In addition to alignment to Common Core and Content Standards, all lesson plans noted common essential questions across grades and content areas. In a seventh grade ELA class, the text- related essential question was, “Do gender biases still exist today?” A sixth grade science class posed “What is temperature?” Lessons demonstrated tiered tasks to provide entry points for English Language Learners and students with disabilities, but limited extension opportunities for advanced students to engage more deeply. In the area of assessment the school was rated Proficient in the 2016-2017 Quality Review Report. It was found that Teacher classroom practice reflects the use of assessments, task-specific rubrics, and grading policies aligned to school curricula. Across classrooms, teacher assessment practices consistently reflect the use of ongoing checks for understanding. It is clear that teachers provide actionable feedback to students, informing them of their next learning steps, and enabling teachers to monitor student progress. Teacher practice reflects checks for understanding and regular opportunities for student self-assessment that lead to adjustments that effectively meet the learning needs of all students. Supporting Evidence All teachers observed and interviewed adhere to the school-wide grading policy in all classes, and use assessments and rubrics that are aligned to curricula. All student projects are aligned to grading policy and receive peer feedback, student self-assessment, and teacher feedback, all based on task-specific rubrics. A school-wide norm of all task handouts containing the rubric on the reverse side is adhered to in all classes for consistency. In math, all rubrics contain categories for conceptual understanding, computation and implementation, strategies for reasoning, and communication. Teachers offer clear and actionable feedback. For example, for a social studies task which involved analyzing a political cartoon and establishing the artist’s purpose, a teacher wrote “you have clearly taken a position on the cartoonist’s viewpoint, so next steps would be using the evidence you cited to draw a conclusion that reflects a deep understanding of the message in the cartoon.” Across classrooms visited, teachers used checks for understanding at some point in daily lessons. While one sixth grade teacher had table groups actively use red, orange, or green cards to signify levels of understanding or the need for assistance at multiple points throughout the class period, other teachers used simple statements such as, “Everyone got that?” or “Who needs help?” and looked to a show of hands or thumbs up/thumbs down to make on-the-spot adjustments in the classroom based on checks for understanding. For example, a sixth grade science teacher directing a lab experiment on the flow of heat modeled the lab and then asked if there were any questions. She then directed students to begin in their lab group. After a few minutes of checking in with table groups and seeing some confusion, she did thumbs up/thumbs down check for the whole class and found four out of eight table groups were unclear as to next steps. The teacher then broke the lab down into smaller steps on the board to assist the four. Also, multiple classes used exit tickets as a final check to adjust subsequent lessons. Across classrooms, rubrics and post-it based assessments are used as tools of support for student academic growth. Rubrics have been individualized to specific assignments as well as the different target audiences for which they are designed. For example, rubrics used in all ELA classes are standardized for the department and aligned to Common Core, 2018-19 SCEP-FF 22  but modified according to grade level, task, and student needs. Across grades, rubrics were used for students to self- assess. All students asked could speak to and explain the use of rubrics and elaborate the specifics of each rubric as it related to their class or assignment and how it informed their next instructional steps. In a sixth grade math class, as students self-assessed using the specified class rubric for the day, a student responded, “I should be a level 3 because I was able to recognize patterns in the work and needed no assistance in getting the final answer. To be a level 4, I would need to better justify and explain the work I did in getting that answer.” The school will continue to work on pedagogy. Assessment will continue to be focus as the 2016-2017 Quality Review revealed that “not all students were engaged in tasks that challenged and deepened their thinking and enabled them to take ownership of their learning at their appropriate levels.” The Principal Performance Review of 2016-2017 revealed that Teachers and students need to be trained into writing student friendly learning objectives. Frey and Fisher (2011) states that in a classroom “the answer to the “Where am I going?” question should be jointly shared by teacher and student.” Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teachers will conduct weekly analysis of student work and data from interim assessments to develop rigorous and engaging tasks. This will be evidenced by a 5% increase of teachers being rated effective in Danielson Framework for component 3c-Engaging Students in Learning 2018-19 SCEP-FF 23  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). All students will take the I-ready Diagnostic for Math and ELA All Students Teacher teams (grade & subject) , led by the Professional Development team members, will refine the baseline and interim assessments previously created. Teachers will ensure that the rigor of the assessment questions reflect how the standard is assessed on the New York State Exams. The school will treat interim assessments as if they are the actual N.Y.S Common Core exam and enact all state protocols (i.e. time specific, signing sheets, special education students receiving extra time, special location, scribes, etc.). Awareness of upcoming assessments will be apparent in all classrooms throughout the building via a school-wide assessment calendar. The many nuances of each state exam will be addressed well before the test is issued. Teachers Students I-ready Diagnostic will be three times a year: September, January and June Activities will take place beginning October 2018 to December 2019 Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Administrators Administration Teachers CITE Consultants Administration Teachers 2018-19 SCEP-FF 24  This preparation ensures for a smooth, structured and orderly day of testing. Administrators will monitor this activity by conducting learning walks. For all students, including students with disabilities (SWDs), English Language Learners (ELLs) and our other high need student subgroups, teachers will use assessment data from ATS, school wide quarterly data, NYSESLAT information, SESIS and classroom assessments to inform instruction. January 2018 - March 2018 October 2017-March 2018 CITE Consultants Supervisors Administration Teachers CITE Consultants Teachers will provide Response to Intervention methods in ELA and Math to Level 1 and 2 students. Students falling in these categories have been invited to attend the school’s after- school program that specifically addresses their needs. SWD and ELL students will be monitored through the use of assessments. Data will inform professional development to meet teacher needs in order for teachers to meet student needs. Administration will monitor the attendance of students at these activities and have teachers contact students and their parents in need of attending. Teachers will accomplish this task during Tuesdays parental outreach segment of their schedule. Supervisorand teachers October 2018 - June 2019 Teachers, students and parent ENL students will engage in academic intervention using Imagine Learning curriculum. Teachers of ENL Students October 2018 - ENL Students 2018-19 SCEP-FF 25  SWD teachers will engage in professional coaching. Teachers of SWD Students in Grades 6, 7 and 8 will be using the Check it APP for State Examination Review Purchase and Installation of JAMF an MDM needed to control the ipads and macbooks. All Students Administration February 2019 Monthly beginning October 2018 to June 2019 All Students October Administration 2018-June 2019 September 2018-December 2018 Administration 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. In September 2018 the school will have a curriculum night and during this time families will get a chance to have a close view of the Curriculum , routines and rituals of the school and be exposed to MSQI, Word Generation Learning Partners and Passport. As new information is found it will be turn keyed to parents. On open school in November 2018 administrators will do a workshop for parents that describes the instructional significance of the Common Core New York State Math and ELA examinations; I-ready, a supplemental curriculum, for Math and English Language and the impact of MyOn on student’s literacy achievement. In addition parents will be exposed to STEM labs an online platform for middle school students. From January to March 2019 the parent of each child will be invited to the school to have a discussion with Parent Coordinator, Community Associate or a representative from administration. The school personnel will review the child’s interim assessments results with the parent and provide information as to how to support their child at home which will take their child to the next level. Children who need extra help will be invited to the established after school and Saturday sessions. Parents will get a chance to view students’ current portfolios of work for their core subjects. In March 2019, Students will lead conferences and explain to the parents their work using rigorous Common Core standards. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 26  Human Resources include- CITE Consultants, I-Ready Consultant, School for One and Check it APP Consultant Instructional Resources- I- Ready, Imagine Learning, Eureka Math, Passport, Textbooks, School for One Software, Check it APP, 250 Ipads for the School For One Project. Schedule Changes-Modified testing Schedule Other- JaMF an MDM needed to control ipads Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 50% of all teachers will develop, implement, monitor and evaluate formative and summative assessments through their weekly meetings to ensure alignment between curriculum and assessments. As a result, there will be a 2.5% increase of improvement in student proficiency levels by this date. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Assessments such as a. I-ready Diagnostic Assessments, b. DRP( Degrees of Reading Power) Assessment c. Standards based Assessments developed in DDC and I O Assessment within Skedula d. MOSL Assessments will be used to assess progress. In addition, the following curriculum will be used to assess progress. They are the a. Eureka Math, b. Codex for ELA, c. the New York City Science Scope and Sequence d. Passport for Social Studies Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 27  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. x x X x SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? 1. According to the 2016-17 Quality Review report, "the school received Well Developed in the following: 1.4 Maintain a culture of mutual trust and positive attitudes that supports the academic and personal growth of students and adults Findings The school structures such Positive Behavioral Interventions and Supports (PBIS), advisory, and student leadership foster and support the school-wide student, staff, and parent commitment to shared beliefs around culture-building, discipline, and social-emotional supports. Impact A school-wide culture of both mutual trust and positive attitudes perpetuates a safe and inclusive environment that promotes academic and personal growth of students and adults. Supporting Evidence · A robust PBIS program, including clear school-wide expectations for behavior paired with an incentive structure to celebrate successes through daily recognition events, weekly “star-bucks” awards, and monthly school-wide 2018-19 SCEP-FF 28  celebrations, is noted by parents, students, and staff as central to the school’s declining rate of reported incidents and an increase by 15 percent over the last three years in students attaining a 90 percent or higher attendance rate. · The creation of a student leadership structure enables students to have direct access to the principal to present ideas for improvement or voice concerns. School leadership engages with and hears from students at regular town hall events, while student representatives also have a proactive voice in the events and meet with school administration once a month to offer concerns, such as better managing the school recycling program, and suggestions for an increase in extracurricular activities. Student government, representing the student body as a whole, was active co-designers of the school’s 18 clubs and teams. · Advisory is programmed into the school schedule one period per week and provides the opportunity for developing and maintaining strong adult-student trusting relationships. The personalized nature of the small advisory groupings allows each student to be known well by an adult and receive supports and guidance as well as feedback on academic and personal growth. Students that demonstrate a need for further academic or social supports in advisory are pulled into the school’s “connect and check” program in which those students are explicitly mentored by teachers who meet with them on a weekly basis. · Community outreach and events occur on a regular basis and are rooted in the academic and personal behavior expectations for the students. Explicit events such as Fathers Take your Child to School Day, a special someone recognition dance, and the Pencil Program Young Men’s Leadership Initiative “kickoff party,” incorporate an alignment of the school’s focus on an inclusive culture and an integration of family and community commitment. 2. Social and Emotional Developmental has been a focus in the Special Education setting as well as an anchor for positive behavior intervention services. However, there is a great need to engage staff and teachers with social emotional intelligence training. Our school has selected key stakeholders who were trained in SEL methods and will by providing training to staff for a full implementation in the 2018- 2019 school year. The school leader will continue to put in place systems that provide social and emotional support such as: Monthly school/community events organized by our community associate and parent coordinator who are active in the community. These will inform parents of ways in which they can support student learning and development at home and provide information on school-wide initiatives. Conduct monthly School Safety Meetings in which all related school constituents within this co-located building will attend. These meetings have become a place where the safety and security of all students will be discussed, problems identified, and solutions put into place. Conduct weekly town-hall meetings where students meet by academies. This will ensure that students are provided opportunities to have their voices heard about issues that relate to their academic and social development in the school. All constituents will utilize formative assessment and observational data to engage students and meet their needs whether academically or socially. Teachers will utilize data from assessments to individualize instruction for students. Deans, A.P.’s, and Guidance counselors will utilize data from attendance, ilog, Datacation/Skedula information provided by teachers, parent conferences, A.T'S data among other sources to provide intervention (guidance, academic, etc.) to meet student needs. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 29  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools –Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the number of students receiving a superintendent suspension will decrease by 5% as evidenced by reports entered into the OORS system. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 30  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Students and Teachers Administration CITE Consultants Dean Activities will take place weekly and some monthly from 9/2018 -6/2019 as indicated in the first column Pilot SEL and RULER approach in two classes Engage teachers in SEL and RULER 5 week training Utilize piloted classrooms for training purposes Engage in schoolwide approach to RULER and SEL implementation Assess and modify practices for continued improvement schoolwide CITE representatives conduct staff professional development using the latest research tool on classroom management and teacher pedagogy. In addition, these representatives have been enlisted to work with specific educators to assist them with classroom management strategies. The school will invest in a PBIS Rewards APP that will allow the system to go paperless. PBIS Rewards is an affordable school-wide PBIS management system that assists schools in their Positive Behavioral Interventions and Support program. The multi-device platform makes it easy to continuously recognize students for meeting behavior expectations from anywhere in the school, not just the classroom. And with added features like referral tracking and Teacher Rewards, PBIS Rewards helps to foster accountability and fidelity in your PBIS program. Teachers will also engage our school’s PBIS initiative to reinforce the following: 2018-19 SCEP-FF 31  * Students receive STARBUCKS for displaying positive behavior qualities, daily as outlined on the matrix. * Teachers will work with PBIS team members to gain strategies in implementing the program and monitor progress monthly. * Teachers will reward students with Starbucks for effectively demonstrating PBIS qualities as they occur. * Starbuck store will be monitored weekly and managed by PBIS Team Leaders. * Dean will review monthly infractions and work with Supervisor of Safety and Security to appropriately address issues. This information will be shared at monthly School Safety Meetings as a way to further improve and monitor its progress. * Dean and School Conflict Resolution Representatives will provide ongoing support. * Weekly Academy Town-Hall Meetings will enlist the assistance of student generated presentations to address the successful initiatives (anti-bullying) being applied and address new issues that arise. * ongoing support. * Weekly Academy Town-Hall Meetings will enlist the assistance of student generated presentations to address the successful initiatives (anti-bullying) being applied and address new issues that arise. Assistant Principal assigned to supervise ELLs and SWDs will collaborate with teachers weekly to assess and evaluate the progress of programs being utilized to address these students’ needs. SWDs ELLS Students with disabilities, ENL students and our high need student subgroup have been scheduled for Guidance Intervention. Additionally, special after school and Saturday programs staffed by ENL teachers will be in place during the school year. 9/2018-6/2019 Administration Guidance Team Teachers Dean Students are regularly monitored and counseled by our guidance team. Multiple Online software will be used to provide targeted differentiated instruction for students as well as act as the conduit for administering and tracking student performance. These include I-ready and Imagine Learning. All Students 9/2018-2019 Administration Teachers 2018-19 SCEP-FF 32  Teachers and consultants to teach and coach the following Club Activities after school:- Her Story, Debate , Indian Dance , Creative Dance, STEP, Choir"The Voice", Soccer, Boys and Girls Basketball Student Government, Band,Technology/Gaming, Rockets Cheer-leading , Young Men's Leadership, Journalism, All Students 9/ 2018-6/ 2019 Administration and Teachers Flag Football, Science, Anime, Art, Track and Field. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents receive monthly newsletters which highlight the improvements that exist throughout the school’s community. In addition, parents are provided daily updates about the progress of their students through the Skedula program. Finally, parents are informed of issues that exist when they attend the monthly Parent Association Meetings and the weekly Tuesday Extended Parent Conversation opportunities. Teachers are required to keep detailed logs of their correspondence, which administrators will monitor. They will discuss next steps with the teachers they supervise. The Parent Coordinator will provide monthly workshops so parents understand the use of the following:- Skedula, PBIS Rewards, Google Classroom, Eureka Math, Urban Advantage, State Math, English Arts Examination and Grades 6,7 and 8 State Examinations. Parents will have the opportunity to download the PBIS App on their phones and they will be able to track their child’s behavior on a daily basis. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources: Per-session for After Clubs and Activities facilitated by Teachers and School Staff Technology Resources: PBIS Online System and the publishing of the School Newsletters Schedule Adjustment: Advisory during the school week, during school and after school community outreach activities Other- Incentives to Improve behavior Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will be a 2% decrease in superintendent suspension rates as evidenced in OORS. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 33  Administration will monitor the following:- a. data in the O.O.R.S system based on the level of occurrences in the building b. data from the School Wide Information System(S.W.I.S) c. information gathered from the P.B.I.S Rewards APP. d. Guidance will use i-log to monitor progress. e. Information from Pupil Path and Skedula shared by teachers f. relevant ATS Reports Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 34  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. SOP(s) Addressed x x x 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. x 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The 2016-2017 Quality Review Report in the areas of The Teacher Teams and Leadership Development, were the sections where school was rated Proficient It was revealed that across all grades and content areas, all teachers are engaged in inquiry-based teams, each with a teacher leader. These teams collaborate in regularly scheduled meetings with a focus on the school’s instructional goals and implementation of Common Core Learning Standards. It is clear that the work of teacher leaders and inquiry teams strengthens instructional capacity and creates instructional coherence across content classes and grade levels which results in increased student achievement as demonstrated by school-wide student gains in math and ELA. In addition, through team leadership and collaboration with administration, teachers are integral to the decision-making processes in the school. Supporting Evidence The sixth grade math team was observed using mid-year student assessment data as an entry point to monitor departmental progress toward school-wide instructional goals. The team leader referenced the appropriate Common Core standards that are emphasized by the department in sixth grade and the group analyzed lesson plans to ensure the instructional shifts are evidenced. Specifically, the group focused on using ratio and rate reasoning to solve real world mathematical problems. The department is focused on moving into instructional shift four – deep understanding of concepts – but noted that a finding in the mid-year assessment was common errors related to vocabulary and explaining the processes. The team set next steps for developing scaffolded language-based resources focused on incorporating key language for operations. Two teachers had begun developing a similar resource independently and were able to 2018-19 SCEP-FF 35  offer colleagues a starting point. The overall finding on the mid-year assessment was a grade-wide gain of almost ten percentage points on the diagnostic when compared to the October diagnostic. The school currently has four model teachers, all of whom are also leaders of inquiry-based teams, in addition to a school-based mentoring program for newer teachers. In an interview with staff, one teacher reported, “My teacher mentor has helped me focus on areas of growth in a structured way that helps – in between my observations from administration. Our work together on our inquiry team gives me another opportunity to interact with her.” In staff interviews, a vast majority of teachers spoke to the benefit of the multiple team opportunities within the school. A primary benefit noted was the coherence across classrooms in their instructional practices. Three teachers spoke about the school’s focus on student discussions and the support of their teams to experiment, inter-visit, and both provide and receive feedback from team members. The principal and assistant principals take part in, but do not lead, department and team meetings on a regular basis and work to create an open line of communication and consistent opportunities for teacher voice in decision making. Several times per year departments or grade teams share out findings from instructional “experiments” which can influence course creation, structural changes, or improvement pilots in curricula and instruction. The school wide decision to focus on student discussions evolved from the input of teacher teams. One ELA teacher spoke about the focus on discussions contributing to an increase in student performance. The teacher cited the grade six mid-year ELA diagnostic, which showed a grade-wide gain of almost twelve percentage points when compared to the October results. School leaders conduct frequent and cyclical classroom observations and provide feedback utilizing the Danielson Framework for Teaching as the standard for professionalism and quality instruction. Each rated item on observation reports includes specific language from the rubric and evidence from the classroom observation that supports the rating along with actionable next steps. These next steps are then implemented and monitored in subsequent classroom observations. All observation data is stored through the an online performance management platform which provides a school-wide analysis for areas of teacher support and training related to specific components of the Danielson Framework for Teaching. The school wide professional development calendar and professional learning plan for staff includes multiple trainings aligned to the Danielson Framework for Teaching. In addition, each staff member sets professional goals rooted in the Framework which are part of their mid-year and end-of-year review process. These goals are also entered and tracked in the online Teach boost system. To take Teacher Collaboration to the next level the inquiry process will be revamped and modified based on our partnership with the Learning Partners Program (LPP). This partnership involves engaging with a showcase school to focus on rigorous instruction and Collaborative teachers. In addition, there will be a focus on student learning, sharing best practices and adjusting each curriculum as needed to meet the needs of our students. The opportunities and activities should help us develop a coherent set of beliefs about how students learn and as a result students will produce meaningful work products that indicate student achievement. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of our teachers will develop, implement, monitor and evaluate formative and summative assessments to ensure alignment between curriculum and assessments as evidenced by a 5% increase of improvement in student proficiency levels in Language Arts, Mathematics, Science, and Social Studies on year end assessments. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 36  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff)  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Professional development will be available and administered to all teachers on how to improve their classroom practice on engaging students in learning. Teachers and Administrators will focus on creating questions and tasks that develop students thinking. Teachers and Administrators will read and implement strategies from, Making Thinking Visible: How to Promote Engagement, Understanding, and Independence for All Learners by Ron Ritchhart, Mark Church . This instructional focus will extend throughout the school year and professional learning opportunities will be offered by many different constituents from our community of educators. Administrators will monitor this activity and results through observational methods (i.e. formal observations, learning walks and cycles of observations, etc.). An MSQI (MIddle School Quality Initiative) Coach will continue to work with content area and ELA teachers to improve student comprehension skills. The initiative focuses on explicit teaching and modeling of reading and writing strategies. Outside providers (CITE) will be working with specifically selected teachers, on a cycle, to provide them with additional classroom support in lesson development, pacing, questioning and engaging task/assignment development. Peer Instructional Coaches and Demonstration Teachers will provide ongoing instructional support for teachers based on assessment data and observation feedback. Administrators will ensure teacher teams participate in weekly professional learning opportunities on providing effective feedback to teachers using Danielson’s rubric to improve teacher practice. Administrators monitor and receive formal documents pertaining to the meetings topics and next steps for improvement. Teachers Daily 9/2018 – 5/2019 Administration CITE Consultants Twice Monthly 9/2018- 6-2019 2018-19 SCEP-FF 37  Weekly through June 2019 Weekly Weekly through June 2019 Teachers of ELLs and/or SWDs 9/2018-6/2019 Administration The ENL Coordinator, Supervisor for SWD and ELL students will conduct monthly professional development on strategies in testing, communicating with families, SESIS information, use of graphic organizers, online resources, computer programs for speaking, VMath, Imagine Learning, MyOn Reading Program and others to engage SWD and ELL students. Supervisors and teachers will analyze data from these researched based programs to provide individualized professional development for all teachers of SWD and ELL students. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. On Tuesdays, parents will have the opportunity to meet with groups of teachers to discuss their child's academic performance. The school has an open door policy where every Tuesday from 2:30pm-3:10pm parents are invited to meet with teachers and with team of teachers to discuss how they can support their child at home. Parents will be provided information during this time by teachers through the program called Skedula. This system allows parents to view their child’s grades, performance, homework, etc.The online system, Skedula, gives teachers and parents an open line of communication via email. Teachers will use Tuesday’s after school time to collaborate with fellow educators and schedule meetings with parents to discuss academic and behavioral issues. Teachers are also instructed to log all information for supervisory inspection. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 38  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Cabinet meetings with Principal and Assistant Principals will be a forum where all administrators can share their views of the teacher and student progress using data from various sources including OORS, unit exams, interim assessments and observations. Administrators will monitor and revise school action plans and make all necessary adjustments needed to meet outlined goals. CITE Consultants will provide structured and targeted professional learning opportunities for all teachers. Administration will collaborate with ELL coordinator and teachers of Students with Disability to develop strategies on engaging students in learning. Additional software and resources will be purchased to support afterschool and Saturday Programs. Administrators will participate in weekly professional learning opportunities on providing effective feedback to teachers using Danielson’s rubric to improve teacher practice. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, teachers will meet weekly to analyze student work and data from interim assessments to develop rigorous and engaging tasks. This will be evidenced by a 2.5% increase of teachers being rated effective in Danielson Framework component 3c. Engaging Students by June 2018 Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Administration will use the following:- a. Advance b, Teach boost c. Data from the interim assessments created d. Agendas, Signing Sheets and artifacts of rigorous and engaging work from teacher created tasks. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 39  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). x x X x SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Results from our 2016-2017 Quality Review suggest that the school leader continues to be proficient in making strategic decisions as well as establishing and communicating high expectations to staff, students, and families and provide supports to achieve those expectations. Continual use and training on Skedula/Datacation allows for parents, teachers, and administration to track student progress. Teacher practice is also examined with the aid of Teachboost and Advance. There is a system of accountability for high expectations but a culture of mutual accountability for these high expectations is what we need to further develop. Reflecting on the 2016 Advance data, we understand that though leaders communicate a unified set of expectations to teachers, parents and students, teachers are not effectively communicating these expectations to all students. Leaders need to ensure that they support teachers in providing clear, focused, and effective feedback as well as guidance/advisement supports to ensure that students, including high need subgroups, own their education and experience. Leaders need to work on supporting teachers not only with developing assessments and monitoring of student learning but also in providing feedback to students and making student self-assessors and self monitors. Part 2 – Annual Goal 2018-19 SCEP-FF 40  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART– Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, school leaders will support teachers using the Danielson Framework for teaching by providing effective feedback as evidenced in a 5% increase of teachers rating effective in component 3d Using Assessment in Instruction compared to their ratings in October 2018. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 41  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Administrators will continue to use the TEACHBOOST computer program to schedule and log all teacher observations for the 2018/2019 school year. This educational tool allows administrators to provide teachers with instant feedback through email. Administrators All teachers Daily 9/2018- 6/2019 Principal CITE Consultants Administrators will conduct professional learning sessions on the competencies of the Danielson Framework that will improve teacher practice. Daily instructional walk-throughs reveal implementations of these shared practices. Administrators are able to track the progress of students and teachers through the Skedula software. This results in creating and/or modifying upcoming professional development to meet the needs of one or more teachers. Administrators hold quarterly meetings with educators to review grading policies and proper adherence to school goals. The adjustment to all assistant principals’ schedule, 10:00AM to 2:00PM in classrooms, will provide administration with additional source material to examine at weekly cabinet meetings. The information will be a true insight to the pulse of the school, what classroom practices are succeeding, where structures need to be placed and how initiatives are progressing. As an administrative team, we’ll be able to competently make decisions on the next steps for curriculum, testing, lesson planning, questioning and improving student learning through engaging practices. Outside providers (CITE) will be enlisted to assist teachers identified by administration in need of assistance in classroom management and/or engaging students in learning strategies. Daily 9/2018-June 2019 On-going through June 2019 Daily 2018-19 SCEP-FF 42  Weekly 9/2018-6/ 2019 Teachers of SWDs and/or ELLs 9/2018- Administration 4/2019 Administrators will address our students with disabilities, ELL’s and our other high need student subgroups by analyzing assessment data, school wide quarterly data,interim assessments, Skedula,NYSESLAT information, SESIS and classroom assessments. Analysis of the data will assist in creating individualized monthly professional development opportunity for teachers of SWD and ELL’s. Guidance counselors and other support personnel will be enlisted to assist in meeting the needs of these students, both educationally & socially with presentations to teacher and students as well as student group meetings. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will be provided daily information by teachers through the Skedula computer system. This system allows parents to view their child’s grades, performance, homework, etc. In addition, it gives administrators, teachers and parents an open line of communication via email. Teachers will use Tuesday’s "Other Work" time to collaborate with fellow educators and schedule meetings with parents to discuss academic and behavioral issues. Teacher logs are reviewed by administrators to ensure this activity is conducted in proper form. Parents are also informed of opportunities for student engagement in our monthly newsletters created by teachers and students.The students will continue to use every mode of communication to engage families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership. These include phone calls, using an automated calling system called phone messenger to send out messages, backpack notices to home in English and other languages of the parents and the school website. Parents are invited to volunteer in the building. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 2018-19 SCEP-FF 43  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Assistant Principals will provide the professional development for all educators in the building prior to administering state exams. CITE representatives will conduct weekly professional development for individual teachers to meet their needs.Teacher per session and per diem. The school's phone messenger system is used to disseminate information on state exams.Letters are routinely sent home to parents on the subject of testing. All exams are identified in the school’s monthly newsletter Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, school leaders will support teachers daily using the Danielson Framework for teaching by providing effective feedback as evidenced in a 2.5% increase of teachers rating effective in component 3d Using Assessment in Instruction compared to their ratings in October 2018. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The following measures will be used: a. Advance b. Teachboost c. Walkthrough with CITE d. Walkthrough with Word Generation Consultant Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 44  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. x X x x SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. According to the 2014-2015 School Quality Snapshot, 70% of parents surveyed responded positively to questions about strong family-community ties and 82% responded positively to the same question on the 2015-2016 N.Y.C School Survey. Reports from previous administrative 2015-2016 walk-throughs and the quality review of 2016-2017 suggest that we continue to be effective in developing relationships with community services to address identified family needs. We have a Community Associate and Parent Coordinator who actively engage the community with monthly school/community events. As noted by the reviewer on the 2016-2017 Quality Review, the Quality Indicator 3.4 (High Expectations) has achieved proficiency based on the following improvements: 3.4 High Expectations Findings 2018-19 SCEP-FF 45  School leaders consistently communicate high expectations to the entire staff and support them towards achieving those expectations. School leaders and staff communicate expectations connected to a path to both high school and college and career readiness to students and families. Impact A system of accountability for high expectations is in place that encompasses training, goal-setting, observations and monitoring of performance. Parents are aware of their child academic progress towards high expectations while students are prepared for the next level. Supporting Evidence Students and families spoke of their understanding, excitement and support for the school’s external partnerships and extra-curricular opportunities for students. The school offers multiple programs which demonstrate high expectations for students and offer supports such as mentoring and leadership opportunities for achieving those expectations. Through the Pencil program partnership which supports the Young Men’s Leadership Initiative and the Herstory program for young women, the communication of high expectations is consistent and clear. An application process, attendance and grade requirements, and continual growth are required for participation and the two programs both illustrate and support the school’s message about expectations. Students and their families speak highly of the school and the communication received concerning academic support. In addition to student-led parent conferences and yearly individual family meetings with the parent coordinator to monitor progress, Pupil Path, a parent and student online portal, is actively utilized to keep families abreast of how students are doing academically. One parent said, “I was able to see that my son worked on several writing projects by checking Pupil Path.” Additionally, one student said, “On Pupil Path, you can check your grades to see how you’re doing, check for homework you may have missed, and you can always know how you are doing.” Parents praised teachers for their communication via email and phone calls, and stressed that they felt they had an open door to the school through the parent coordinator and administration. A school messenger system sends daily messages to parents for those students who are absent and weekly reminders of upcoming events. A parent calendar is distributed monthly with all upcoming events including college trips planned for the school year. In depth, quarterly newsletters, noting high expectations for students, are also produced and shared with families. 2. In an effort to further improve strong family and community ties, we would like to continue to improve parental attendance at all school functions. Possible next steps are to provide more professional learning opportunities for staff on developing partnerships with families and the wider community. We will continue to build strong family ties through monthly workshops, building a user-friendly school website, the bi-monthly newsletters, inviting parents to classroom celebrations, and providing school related information through the School Messenger system. Also to become highly effective in family and community engagement, we will monitor partnerships and feedback from staff, family and the community to aid families in supporting student achievement. We will also continue with our mid-year parental data review initiative which allows each parent and child to meet individually with a school personnel to review midpoint data collected. Parents are provided with the necessary remediation or acceleration resources at this meeting. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 46  By June 2019, there will be a 5% increase in parent attendance to monthly Parent Teacher Association Meetings compared to the 2017-2018 school year.We are going to measure this goal by letting the parents fill out a survey for each time they attend. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 47  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Teachers who are a part of the Parent Teacher Association conduct monthly meetings for parents where the following professional learning opportunities are addressed: Parents Students 9/2018– 6/2019 Parent Association Parent Coordinator Community Associate, Administration Financial Planning Workshop Workshops for ELL Parents iLiteracy and Math Workshops Celebration Activities include and are not limited to Perfect Attendance Father & Daughter Dance Game Night is announced. Thanksgiving Dinner with local shelter. Assistant Principal(s) conduct workshops on the school’s curriculum, school policies, state exam information, etc. Parent Coordinator and Parent Association president utilize the school’s Messenger System which calls all phone numbers of our students and alerts them of upcoming events and meetings. In addition, they send fliers home with students. Information for parents is translated and sent home. In addition there are teachers who are experts in other languages that translate for parents as needed. Parents of SWD and/or ELLS 9/2018 – 6/2019 ELL teacher and Administration 2018-19 SCEP-FF 48  Urban Advantage trips coordinated by the Parent Coordinator All students 9/2018-6/2019 Parent Coordinator 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Urban Advantage provides free access for students and their families to facilities associated with the New York Wild life Conservatory Society. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human resources- Per-session for After School Celebrations , Workshops. and weekend community activities Technology resources- maintenance of School Messenger and the school website Other items- Incentives for Monthly celebrations Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will be a 2.5% increase in parent attendance to monthly Parent Teacher Association Meetings as evidenced by attendance sheets compared to parent attendance in October 2018. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The following measures will be used a. comparing monthly attendance sheets to the 2016- 2017 school year. b. NYC School Survey c. Parent Perception Survey Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 49  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Review of student performance on formative and interim assessments as well as teacher observations Review of student performance on Math Statewide, formative and interim assessments, and teacher observations Review of student performance on Science Statewide, interim and formative assessments Review of student performance on ELA, State-wide, classroom, and Schoolwide Social Studies Assessments, teacher recommendations Review of student behavior and analysis of data from suspensions, attendance and teacher referrals Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Response to Intervention Reading Program Open to 900 Students Small Group Instruction Response to Intervention Reading Program Open to 900 Students Small Group Instruction Response to Intervention Reading Program Open to 900 Students Small Group Instruction Response to Intervention Reading Program Open to 900 Students Small Group Instruction When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During the school day, Before and After School, Saturday School During the school day, Before and After School, Saturday School During the school day, Before and After School, Saturday School During the school day, Before and After School, Saturday School Group Counseling Sessions, Restorative Circles, etc Small Group Instruction- Provided by Guidance Counselors, Dean and Assistant Principals. During the school day, Before and After School, Saturday School 2018-19 SCEP-FF 50  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) There are 12 Students in Temporary Housing. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. We currently have 12 students in Temporary Housing. Each student is provided with a metro card, free school uniform. and basic emergency supplies (e.g., uniforms, school supplies, books, etc.). They are also provided with counseling services, and intervention services so that they will have opportunities to progress academically. The parent coordinator works with the Pupil Personnel secretary to identify and support students in this category. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 51  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FF 52  Section 8: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. We will utilize the Teacher Finder System to advertise and review resumes of possible candidates. Following that process, we will have candidate interviewed and conduct demonstration lessons to students who will then assist in evaluating their performance. We will then reach out to Field Support who will provide us with information as to the license(s) the teacher holds. Only after teachers are vetted by Field Support are they offered a position in our school. Retention: Administration will continue to provide a nurturing and supportive environment for all its educators through reflection surveys, observations and team building professional learning activities, and commendations. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). All staff engage in weekly professional development provided by consultants, Superintendent representatives, New CSA, UFT and Teacher Leaders in strategies that will enable students to meet Common Core Learning Standards. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. Targeted assistance training will be provided to the administrator by the superintendent's office and will be implemented to meet the needs of students. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 53  3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). Students will engage in regular classes and strategies gained from planning and coordination of supports will be embedded in the school's instructional and operational practices. Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teacher teams (grade & subject) will refine the baseline and interim assessments previously created. Teachers will ensure that the rigor of the assessment questions reflect how the standard is assessed on the New York State Exams. Assessment results will be used in differentiating lessons and meeting student needs.Administrators will use this data to ensure groups are formed and specific skill needs are being addressed by all educators. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (SCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) X Title I Part A (Basic) Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Federal Federal Federal 509,234.00 x 2018-19 SCEP-FF 54 Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Federal Federal Federal Tax Levy (FSF) Local 0 12,366.00 19,134.00 5,456,378.00 x x X X 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/SCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 55   Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 56  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Middle School 226 , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Middle School 226 will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 SCEP-FF 57  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Elementary and Secondary (ESSA) Act; 2018-19 SCEP-FF 58  ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Middle School 226 , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; 2018-19 SCEP-FF 59  ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Elementary and Secondary (ESSA) Act; I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; 2018-19 SCEP-FF 60  ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; 2018-19 SCEP-FF 61  ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 62  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 SCEP-FF 63  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: We currently have a total of 915 students enrolled. Students are primarily from Guyana, Suriname, Trinidad, Jamaica, and other Caribbean islands where they often communicate using an English Creole. Our goal is to offer students from these backgrounds additional literacy support so that they may acquire the standard American English vernacular and better function in the classroom. All students will be provided with literacy instruction in English with a focus on building reading comprehension skills across all content areas. Students will be grouped heterogeneously across grades six through eight. One certified English, Math, and ENL teacher will be used to instruct this unique group of students. They will have the opportunity to practice navigating through the English Language Arts and Math curriculum, with an intense focus on the academic vocabulary words used in the classroom. We have purchased the Imagine Learning computer software program that will be used to assess, instruct, and track student progress in both Math and ELA instruction. We have designed this Saturday and Before School Academy with our struggling learners in mind. It is our goal to equip these students with the literacy skills they need to perform on grade level. Our before school RTI program will begin on Thursday, November 1, 2018 and run through Friday, March 29, 2019. This will make for a total of 80 sessions from 7:30 a.m-8:10 am. We have purchased Continental Press' Finishline for ELLs 2.0 English Proficiency kits. Each kit is NYS standards aligned and has grade appropriate curricula. The ebook component makes recording and tracking student data very manageable. Through this program students are able to listen to texts read aloud, write short and extended responses to a variety of content specific topics. Opportunities to answer multiple choice items and record oral responses is embedded in the digital program. The data indicates that there are 21 transitional ELLS and 24 Expanding ELLs. These groups make up 50% of our total ELLs. Through this program, students will be exposed to grade level writing techniques (this modality has the lowest points-3-7 points scored on the 2018 NYSESLAT exam). Additionally, the SCAMPER strategy will be applied to the Quick Write activities provided by the program to strengthen writing skills and teach students how to elaborate on their ideas when they write. The content of the text is also aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards and the Next Generation Standards. The exposure to this text and the embedded strategies will improve the reading, writing, listening, and speaking skills of the students. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 64  Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Teachers working this program have attended an Imagine Learning webinar training to introduce them to the benefits and features of the program. Additionally, Imagine Learning team members will provide six additional sessions of professional development to assist teachers in navigating through the program during our Monday afternoon professional learning sessions. A series of professional development workshops are offered to educate the teachers of our ELL community on the learning styles, needs, and obstacles faced by their students who belong to the ELL community. The 45 minute sessions will be individualized according to Newcomers, SIFE, Struggling Readers, Advanced ELL proficient, and Intermediate ELL Proficient. Teachers in the Title III Program will have professional development provided by consultants from the Sound Reading Program and imagine Learning. The consultants will explain how teachers may best use the program to their benefit, assist teachers in how to generate data reports, and analyze them to support students during teacher lead e-book reading sessions. The ENL Coordinator, Ms. Hunter will provide other professional development sessions. Ms. Hunter develops her professional development sessions by using resources from the Engage NY website, turnkeying the information she receives from the Field Support Center learning institute, as well as the workshops provided by the Sound Reading Company. Workshops focus on strategies to address the basic instructional needs of the ENL population, how best to scaffold for ELLs/MMLs, and difficulties faced by struggling ELL/MLL students. The teachers of ELLs/MLLs who will be receiving these training sessions are as follows: Portia Stevens, Luz Colman, Terry Denny, Hardat Sugrim, Sherille Sheppard, Luguenia Wright, Kami Durham, Ellen Brach, Melissa Priester, Anne Goldfeder, Carlos Hernandez, and Karen Hagues. The workshop facilitator will create and distribute agendas and sign-in sheets to all attendees. At the end of each session the agendas and sign-in sheets are then submitted to the ELA/ELL/SS supervisor, Jennifer Shirley-Brown to be filed and held on record. On-going Tuesdays Topic: Using data from Imagine Learning and Finishline for ELLs to meet student needs Facilitated by: Ms. Hunter 2:30-3:10 p.m. October Topic: Communicating with LEP Parents, accessing resources Facilitated by: Ms. Hunter 2:30-3:10 p.m. December Topic: Disciplinary Literacy and ELLs/MLLs Facilitated by: Ms. Hunter 2:30-3:10 p.m. February Topic: Understanding the Social-Emotional needs of ELLs Facilitated by: Ms. Hunter 2:30-3:10 p.m. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration  topics to be covered 2018-19 SCEP-FF 65  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities  name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities Begin description here: We endeavor to create a welcoming environment for our parents of ELLs/MLLs so that they stay well informed about their children's education. On Saturday mornings from 10:00-11:30a.m., from December through April, parents will have an opportunity to engage in a series where they will be offered English courses on how to complete important documents like lunch forms, medical forms, high school applications, and scholarship material. Parents of these immigrant students will receive an hour long computer workshop that will help them navigate through the same computer programs their children use to complete their assignments. Some of these online resources are: iReady, MyOn, Skedula, Imagine Learning, Google Classroom, and GoMath. Parents will receive a flyer, translated in the home languages, that indicates the date, time, location, and topics to be covered in their preferred language. These workshops will be held the first Saturday of every month from October through May from 10:00-12:00 p.m. facilitated by Ms. Hunter the ENL coordinator and MS. Kelly the Parent Coodinator. Ms. Osbourne, the guidance counselor, will work along with the Parent coordinator to provide informative parent outreach sessions about how to navigate the school's website and find resources online. Notifications about these sessions will be sent via PupilPath a web-based system (which has the messages translated into the parents' preferred language) as well as through the school messenger. The Language Access Coordinator will schedule interpreters to be present at such information sessions through the T & I Unit. In the spring parents receive a special test prep workshop where they learn about promotion criteria, the State expectations for NYS ELA, Algebra I, Science, and NYSESLAT exams their children will be taking. Copies of workshop agendas, and sign-in sheets are kept in the ENL Compliance binder. December Topic: Staying connected- Using Technology to access schoolwork Facilitated by: Ms. Hunter 10-11:30 February Topic: Understanding Next Generation Standards for Writing Facilitated by: Mrs. Shirley-Brown 10-11:30 April Topic: How to Avoid Test Anxiety Facilitated by: Ms. Paisley 10-11:30 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 2 teachers to provide parent workshops on Saturday mornings Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services 2018-19 SCEP-FF 66 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. On site training provided by the Imagine Learning technicians Finishline for ELLs 2.0 English Proficiency Practice workbooks  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL Finishline for ELLs 2.0 English Proficiency ebook digital literacy programs will be purchased for use in the Program 2018-19 SCEP-FF 67  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 27 School Name Virgil I. Grissom Borough Queens School Number 226 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Rushell White Coach type here ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Lauren Hunter Teacher/Subject Area Patricio Freirel/Math Teacher/Subject Area Colman/Spanish Related-Service Provider Superintendent Jennifer Ambert Assistant Principal Jennifer Shirley Coach type here School Counselor Raven Osborne Parent Sandra Buckley Parent Coordinator Donna Kelly Field Support Center Staff Member Joshua Metz Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 1 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 930 2018-19 SCEP-FF 68 Total number of ELLs 90 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 9.68%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 2 3 4 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? In order to guide instructional planning The Continental Press Finish Line New York ELLS Common Core book series is used. Based on the formal assessments provided by this program we are able to track ENL student progress. This program is aligned to the Common Core and mirrors NYSESLAT State testing performance tasks. The results of these assessments help teachers assess the literacy skills and development of our ELLs. Each student is given a portfolio that is updated every two months. Their reading, writing, listening, and speaking skills are tracked on a teacher generated ESL/ENL student progress sheet. Additionally, our ENL /ESL students benefit from the iReady diagnostic and instructional program. This adaptive electronic program provides at least 45 minutes of instruction each week. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? In order to support this effort current NYSESLAT proficiency levels are attained from the ATS RLAT report. Once ELL student proficiency levels are attained the ENL teacher meets with the Core ELA teachers during subject-wide common planning 2018-19 SCEP-FF 69  sessions. At such sessions the Core ELA teachers that service any/all ELLs share their achievement data with the ENL teacher. Discussions about trends in common problem areas specific to the ELL population help provide the ENL teacher with a target area to address. The ENL teacher then provides professional learning opportunities to share best practices with all staff that will support them in implementing an ELL specific scaffold in their classroom. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Diagnostic Assessments and Interim Assessments in the core subjects are given as an additional measure to monitor student progress. These Assessments then help us to target skill areas in which students struggle with, and provide intervention. Monthly professional learning opportunities and leadership trainings are offered to staff. These sessions act as early intervention initiatives that allow educators to support students in becoming stronger readers and writers. These methods closely resemble the Fountas and Pinnell assessment program. The success of our program for ELLs is evaluated based upon our AYP, CEP, ELL Periodic Assessments, Benchmark Assessments, State exams, and teacher crafted tests. The software purchased for our ELLs also generate reports that allow us to examine the success of each student. We are then able to compare student performance from previous school years with the current one, identify trends, and conduct item analysis reports. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Once the summative data has been gathered we design a Saturday academy as a means to provide intervention services for our ELLs that may be identified as "pushables" or "slipables". This intervention program provides our students with additional opportunities to utilize the iReady program. Teachers are able to use the instructional portion of the program to further address individual student need. Since these sessions have fewer students in attendance one-to-one teacher support is given to struggling students. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Data about student progress is kept on our PupilPath/Skedula electronic grading system. This data is then used to design specific lesson plans for intervention services and offer our ELLs adequate opportunities to learn. 80% of core instruction serves to help the language development needs of our ELLs. Daily intensive and individualized instruction helps to serve small groups of ELLs on a one-to-one basis. Our RTI program focuses on literacy to ensure our ELLs can compete on grade level with their peers. Electronic-based reading programs such as Sound Reading, MyOn Reading, iReady, and Imagine Learning are infused into the curriculum to provide support in fluency and comprehension. Students are also strategically grouped according to the data collected from these computer programs. The iReady program contains Instructional material that are specific to each student's academic needs. Reports available not only reveal student progress and the areas in need of improvement but the instructional resources needed to target these deficiencies. Teachers utilize this data when they work with the students. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The data gathered from the 2018 NYSITELL revealed that we have a large number on long-term ELLs. Of this subgroup many of them are also SWDs. As a whole most students performed better in the areas of Speaking and Listening NYSESLAT modalities. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? At the beginning of the school-year the ENL Coordinator runs (RLER,RLAT, RNMR, and UYRE) ATS reports to gain insight into the make-up of the ENL population in the school. Next, Google Sheets are created to log stay abreast of ENL student data and log changes. The ENL Coordinator will then send out email notification regarding such updates to the guidance counselor, programmer, and assistant principals. Part IV: ELL Programming 2018-19 SCEP-FF 70  Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. For our Freestanding ENL program, most ELL students are grouped together and receive the mandated amount of standalone and integrated ENL services in small group settings, according to their LEP level, as per CR Part 154. We have designated two classes per grade to accommodate our ENL students. Entering and emerging ELLs receive 180 minutes of stand-alone ENL instruction. The ENL teacher schedules time with core ELA and Math teachers so that the remaining 180 minutes of integrated ENL instruction may be provided to both general and special education classes. Transitioning ELLs receive 90 minutes of integrated instruction during their core ELA periods, an additional 90 minutes of integrated instruction is administered during core Math periods. Expanding ELLs receive their entire 180 minutes of ENL instruction through integrated co-teaching session during core ELA class time. Lastly 90 minutes of integrated ENL instruction for commanding ELLs is provided during their core ELA class time . b. TBE program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: c. DL program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Each academy AP provides the ENL coordinator with a class schedule for all students. The ENL coordinator then reaches out to the speech therapist, occupational therapist, and SETSS teachers to review which students may be shared among the group so that scheduling of services may take place without any conflicts. All students classified as Entering and Emerging based on the most recent NYSESLAT receive 180 minutes a week of standalone and 180 minutes a week of integrated instruction. This model allows for our school to meet the needs of these ELLs, and support the core teacher. Expanding students receive 180 minutes of integrated ENL during their ELA periods. Our Transitioning students receive 90 minutes of integrated ENL during their ELA class time, and 45 minutes of integrated ENL during Math and Science. Commanding students receive 45 minutes of integrated ENL during Math and Science classes. This program model helps to ensure that our ELLs are well balanced in their knowledge of academic English as they progress toward becoming proficient in English. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. All of our core subjects are taught in English. Before the ENL teacher co-teaches in classes that contain ELLs, a planning meeting is conducted to discuss key vocabulary, concepts, and skills needed to complete the desired tasks. The ENL teacher is then better able to support the core teacher and help scaffold instruction for ELLs. Some techniques used include, but are not limited to, providing subject specific bilingual glossaries, picture dictionaries, photos, and key vocabulary word lists to support ELLs during these instructional periods. Core teachers are also trained to use the Imagine Learning, Sound Reading, and MyOn programs to facilitate the use of technology as an additional means of instruction. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? A copy of an RLER report is kept in an ELL binder so that the ENL teacher may continually reference it throughout the year. This list identifies the home language of each student. This enables the appropriate testing accommodations to be provided during local and state examinations. As a member of the testing committee, the ENL teacher ensures that Spanish and Hatian 2018-19 SCEP-FF 71  Creole native language tests, and other required accommodations are provided for all students. Interpreters are then provided for speakers of other languages for whom the DOE has not provided written natives versions of tests. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status We have purchased licenses for computer software programs so that our ELLs have access to technology. Our Newcomers work on computers using the Sound Reading program to develop fluency. Our SIFE and Long-term ELLs use Imagine Learning to target their literacy skills. Our Commanding and Developing ELLs work with the iReady digital literacy program to help them dig deeper into literature and other content areas. All subgroups are periodically assessed through these electronic programs and the resulting data from the item analysis is used to identify areas of weakness and strength. Once identified, students are grouped accordingly and instruction is tailored to meet their deficiencies. Their performance is monitored routinely and adjustments are made to their plans. Additionally, SIFE students receive intensive reading instruction with the use of the Okapi electronic reading program. Newcomers receive phonics instruction, letter writing and sentence formation. The Long Term ELLs participate in writing workshops geared toward helping them improve their comprehension and communication skills. The former ELLS also receive writing instruction, as well as work with multiple meaning and content specific word exercises. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Students utilize the same standard-based grade level curriculum as their general education peers. Scholastic's Code-X ELA series is a resource used in our Core ELA classrooms. However, the teachers provide more scaffolding in the form of technology, graphic organizers, multi-media presentations, time on task and other best strategies to improve reading and writing skills. Students have access to the MyOn reading program, which tracks their reading patterns and growth. During integrated ENL services in the ELA classroom additional supports are given when the ENL and ELA teacher co-teach. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Students are scheduled according to their language proficiency levels. Depending on their classification, students receive one- to- one ENL instruction in the content area classroom as well as additional small group standalone ENL instruction. They are also provided with multiple opportunities to produce hands on projects and exercise choice. The instruction is modified to support their reading levels, and scaffolds according to their IEP goals. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Two hours of Intervention classes take place twice weekly on Tuesdays and Thursdays. Long Term ELLs and Newcomers are the groups targeted. Students are exposed to key jargon related to math and science. ELLs have multiple opportunities to read, write and speak about these topics. Additionally, four hours of intervention are provided on Saturdays from October to June, providing intensive practice in reading and math. A bilingual certified Math teacher provides RTI services during the Saturday academy. This has proved to be very beneficial since the overwhelming majority of our ELLs speak Spanish natively. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We will continue to utilize the MyOn reading program, Imagine Learning, and Sound Reading literacy programs to aid comprehension and fluency. This year, we have decided to add the Okapi flexible literacy program to our instructional practice as well as the iReady web-based program. We believe that these two new programs will be extremely beneficial to our ELLs. Trends from the mid-year iReady data found that over 80% of students have improved 15 points and above in average scale gain. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? 2018-19 SCEP-FF 72  11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Seven teachers, some of whom lead our after-school clubs and teams, are bilingual and speak the same languages of our ELLs. These teachers are able to help encourage ELLs to participate and enroll in these after school clubs, teams, and intervention programs. Notices about such events are sent home in their parents' preferred language, publicized at parent meeting and conferences, and also included in the School Messenger. The school places a strong emphasis on school community and multiculturalism. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Instructional materials to support ELLs include: GoMath, Boardwork (all content areas), laptops, iPads, Smart Boards, MyOn Reading program. (All provide reading material in Spanish). Newcomers use the Sound Reading program. Our SIFE and Long-term ELLs use Imagine Learning. Our Developing and Former ELLs work with audiobooks MyOn reading program. We have partnered with Word Gen and The Writing Revolution in the ELA department. Our Science department has a partnership with Urban Advantage, and Social Studies teachers are currently using the PassPort program. iReady provides instruction in both reading and mathematics. These instructional materials have been a great source to aid in student engagement and allow our ELLs additional access to content in their native language. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Although our ENL program is a 100% English immersion program, we support the home language of all of our ELLs by encouraging students to express themselves first, in their native language if they need to, when completing written assignments. Students are then required to work on translating their native language thoughts into English. They are able to do so using tools like Google.com/translate, or the assistance of a stronger LEP classmate. We are also able to deliver home language support through use of content specific bi-lingual glossaries.Signage in the ENL classroom can be seen in multiple languages and notices about translation services are posted on the classroom bulletin board. Students are encouraged to improve their native language literacy by using online language learning tools such as DuoLingo.com. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. ENL instruction uses the Common Core State Standards to deliver services according to student and grade level. The LPT routinely meet to re-evaluate student services and modify the supports given to ensure they correspond to the ELL's ages and grade levels. Students are instructed with grade level Common Core content texts and language acquisition supports are provided based on their English proficiency levels that have been identified from their most recent NYSESLAT results. The instructional materials we have purchased are based on the grade level NYS standards. Our ELLs receive the same grade and age appropriate resources as their monolingual peers. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Since we are a co-located school students are informed about the building's make up. Emphasis on the importance of wearing their uniform to identify them as belonging to our school community is communicated to them during weekly grade level Town Hall meetings. Each student is provided with a photo ID that is used to identify the school they belong to, track their attendance, purchase lunch in the cafeteria, and gain access to online school programs like MyOn. Our Assistance Principals coordinate with the leaders of our school campus to schedule time in and use of communal areas like our gymnasium, cafeteria, auditorium, and schoolyard. Ell students have access to all campus space and all opportunities for learning and social development available to the school community. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). At the beginning of the school-year, a special ELL specific parent orientation is held for our multilingual families. The Parent coordinator, Principal, AP of ELLs, AP of Special Education, Guidance Counselor, and LAC all work together to ensure new 2018-19 SCEP-FF 73  families feel welcomed in this school community. During the summer, even before new students attend their first day of school, we provide a two week Bridge Program that welcomes newly enrolled ELL students. This program affords new students the opportunity to become familiar with the culture, routines, and expectations of the new school. This translates into a smooth transition during the school year. Each week, APs meet routinely with students for a Town Hall meeting during which students share concerns, questions related to everyday school life and are provided with college and career related information. Students who enroll during the year are provided with a tour of the school by a senior student, a member of the welcome committee, who informs the new student of the activities that are available and share insights of the culture and expectations. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Currently, our ELLs are offered Spanish as an elective. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Paste response to question here: Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? The ENL coordinator consistently attends all workhops provided by the UFT and Borough Field Support Center. The knowledge gained from these sessions is then turn-keyed to all teachers of ENLs and related service providers. These teachers include Mr, Denny, Mr. Veloso, Mr. Freire, Mr. Sugrim, Mrs. Colman, Ms. Brach, Ms. Reid, Ms. Hagues, Ms. Stevens, Mrs. Moore, and Ms. Hunter. Below are some of the PLOs scheduled for this year: Professional Development Session Date Topics Presented By Help to Address Language Barriers October -LAC -Translation & Interpretation Unit ENL Coordinator Ms. Hunter Distinguishing Between SWDs and SLA November -Similarities between student behaviors in SWDs and SLA-Best practices ENL Coordinator Ms. Hunter CR Part 154 Requirements for ENL Students December -What is ENL? -How are students serviced differently? -What supports may I give to my ELLs? -My Co-ENL teacher? ENL Coordinator Ms. Hunter Scaffolding and Differentiation for ELLs January -Best practices for: *grouping *modifying*assessment ENL Coordinator Ms. Hunter Our bilingual teachers and ENL teacher receive professional development on how to support ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards by attending in-house sessions via Boardworks, MyOn, and Imagine Learning representatives. Webinar sessions are also attended by such staff members as they learn about how to gather data on ELL assessments from the Skedula/PupilPath website. Numerous Professional Learning Opportunities are offered through the Borough Field Center and UFT. Such sessions educate the ENL teacher, who attends, on how best to support ELLs as they navigate the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Skills such as providing scaffolding through native language 2018-19 SCEP-FF 74  support, building background knowledge, and using questioning to foster academic growth, are just some of the topics discussed. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. During scheduled Profession Learning Sessions, staff member are provided with current practices, policies, and procedures involved in the ELLs' transition from middle to high school. They are informed of the HS application and admissions process so that this information may be conveyed to the students as well as influence their teaching. The guidance counselor and the parent coordinator work with teachers to inform ELLs of the programs and opportunities available to them that can aid them in making a smooth transition from elementary to middle school, and then from middle school to high school. Students are also encouraged to attend the Summer Bridge Program and intervention programs. Our ELL Coordinator works with the AP of ELLs to develop Professional Learning Opportunities that will help all teachers meet the needs of their diverse learners. These targeted PLOs are provided monthly throughout the year for all staff members. At all sessions, attendance is taken and then carefully kept on record. The Pupil Accounting secretary collects and files the agendas and records of attendance. Keeping these records helps to ensure that all staff members have received the 15% of total hours minimum, and our ENL teacher has received the 50% of total hours time requirement minimum of ELL specific professional development. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? We have made it our goal to provide a special ELL family welcome orientation at the beginning of the year. Parents are also able to regularly view and monitor the academic progress of their child by logging onto PupilPath. There, all homework, and assessment grades are kept. If a parent has any questions or concerns, they are then able to contact each content teacher directly via PupilPath or schedule a meeting with the assistance of the Parent Coordinator. Additionally parents are invited to meet with teachers as needed on Tuesday afternoon. In February, individual conferences are scheduled to review student performance in all classes. Parent, student, and teachers confer to develop an action plan to support learning targets. Parents are equipped with common core materials that will aid the student toward reaching success. Mid- year conferences are scheduled for individual students each year beginning in January. Parents meet with a school personnel and the student to discuss academic performance, review data collected, review student portfolios, air concerns, and learn about resources and programs available to aid the acquisition of language. Translation services are provided where needed. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. We have noticed a low level of ELL parental involvement in the school. Because of this, we have decided to host ELL family specific events to help foster more parent involvement during this school year. After conducting a survey, we have designed monthly workshops to meet the needs of the parents. Some examples are: The Take your Child to School initiative, Technology Class, Monthly Parent Book Club and Literature Circle, Parent Dance, Art Workshop, Accessing Student Scores in Skedula, Navigating the MyOn Program, and Creating a Home Garden (hosted by Home Depot representatives). Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 SCEP-FF 75  2018-19 SCEP-FF 76 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Rushell White, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 77  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Virgil I. Grissom Middle Schoo School DBN: 27Q226 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Rushell White Title Principal Jennifer Shirley Assistant Principal Donna Kelly Parent Coordinator Lauren Hunter ENL/Bilingual Teacher Sandra Buckley Parent Patricio Freire/Math Teacher/Subject Area Colman/Spanish Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Raven Osborne School Counselor Jennifer Ambert Joshua Metz Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 6/26/18 6/26/18 6/26/18 6/26/18 6/26/18 6/26/18 6/26/18 1/01/01 1/01/01 6/26/18 6/26/18 1/01/01 1/01/01 1/01/01 1/01/01 2018-19 SCEP-FF 78  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 27Q226 School Name: Virgil I. Grissom Middle School Superintendent: Mary Barton The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Lauren Hunter Teacher Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. During enrollment, a brief interview is conducted by the ENL teacher, during which parents are asked in which language(s) they would prefer to receive information from the school. This information is then documented and kept on file. Parents are also given the opportunity to determine in which language(s) they communicate best,orally and in written form. Bilingual staff members are used to interpret information orally to these families. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 79  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral English English 100% English Spanish, Arabic, Bengali, BeninPunjabi, Hindi, Dutch, French, Haitian Creole, Urdu, Yoruba, Igbo, Polish, ASL (American Sign Language), Portuguese, Mandarin, Chinese 50% 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. We do not have any other languages besides the ones listed above that make up 10% of our school population. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families The school typically disseminates a Parent and Student Handbook during Orientation. An Overview of Curriculum, permission slips for intervention programs and other documents are also distributed throughout the year. In September How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. When documents are prepared with sufficient time for translation we will use the T&I Unit to translation into the 9 covered languages. For our parents that need documents translated into other language we will reach out to The Big Word for their translation services. School news and updates are posted to our online school website provided by Google Apps that may be translated using Google translation services. Routine and Procedure Guideline, distributed during Town Hall meeting, and on-going during the year as needed. We also disseminate emergency contact cards during the first week of school; a monthly school newsletter and calendar. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 80  Meet the Teacher Night. Clubs and teams registration forms are distributed at a Pep Rally From October to November Parent-Teacher conference announcements, permission slips for school trips, continuation/discontinuing of special services (Speech, OT, ENL, SETSS etc.) On-going throughout the year A backpack notice is made and translated using the services off the Translation and Interpretation Unit so that parents may be informed of these events. These notices are provided by DELLS in the parents preferred Home Language. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Formal face -to-face meetings that will occur during the year include - Meet ; Parent-Teacher Conferences. Meet the Teacher night in September IEP meetings, and meetings with the guidance counselor On-going throughout the year. Performance Mid Year Review Meeting Held in January 2018. interpretation service(s)? Bilingual staff members will offer interpretation services as needed. To service our small group of deaf parents, we utilize the services provided by the Office of Interpreting Services that is specifically designated to Sign-language interpretation. For all other languages Interpreters from The Big Word are ordered and scheduled to come on site. For other cases, calls are made to the over-the-phone interpretation service called Language Line Solutions. In cases where no bilingual staff member is available the DOE Interpretation call center is contacted for language services. Again, The Big Word will be scheduled to come on site, or calls are made to the over-the-phone interpretation service called Language Line Solutions. Bilingual staff members will offer interpretation services. For deaf parents a hearing parent volunteer will come in to offer ASL interpretation services for those families in need. In cases where no bilingual staff member is available the DOE Interpretation call center is contacted for language services. Student Informal meetings with parents to discuss student progress Occur on a weekly basis on Tuesday afternoons- 2:30-3:45pm. Bilingual staff members will offer interpretation services. In cases where 2018-19 SCEP-FF 81  no bilingual staff member is available the DOE Interpretation call center is contacted for language services. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Our school uses a web-based school messenger that offers translation services electronically to update and alert parents to changes as often as they occur through our PupilPath/Skedula.com website. We also make use of the over-the-phone interpretation services provided by the DOE Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Our Language Access Coordinator provides a professional development session to inform all staff members of the availability of over-the-phone interpretation services and the ability to have documents translated that the DOE offers through their Translation and Interpretation Unit. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) A parent workshop was facilitated by the Language Access Coordinator that provided parents and staff with "Parent's Guide to Language Access" brochures so that the appropriate interpreter may be contacted as needed. We will use the services of the Translation & Interpretation Unit, along with The Big Word to translate letters in their preferred language so that they may have access to information about school events. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? We distribute a school -generated parent survey during our quarterly parent-teacher conferences. These surveys will be provided in the parent's preferred language. Parents are also welcome to leave comments in our suggestion box when they meet with teachers during open conference times on Tuesday afternoons or during a formal visit to our school. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 82 
