 31R049 School Name: I.S. 49 BERTA A. DREYFUS Principal: LOUIS BRUSCHI 2018-19 SCEP-FL 1  School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Section 4: SCEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information BertaA. Dreyfus, I.S. 49 31R049 353100010049 6th – 8th School Number (DBN): 101 Warren Street Staten Island, NY 10304 (718) 876-8207 Fax: (718) 727-6040 Phone Number: Louis A.Bruschi lbrusch@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Louis A. Bruschi Email Address: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): Victoria Trombetta Renee Mongee Betty Hargraves Mohammed Kabba N/A Evelyn Hererra/RebecaEncarnacion CBO Representative: District Information Geographical District: 31 Vincenza Gallassio Superintendent: 715 Ocean Terrance Staten Island, NY 10301 Superintendent’s Office Address: vgallas@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-420-5657 Phone Number: 718-420-5657 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 3  Staten Island (District 31) FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Kimberly Ramones Executive Director: 715 Ocean Terrance Staten Island, NY 10301 kramones@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: (718) 556-8335 Phone Number: 718-556-8335 Fax: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the SCEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Louis A. Bruschi Victoria Trombetta Renee Mongee N/A Renee Mongee N/A N/A Ging Vann Betty Hargraves Larry Meisel *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Teacher /SLTChair Member/ Teacher 2018-19 SCEP-FL 5  Elaine Watt Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/ Paraprofessional Representative Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 SCEP-FL 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) is a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. The process of developing and implementing the SCEP is aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding SCEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and SCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 7  In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement 2018-19 SCEP-FL 8  NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the SCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the SCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for SCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 9   Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 5: Build consensus around activities, strategies and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 6: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 7: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 10  Section 4: SCEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Dreyfus Intermediate School 49's Mission Statement: The mission of Dreyfus Intermediate School 49 is to create a collaborative culture that holistically supports the community, and encourages self-sufficiency and sustainability. The Dreyfus Community will prepare its students in their role of becoming responsible and productive citizens with a focus on Urban Agriculture and Marine Arts and Sciences as an entry point to academic, civic, and social-emotional empowerment. Through this focus, students will explore and apply the elements of real-world systems, challenges, and operations to their daily lives as productive, self-sufficient members of the community. Dreyfus Intermediate School 49's Instructional Foci: If teachers and stakeholders increase instructional engagement and rigor, then student learning and outcomes will improve. If teachers and stakeholders collaborate and plan strategically, then teacher practice and school-wide curricular coherence will strengthen. If all members of the Dreyfus community function collaboratively with its staff, students, families, and partners, then a school culture of a celebration, accountability, regard, and excellence will encourage sustained growth. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Dreyfus Intermediate School 49 is a Title I Community School consisting of 536 students from grades six through eight. Several of our students and families are faced with adversity; we have students who are faced with parent incarceration, who have been put in and out of the shelter system due to domestic violence and personal hardships, and some students who are currently in foster care. Due to an increase in family involvement, our families have built confidence and trust in the work we are doing, and our students receive support through a range of social and emotional partnerships within the community school structure. We have increased our partnerships with community-based organizations to support students and families. Some of our strategic partnerships include the Big Brother Big Sister Literacy Program, Girl UniverCITY, Sundog Theatre, Salvation Army, the Jewish Community Center, Urban Advantage, Safe Passages, Liberty Partnership, and the Jewish Board. Our instructional focus last year addressed the use of formative data in instruction, and having teachers work collaboratively to identify and implement daily, formative assessment. Teachers focused on creating specially designed entry points for all students to increase their academic achievements. While working in grade-level teacher teams, teachers developed opportunities for student-to-student discussions, formative assessments, and accountable talk. This year we would like to deepen that work and ensure that all staff members are provided with meaningful and actionable feedback during the lesson planning process, to improve their practices and allow all students to receive a fair and equitable education and extend their learning to real-world applications. Through collaboration with MSQI and our borough office's Special Education School Improvement Specialist, this year we plan to improve the quality of instruction by co-planning and implementing best practices with strategically selected cohorts of teachers and teacher leaders, to enhance the elements of instruction and improve academic rigor and student engagement. These instructional collaborations will allow us to develop a more coherent curricula across content areas, and more strategically select purposeful assessments to measure student growth. This year, the Dreyfus administration plans to implement teacher teams. Through this initiative, teachers will be able to select teams of their choice for which to participate in, and contribute to school-wide operational and instructional systems and protocols. The goal of the instructional teacher teams is to improve the cohesiveness of the curricula, and collaborate to identify and implement research-based practices and strategically select and implement appropriate assessments for our students. The goal of the operational teams is to develop a more cohesive and seamless intake, behavior intervention, Special Education placement, and data collection process to improve student success, attendance, school culture, and improve its general collaborative systems. The teams include vertical content-based teacher teams, grade-level teacher teams, Response to Intervention Team, Data Team, Attendance 2018-19 SCEP-FL 11  Team, SIT Team, MOSL/Assessment Team, Technology Team, Respect for All Team, High School Articulation Process Team, and Team Dreyfus. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Dreyfus Intermediate School 49's student population currently consists of 536 students. Within those 536 students, Dreyfus has a 33% population of students with disabilities. The students with disabilities have severe needs. Those students with disabilities, as well as their families, require supports with mental health, academic achievement, financial literacy, housing, and self-advocacy. Dreyfus Intermediate School 49 also has an English language learner (ELL) population of 13%. In regards to English proficiency levels, less than 1% of the ELL population are Entering, 1% are Emerging, 29% are Transitioning, and 52% are Expanding. Less than 1% of our total student population have reached the Commanding English proficiency level, or tested out of the English as a New Language program. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. In regards to the Framework for Great Schools, the area in which Dreyfus Intermediate School 49 has made the most progress is Supportive Environment. The 2017-2018 school year marked the implementation of the Engaging Schools/Safe Space Program. This program allowed Dreyfus to reduce the number of incidents in public spaces such as hallways, cafeteria and the gymnasium. This has greatly impacted the tone and climate of the school. This was also noted in the January 30 review of New York State Center for School Safety (NYSCFSS). The review stated, "Based on observations and interviews with the members of the school community, IS 49 Berta Dreyfus appeared to have a warm and welcoming appearance and climate for students, staff, and visitors.” An OORS data analysis indicates that incidents were down 10% by the end of the 2018-2019 school year. Further analysis indicates a 17% reduction in Level 1 and 2 incidents, a 7% reduction in Level 3 and Level 4 incidents, and a 30% reduction in Level 5 incidents. This data aligns with goals set in the 2017-2018 Incident Reduction Plan. In the 2017-2018 school year, there was also a 15% reduction in classroom incidents. This data can be attributed to 30% of staff receiving training in Therapeutic Crisis Intervention for Schools (TCIS), which also has also contributed the improvement in the Supportive Environment Framework element. These efforts have largely contributed to Dreyfus Intermediate School 49 being removed from the Persistently Dangerous list. For the 2018-2019 school year, there needs to be more of a focus on student engagement and strategic, academic rigor, in relation to the Rigorous Instruction and Collaborative Teachers Framework elements. An analysis of the Danielson feedback, in hte 2017-2018 school year, indicates the need for high-quality and standards-based feedback that is specific and focused on instructional improvement. Last year, teachers were provided with professional development that focused on use of formative assessment in instruction. While progress was made in this area, the next step is for the teachers to collaborate to identify research-based, best practices, strengthen the elements of instruction, and utilize formative assessment data to inform instructional moves and implement specially designed instruction. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 12  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 31R049 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 612 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 135 135 10 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 41 37 8 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 94.0% % Attendance Rate 90.7% % Reduced Lunch 13.2% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.8% 46.1% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 9.2% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 0% 3% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 26.9% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No No Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups Hispanic, ED Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities N/A NO NO NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO NO NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A NO N/A NO NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 139 137 90.5% 3.3% 35.5% 34.8% 9.0% 1.0% 8 25% 8.4 15.6% 52% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No Yes NO YES N/A NO NO NO YSH N/A NO NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 13  Economically Disadvantaged N/A ALL STUDENTS N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 14  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed x Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. Dreyfus Intermediate School 49's Strengths: The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. The administration has ensured that teachers are provided with ample time to collaboratively plan grade-wide, vertically, and across content areas. The administration has developed professional collaborative teacher teams which will also provide further time for professional development and collaborative planning. The teams will set norms and goals at the commencement of the first team meeting. Each week the facilitators will set an agenda and use various protocols to either analyze data trends, look at student work, work on instructional and vertical alignment, or operational school-based initiatives. Dreyfus has also established strategic partnerships with Community-Based Organizations such as Liberty Partnership, Urban Advantage, Jewish Board, Jewish Commnity Center, Safe Passages, Big Brother Big Sister Literacy Inc, Sundog Theatre Program, Salvation Army, and various enrichment programs and residencies to support technology, STEM, and the arts. Dreyfus has also created a supportive environment for students and established relationships to support the social and emotional learning by creating a BIT team, Arts Team, RTI Team, 2018-19 SCEP-FL 15  Technology Team, and Dreyfus Team (which will improve school culture and implement school-wide positive reinforcement structures for the students. Currently, we are utilizing WordGen through the Middle School Quality Initiative (MSQI) Framework. WordGen allows for the students and teachers to interact with a particular text that spans across ELA, Math, Social Studies and Science, thus providing the foundation for interdisciplinary work. Previously, Dreyfus has attempted to expand this interdisciplinary approach to the Arts but has been unsuccessful. We are aware that this is a practice that should be expanded so the learning in each discipline is reflected in all curricular areas, which is also why the teacher teams have been established. We are also utilizing the Wilson Reading System as an academic intervention for students who have fallen below proficiency on the Degrees of Reading Power (DRP) assessment. 2. Over the past three years, there has been an approximate 40% staff turnover. Dreyfus has utilized new teacher recruiting programs such as TOA and NYC Teaching Fellows. Although the new teachers are eager to participate and learn from their colleagues, they also need intensive Professional Development in their respective disciplines and in the elements of instruction. This need will be supported by the Borough Field Office's Special Education Support Intervention Specialist, who will be working with two cohorts of teachers during the 2018-2019 school year, to further develop and enhance the elements of instruction. The goal is to improve student engagement, intentional assessment, instructional rigor, and specially designed instruction to provide students with an accessible and equitable education. On the 2018 ELA NYS Common Core Assessment, approximately 67% of students with disabilities scored a Level 1, 28% scored a Level 2, 2.5% scored a Level 3, and 1% scored a Level 4. On the 2018 Math NYC Common Core Assessment, approximately 88% of students with disabilities scored a Level 1, 11% of scored a Level 2, 0% scored a Level 3, and 0% scored a Level 4. Approximately 47% of the student population scored a Level 1 on the DRP, 43% have scored a Level 2, and less than 10% have scored a Level 3 and Level 4, combined. Through the Wilson Reading System and WordGen performance tasks, students will be administered baseline and benchmark assessments to track their growth in phonics, literacy and writing. The DRP is also administered quartlerly, and will be used to further measure student growth. Dreyfus Intermediate School's Priority Needs: -Implement cohesive, school-wide literacy and phonics assessments, and connect students to the data so they can articulate their current academic strengths/performance and areas in need of improvement. -Implementation of PBIS and completion of TCIS training for entire staff. -Teacher team data analysis to inform RTI, AIS, progress monitoring, daily instruction, and school-wide improvement -Progress Monitoring, incorporate more checkpoints during instruction and lessons to determine student needs and make adjustments as needed. -Behavior Data Analysis (OORS and BIT data) to inform decisions in supporting student social and emotional growth. -Increase parent involvement and engagement through various school events and community-based organizations. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 16  By June 2019, as a result of 100% of teachers collaboratively developing and implementing rigorous CCLS-aligned performance tasks, assessments and lessons in alignment with Wilson, WordGen, and Code X and in accordance with the instructional implications indicated on students’ IEPs, 20% of students will improve one grade level, as measured by the end-of-year DRP assessment. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 17 Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) The MSQI Coach, instructional leads, student programmer, math teachers, ELA teachers, Principal, and Assistant Principals. Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). The MSQI Coach will meet with instructional leads on a regular basis to provide training and support in using student performance data to plan instruction. During these meetings the MSQI Coach and teacher teams engage in analyzing student work to identify specially designed instructional strategies for struggling learners, and identifying problem-solving strategies to support teacher progress towards the school's instructional focus of Questioning and Discussion techniques (Danielson 3B) and Assessment in Instruction (Danielson 3D). The goal of the bimonthly implementation of WordGen is to allow teachers to focus on student strengths and areas in need of improvement, across content areas. Teachers and the MSQI Coach will use the data from the DRP as a baseline, the CCLS-aligned and rubric-based data from the WordGen performance tasks, and CCLS-aligned Code X unit assessments as formative assessment to inform instructional decisions and student grouping. Through MSQI support, select teacher(s) will be sent for training and professional development in the Wilson Reading System to provide further intervention for struggling readers. The DRP data will be used to determine eligible students to participate in the tiered Wilson intervention program. The administration will implement teacher teams, including a math team. The math team will create spreadsheets to track and analyze growth in Go Math unit assessments, and share results with administration and relevant support staff to inform instructional moves and additional academic interventions. All students, with a concentration on the lowest third, students with disabilities, and English language learners DRP Administration: Fall 2018, Winter 2019, and Spring 2019. CCLS- aligned WordGen performance tasks: Administered monthly. CCLS-aligned Code X unit assessments: Administered every 1-2 months CCLS-aligned GoMath unit sasessments: Administered every 1-2 months The Special Education School Improvement Specialist, special education teachers and service providers meet with teacher teams bimonthly to support instruction and student access points in the ELA curricula. The support will focus on the elements of All students, with a concentration on the lowest DRP Administration: Fall 2018, Winter 2018, The Special Education School Improvement Specialist, 2018-19 SCEP-FL 18  effective instruction, lesson development, delivery, and differentiation according to the instructional implications identified in the students’ IEPs. The goal is to improve the quality of teacher lessons, intentional planning, and delivery of instruction so as to allow students to gain access to the content. This work will be aligned with the work of the MSQI coach, in using the DRP data as a baseline, and the rubric-based WordGen performance tasks as formative assessment to inform instruction. Through collaboration with the Special Education School Improvement Specialist, teachers of struggling readers who scored a Level 1 on the DRP and NYS ELA Common Core Assessment will implement the Wilson Reading Intervention System. third, students with disabilities, and English language learners The Special Education administrators from the Staten Island Field Support Center will conduct monthly professional development for special education teachers and paraprofessionals to improve the quality of students’ IEPs, and the use of IEPs to inform instruction. During the visits, the Special Education Administrators will review and analyze the elements of an IEP, how to construct a quality IEP, in addition to maintaining ongoing communication and providing multiple supports for teachers to encourage sustainability in the IEP writing process. Field support will also work with teachers to identify research-based practices to implement specially designed instruction, informed by contents of the IEPs. The work of the Special Education School Improvement Specialist will align with this work, as the goal is to improve the quality of instruction and IEPs specific to instructional needs. In accordance with the Staten Island Field Support Center, Division of English Language Learners, special and general education teachers will collaborate with the English as a New Language teacher team and the ENL Coordinator to analyze student work and identify best practices in ensuring equitable and accessible curricula for our ELLs. The ENL teachers will utilize the NYS ELL Baseline Assessment data to inform instruction and collaborate with classroom teachers in identifying student strengths and areas in need of improvement. Through collaboration with the MSQI Coach and Special Education School Improvement Specialist, teachers of ELLs will implement the Wilson Reading Intervention System for struggling ELL readers, track student progress through rubric-based Word Gen tasks, and deliver specially designed instruction to improve English All students, with a concentration on the lowest third, students with disabilities, and English language learners All English language learners, including Students with Interrupted Formal Education, and students who are not identified as ELLs but may need linguistic support. instructional leads, school programmer, Principal, members of the SIT Team (school psychologist, IEP teacher/SETTS Teacher, social worker, school counselors, and peer mediation facilitator), and Assistant Principals. The Special Education administrators from the Staten Island Field Support Center, Principal, Assistant Principals, SIT Team, and special education teachers. The ENL Coordinator, MSQI Coach, ENL Teachers, Principal, and Assistant Principals. and Spring 2019. CCLS-aligned WordGen Performance Tasks: Administered Monthly. Wilson Intervention System: Monthly running records Monthly visits from Field Support Center, and monthly internal professional development/ planning during the Monday PD time and/or Tuesday professional duties time. ELL Baseline Assessment: October of 2018. CCLS-aligned WordGen performance tasks: Administered monthly 2018-19 SCEP-FL 19  proficiency in the four modalities; Reading, writing, speaking, and listening. Wilson Intervention System: Monthly running records 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. In coordination with the Community School Director, Community School Coordinator, the Parent-Teacher Association, and the Parent Coordinator, quartlerly curriculum nights will be conducted, targeting specific content areas and grades. Families will be invited to learn about the curricula, assessments, student portfolios, and various curricular activities to further support the learning at home. The proposed schedule is tied to the monthly PTA meetings. The Assistant Principals and Lead Teachers will develop lessons and curriculum maps/outlines to be presented at the meetings and workshops. During the workshops, staff members and administrators will explain that high standards are set in every classroom with a focus on customized, inclusive and motivating instruction, active student engagement, and the development of critical thinking skills. Personnel – Community School Director, Parent Coordinator, Teachers, SIMH, Jewish Board, SAPIS worker, Guidance Counselors and outside agencies including the JCC, Safe Passages, Staten Island Mental Health, Urban Advantage, Jewish Board, Salvation Army, and Liberty Partnership Timeline: September 2018 – Meet the Staff Night (school wide); PE Day &amp; PC Workshop: Welcome Back to School October 2018 – PC &amp; Guidance Workshop – High School Information Night November 2018: PC Workshop w/ Jewish Board – “Trauma” supports Mental Health Awareness; School Wide – Parent Teacher Conferences; School Wide - PTA craft night &amp; Family Game Night December 2018: Parents in conjunction with PTA – Holiday Fun &amp; Trim Party; PC Workshop – Drug Awareness / Respect for All January 2019: PC Workshop – College Access for all &amp; PC Trip to visit a college (CUNY CSI) February 2019: PC Workshops - NY State ELA &amp; Math Exam &amp; Promotion In Doubt March 2019: PC Workshop: Healthy Homes and/or IEP’s – School Wide: Middle School Parent Teacher Conferences April 2019: Family Trips including Bronx Zoo &amp; NY Aquarium with Urban Advantage; PC Workshop - May and June 2019 - PC workshop Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The resources to be leveraged to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan are two hours of supervisor planning per session per week, two hours a week of teacher planning per session, rescheduling of classes to accommodate teacher training, adjustment of student schedules to allow for placement in additional academic and/or social-emotional intervention, xternal consultants/Professional Developers, External Instructional Coaches, 2018-19 SCEP-FL 20  purchasing and use of professional literature and instructional CCLS-aligned resources, inter-visitation across District 31 schools, and substitute teacher coverages. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant X 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February, 2019, there will be a 10% increase of student performance as measured by the Winter DRP assessment. By the end of February 2019, the administration and teacher leaders will monitor school-wide, CCLS-aligned GoMath assessments and compare the results from October to February to determine and measure the progress students have made and if the school is on course to meet the annual goal. Teachers will meet in grade-level teams to review student data gathered from the periodic assessments during teacher team meetings. Last year, the staff identified a 4% increase in student performance in the November and March periodic assessments. The DRP will be administered tri-annually. After each administration, progress will be monitored to ensure that Dreyfus is on target to reach the stated goal of a 20% improvement. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The instruments of measure that will be used to assess progress are Wilson phonics and literacy assessments, running records, DRP assessment, ELL benchmark assessments, GoMath unit assessments, and CodeX unit assessments. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 21  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. x x X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Dreyfus Intermediate School 49's strengths relative to the Supportive Environment Framework element: Based on the fact that Dreyfus is a Title I, Community School located in an urban community, with 33% of the student population being students with disabilities, Dreyfus is in the process of establishing protocols and sustainable systems for creating a safe and supportive environment. In September of 2018, Dreyfus became a Community School supported by the Office of Community Schools and the 21st Century Grant. Through these supports, we have been able to partner with Safe Passages to provide a similar program to the ACS program for our female students. Dreyfus has partnered with the College of Staten Island/Liberty Partnership to provide students with both academic and social-emotional education. Liberty Partnership provides services both at Dreyfus as well as at College of Staten Island. Dreyfus has also expanded its PBIS program to include a mentoring program that tracks student social-emotional and academic progress in conjunction with the Big Brother Big Sister Literacy Program. Dreyfus Intermediate School 49's priority needs relative to the Supportive Environment Framework element: Dreyfus has been prevented from hiring additional support staff due to shortfalls from the 2017-2018 school year and prior. In addition, the Safe Spaces/ Engaging Schools initiative has entered its second year and has had a positive impact on student behavior within the school building. Dreyfus will continue to work with Community-Based Organizations to 2018-19 SCEP-FL 22  support families and students in the social and emotional learning. Dreyfus will continue to train staff in TCIS, and have 100% of the staff trained in TCIS by Spring of 2019. Dreyfus will also continue to analyze OORS data, and create and utilize a school-wide behavior monitoring system for collaborative purposes and to further inform student support services. Dreyfus will continue to support teachers in effective elements of instruction and student engagement, so as to decrease the number of classroom incidents, which is currently at 21%. Dreyfus Intermediate School 49's Policies, Practices, and Structures in Place to Support the Whole Child: Dreyfus has implemented a Behavior Intervention Team, which will identify student social-emotional needs, and further inform decisions in supporting students, holistically. The Dreyfus Team, Dreyfus' school culture and school initiative teacher team, will create and implement a school-wide positive behavior intervention system that will promote positive reinforcement and student engagement and academic motivation. This year, Dreyfus has established a clear referral process available to all teachers and teachers can refer students to the Behavior Intervention Team. The team will then discuss the student at length and develop strategies to improve behavior. The team may also refer the child to services such as Staten Island Mental Health, Community Schools Mental Health Program, Liberty Partnership, or Safe Passages for individual counseling, group counseling or parent case management. A member of the Behavior Intervention Team will be assigned to manage the student case and monitor progress. Dreyfus has eliminated the "SAVE" room, or detention room, and replace it with restorative practices that will better support the students' social-emotional progress. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools –Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By Spring of 2019, Dreyfus Intermediate 49 will utilize Restorative Practices, Positive Behavior Intervention System, train 100% of the staff in Therapeutic Crisis Intervention for Schools (TCIS) meet the social/emotional needs of our students and families and reduce the number of classroom incidents (in alignment with B07; Behaving in a manner which disrupts the educational process) by 20%. Dreyfus will execute this through analysis of OORS and PBIS data to identify trends in student behavior and evaluate the effectiveness of social-emotional programs in place. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 23  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). The school will provide assistance to its families by undertaking the actions described in the Parent Involvement Policy in addition to the following: The PBIS program, the State’s student academic achievement standards, the State and Local academic assessments, and administrations of the School Surveys Students, Parents, Guardians and Families Monthly from October 2018-June 2019 Student Building Advisory Council, Behavior Intervention Team meetings, and Parent workshops will be held monthly to explain, demonstrate and reinforce the PBIS program implementation and goals. Parents will be invited to participate in open forums with school representatives to discuss the impact and progress of the program. Through the support of our CBO, Jewish Community Center, we will provide childcare services to facilitate parent attendance at various meeting and workshops. Additionally, the Parent Coordinator and Community School Director and Coordinator will distribute quarterly surveys seeking similar information as contained in the School Survey Report to monitor effectiveness. In coordination with our FSC, OSYD, Teacher Teams, Administration and Parent Coordinator workshops, curriculum nights, concerts, and student-led presentations will be provided to the Dreyfus Community. Additionally, targeted classroom instruction and student assemblies will be utilized to explain, demonstrate and reinforce the PBIS program implementation and goals. The targeted instruction will contain ENL supports and will be aligned with the instructional supports as contained in IEPs for students with disabilities. Teacher teams will meet bimonthly to ensure that data is being collected, recorded, and appropriately analyzed. The data will be utilized to inform and implement appropriate student support services through our Community-Based Organizations. The teacher teams will include, but are not limited to, the Data Team, Behavior Intervention Team, Special Education Intervention Team, Respect for All Team, Team Dreyfus, and Attendance Team. Students, Parents, Guardians and Families Monthly from October 2018-June 2019 Students, Parents, Guardians and Families Monthly from October 2018-June 2019 Students, Parents, Guardians and Families Monthly from October 2018- June 2019 Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Teacher Teams, Principal, Assistant Principals, Data Team Parent Coordinator, PTA Leadership and Parents. Principal, Assistant Principals, PTA, Parent Coordinator and Teacher Teams, Behavior Intervention Team, Deans Teacher Teams, Principal, Assistant Principals, Data Specialist, Parent Coordinator, PTA Leadership and Parents. Principal, Assistant Principals, Data Team, Behavior Intervention Team, Special Education Intervention Team, Respect for All Team, Team Dreyfus, and Attendance Team. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 24  CBOs such as Big Brother Big Sister Literacy Program, Girl UniverCITY, Sundog Theatre, Salvation Army, the Jewish Community Center, Urban Advantage, Safe Passages, Liberty Partnership, and the Jewish Board 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. In coordination with the Community School Director and Parent Coordinator, family workshops will be held to support parents/families in the areas of adolescent development, adolescent behavior, coping strategies, wellness and health, self care and the impact of trauma in the classroom and home. The proposed schedule is tied to the monthly PTA meetings, and timeline referenced in Part 3b of the previous section. The Assistant Principals and Teacher Teams will develop the lessons to be presented at these meetings. We will continue to invite parents to our PTA meetings and workshops. Workshops will include and or focus on social-emotional learning and social / academic skills for supporting their children in and out of the classroom. We will seek feedback on processes for conducting parent learning circles, and train parent leaders so they can facilitate and increase dialogues with families. Also, in conjunction with our CBO we will seek opportunities to provide educational classes to parents so they may obtain ESL, GED and job opportunities. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Teacher and student schedules will be modified to allow for attendance at various PBIS events or participation in programs designed to support social and emotional development. Budget resources will be strategically used to pay for either direct professional development of staff members or to cover costs of substitute teachers, or both. Targeted Professional Development that is in line with Dreyfus Intermediate's vision for social and emotional development will be provided for staff members. Per diem and/or per session will be provided for administrators and teachers to assist in the implementation of the action plan. Additionally, student schedules will be modified, if need be, to accommodate the Professional Development schedule. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant X 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring 2018-19 SCEP-FL 25  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Dreyfus Community will monitor progress of behavior incidents in classrooms mid-year as a benchmark measure, to determine if the goal of a 20% decrease in B07 OORS incidents is on course to being obtained. By February, 2019, 50% of the staff will be trained in TCIS, and 10% of the number of classroom incidents will have decreased. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Monthly review of OORS data. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 26  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by SOP(s) Addressed X using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Dreyfus Intermediate School 49s Strengths: Dreyfus has established a structure for teacher teams to meet. Facilitators have been selected and protocols will be established. ELA and Math units have been developed by teachers and are aligned to the common core learning standards. Units are adjusted based upon the analysis of student work. Dreyfus Intermediate School 49's Priority Needs: Given the wide range of abilities (33% special needs population) difficulties have occurred in shaping instruction to meet diverse needs of the students. A review of the recent benchmark data and NYS Assessment indicates that student achievement is suppressed along all standards, working with the Special Education School Instructional Specialist, decided that taking a targeted approach in one standard would provide foundational understanding to other areas. Dreyfus teachers will continue to implement progress monitoring and make necessary adjustments (6 week cycles of AIS, teachers examining data and making informed instructional decisions, analyze performance taskwriting pieces and insert lessons to close gaps, implement professional development and continue to collaborate in teacher teams to realign our curriculum mapping, and implement the priority standards for the district throughout each unit in all grades. Part 2 – Annual Goal 2018-19 SCEP-FL 27  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of our teacher teams will engage in inquiry work using protocols focusing on using student data and work to drive a specially designed, supportive instructional and social-emotional program accessible to all learners, as noted by team minutes, attendance and debriefs, in order to achieve a 10% increase of student performance as measured by the NYS ELA Exam. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 28  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teacher teams will meet once or twice a month to plan vertically and review student work, data and trends to identify strengths and areas in need of improvement. Moreover, administration will utilize Danielson data quarterly (or as needed) to determine the effectiveness of the MSQI and SESIS support work, in collaboration with teacher teams. Evidence of effective use of actionable feedback will be present in lesson plans, unit plans, classroom assessments, school-wide benchmark assessments, and ultimately, student achievement. Teacher Teams will meet with Instructional Leads and Data Specialist to review student performance as measured by formative assessments, DRP, periodic assessments, MOSL, etc. The Data Specialist will provide assistance in identifying meaningful trends and patterns generated by the data. In addition, Instructional Leads will ensure instructional alignments with ENL supports and instructional goals as contained in IEPs for SWD students. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Administration, teacher teams, and students Quarterly from September 2018 to June 2019 Administration, BFSC and teacher teams. Instructional Leads, Assistant Principals and Data Specialist. Teacher Teams, Instructional Leads, Assistant Principals and Data Specialist. Quarterly throughout the year September 2018 to June 2019 How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. In coordination with the Community School Director, Community School Coordinator, Dreyfus' Community-Based Organizations, and Parent Coordinator, families will be kept informed regarding curricula, long term projects and assessments that are developed collaboratively and jointly during common planning. The proposed schedule is tied to the monthly PTA meetings. The Assistant Principals and Lead Teachers will develop the lessons to be presented at these meetings. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The Professional Development plan allows for the rescheduling of classes to accommodate teacher training and students’ schedules will be modified to allow for placement in additional intervention. Budget resources will be strategically used to pay for either direct professional development of staff members or to cover costs of substitute 2018-19 SCEP-FL 29  teachers, or both. Teacher meetings, targeted Professional Development that is in line with Dreyfus Intermediate's instructional focus and similar opportunities will be provided for staff members. additionally, student schedules will be modified, if need be, to accommodate these activities. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant X 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 1, 2019, 45% of all observations will indicate ratings of Effective for Planning and Preparation (Domain 1) and Engagement (Domain 3). Student performance will increase 5% as measured by the TC Running Records and Fall-Winter DRP data. Administration will participate in teacher team meetings and analyze team meeting minutes to ensure that the goal is on track to being reached. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance data Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 30  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). x SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Dreyfus Intermediate School 49's Strengths Relative to Effective School Leadership Framework Element: Leadership has established systems for sharing a clear vision for student achievement. The Principal has set the tone and has created a climate of inclusiveness among the staff and students. Professional development is offered to teachers both, internally and externally based on teacher needs and interest. School leaders meet with the school community consistently to determine needs and to elicit feedback. Dreyfus Intermediate School 49's Priority Needs Relative to Effective School Leadership Framework Element: This inconsistent use of formative data has led to difficulties in efficiently tracking student achievement data. The difficulty in this area rests in the number of beginning teachers (40%) on staff due to the high turnover rate. Professional development is provided, but it has been difficult to gain traction due to the changes in staffing. The school leaders made the decision to implement common planning time for teacher teams in order to focus on student achievement and social/emotional learning. We know this decision was correct because of the following improvements: increased levels of student engagement as identified through Danielson data; increased achievement as evidenced in student portfolios; and a decrease in classroom incidents as identified by OORS. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 31  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART– Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the average MOTP component for 3C, engaging students in learning, will increase by 3% as measured by MOTP Advance data. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 32  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). In coordination with our Special Education School Instructional Specialist, the administration will calendar the debriefing sessions and check-ins as aligned with the time frame for this goal. The calendar will be shared through GoogleDocs and monitored for compliance. Additionally, administration will focus on the impact actionable feedback on student achievement. Focus will be put on the academic supports for ENL students and the instructional needs as contained in the IEPs for SWD students. The data generated will be reviewed by administration monthly; with a comprehensive review quarterly (or as needed) to determine the effectiveness of the reporting procedure. Evidence of effective use of actionable feedback will be present in lesson plans, unit plans, classroom assessments and, ultimately, student achievement. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Administration, teachers and students 30% of observations, debriefing sessions and check-ins will be completed by 12/1/18; 65% by 3/1/19; and the balance by 5/31/19. Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Administration and Special Education School Instructional Specialist How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. In coordination with the Community School Director and Parent Coordinator, families will be kept informed regarding areas of study, long term projects and assessments that are developed collaboratively and jointly during common planning. The proposed schedule is tied to the monthly PTA meetings. The Assistant Principals and Lead Teachers will develop the lessons to be presented at these meetings. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Adjustment to teachers’ schedules as necessary to assist in the debriefing sessions or other activities (i.e. professional development, inter-visitations, etc.) as a result of the actionable feedback. The Professional Development plan allows for the rescheduling of classes to accommodate teacher training and students’ schedules will be modified to allow for placement in additional intervention. Budget resources will be strategically used to pay for either direct professional development of staff members or to cover costs of substitute teachers, or both. Targeted Professional Development 2018-19 SCEP-FL 33  that is in line with Dreyfus Intermediate's instructional focus will be provided for staff members. Additionally, student schedules will be modified, if need be, to accommodate the Professional Development schedule. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant X 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, the average MOTP component for 3C will increase by 2% as measured by the first two cycles of Advance data Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance data reports; Component average. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 34  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. x SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Dreyfus Intermediate School 49 shares data with families through standard practices, i.e. report cards and progress reports. In addition, we send home quarterly information regarding students progress and goals based on DRP Assessment (Degree of Reading Power) results. We have also implemented the use of Class DOJO (as part of our PBIS program) to share “real time” data regarding student progress and achievement. However, there is limited parent “buy-in” as evidenced by the family subscription rate of 27% to Class DOJO and an even lower participation rate for the NYC Schools Account. A review of of the parent response rates to the NYC School Survey shows a growth from 17% in 2016 to 31% in 2018. Although there is a positive trend in response rates to the survey, attendance at PTA meetings, Parent Workshops and information nights yields less than 20% participation. Many of the families served by Dreyfus are single-parent households where the parents are engaged in shiftwork requiring them to work evenings. In addition, many of them have two jobs and thus their availability is quite limited. At a recent community forum, some parents voiced their distrust of schools since their own experience as a student was not positive. Most recently, the Hispanic Community has been greatly impacted by the current climate surrounding immigration; many are worried about being identified as undocumented and are fearful of reprisal. Many of these 2018-19 SCEP-FL 35  barriers are beyond the control of the school. However, we continue to reach out and offer various opportunities for families to be engaged with their students. We have learned that it is important to offer family engagement activities multiple times per month at various times of the day to ensure family participation regardless of the attendance level. We are offering family engagement activities multiple times per month at various times of the day to ensure family participation. In addition, we have implemented the Academic Parent Teacher Team (APTT) program to enlist parents as learning partners in our 6th grade ELA classes. We have piloted this program with 52 families and we have started to see increased participation as we hold subsequent events.The increase in parent response to the NYC School Survey provides some level of assurance that families are aware of our outreach efforts to include them in our school community. The increased participation in the APTT program is also indicative that efforts are succeeding in improving family and community engagement. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June of 2019, there will be 15% increase in attendance at Parent-Teacher Conferences and parent workshops. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 36  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). The Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselors, PTA and school leaders will hold parent workshops detailing the importance of student assessment data and the need to be connected to data sources regarding student progress. Attention will be given to the academic supports needed for ENL and SWD students. The school will provide assistance to parents of children served by the school, as appropriate, in understanding topics such as the following, by undertaking the actions described in the Parent Involvement Policy in addition to the following: the importance of student assessment data; the need to be connected to data sources regarding student progress; the State’s academic content standards; the State’s student academic achievement standards; the State’s and local academic assessments including alternate assessments; and how to use NYC School Accounts to monitor their child’s progress. In addition, parents have been made aware of the high learning expectations and the changes in the CCLS through monthly PTA meetings and informational emails provided by our Parent Coordinator. Student Building Advisory Council and Parent workshops will be held monthly to explain, demonstrate and reinforce the PBIS program implementation and goals and address school-wide issues. Parents will be invited to participate in open forums with school representatives to discuss the impact and progress of the program. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) The Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselors, PTA and school leaders The Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselors, PTA and school leaders Monthly from October Principal, SLT, PTA, Parent Coordinator, and Community School Director 2018 to June 2019 Monthly from October Principal, SLT, PTA, Parent Coordinator, and Community School Director 2018 to June 2019 Students, Parents, Guardians and Families Monthly from October Principal, SLT, PTA, Parent Coordinator, and Community School Director 2018 to June 2019 If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. In coordination with the Community School Director and Parent Coordinator, families will be kept informed regarding areas of study, long term projects and assessments that are developed collaboratively and jointly during common planning. The proposed schedule is tied to the monthly PTA meetings. The Assistant Principals and Lead Teachers will develop the lessons to be presented at these meetings. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 37  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Parent Engagement funds will be used for meetings and workshops designed to inform families and students about NYC Schools Account. Additionally, curriculum nights will be held in conjunction with PTA meetings to inform parents about what the children are learning and how the parent can assist in the learning process. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant X 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 1, 2019 there will be a 10% increase in attendance at Parent-Teacher Conferences and workshops as measured by the PCAR reports and attendance records. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Monthly surveys as distributed by the Parent Coordinator and Community School Director. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 38  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) (Note: this section to be updated when Assessment data from Spring 2018 is available)Students who receive a DRP score below 45 are referred for AIS; students in lowest third Students who score in the 25th percentile on Fall Benchmark are referred for AIS Students who score in the 25th percentile on Fall Math Benchmark are referred forAIS Studentswho receive a DRP score below 45 are referred forAIS; students in lowest third School Based Support Team, Pupil Personnel Team, Teacher referral and Parent Engagement meetings. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) MSQI, MaxScholar, READ 180, Wilson, Great Leaps, Saturday ELA Program Small group and one-to-one During and after school Small group and one-to-one During and after school Small group and one-to-one During and after school Small group and one-to-one During and after school Small group and one-to-one During and after school MathleticsandMSQI component, Saturday Math Program Addressed through ELA and Math curriculum, Saturday ELA andMath Program. Addressed through ELA curriculum, Saturday ELA and Math Program. Testing/Evaluation, Individual Counseling, Group Counseling, Family Intervention and Parent and Teacher Consultations 2018-19 SCEP-FL 39  2018-19 SCEP-FL 40  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) Dreyfus Intermediate School 49 currently consists of 4 students in temporary housing. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. We have a Community Schools Coordinator and Parent Coordinator who manage and guide parents in accessing necessary resources. We have schoolbags, other necessary school supplies, personal hygiene items, and community-based and city-wide resource packets and information available to students and families as needed. We also have two guidance counselors, an attendance teacher, Staten Island Mental Health, a SAPIS Coordinator, a social worker, and a Peer Mediation Intervention Specialist who work with our families and provide them with the resources they need. Other services provided to these students include, but are not limited to, daily check-ins with guidance counselors, support staff, and administration, funding of fees for school trips where necessary, translation or interpretation services when necessary, referral to local social service organizations/agencies where necessary, and routine family outreach conducted by all support staff mentioned above. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 41  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 42  Section 8: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Administrative staff regularly attends hiring fairs to identify and recruit highly-qualified teachers in all disciplines. The payroll secretary will work closely the network HR point to ensure that non-HQT meet all required documentation and assessment deadlines. Mentors are assigned to support struggling and un-qualified teachers. Teachers are instructed to become HQ under the BEDS or HOUSE. Teacher support is also provided through programs such as MSQI and Urban Advantage. Each of these programs offers the opportunity for teachers to work with curriculum specialists and other pedagogues in an interdisciplinary environment to develop best practices across the curricula areas. As part of our teacher retention program, teachers are provided multiple opportunities to attend targeted PD and inter-visitations (internal and external) in an effort to learn best practices and improve their pedagogy. Teachers have the opportunity to work with teacher teams and are looped with their classes resulting in a collaborative and supportive working environment. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). During the 2018-2019 academic year, teacher teams will participate in targeted professional development focusing on, but not limited to, reading strategies, small group instruction, lesson accessibility and differentiation. Staff members will also receive ongoing PD and support around The Core Collaborative. The PD will be provided by DOE, instructional specialists and teacher teams. Partnerships have been made with Urban Advantage and Teachers College to support and expand the quality of pedagogy. Administrators are connected to attend Professional Learning Communities where they have the opportunity to visit other schools within their cohort and investigate problems of practice and share best practices. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 43  N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. An Instructional Team was developed that is comprised of a cross-section of the school community with representatives from the core academic areas as well as ENL and SWD teachers. The Team meets in consultation with school leadership to adopt and implement assessment measures (i.e. MOSL, DRP, Periodic Assessments) that are aligned with our instructional focus and in light of recent student achievement data. All teachers have received PD regarding the use and application of these assessments as well as the interpretation of student performance and its impact on student achievement. PD in this area will be ongoing and will be provided by school leadership. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (SCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 44  Title I Part A (Basic) Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Local school allocation amounts) 555,818 16,979 73,590 0 12,366 0 4,369,898 Column A Verify with an (X) X X x NA X NA X Column B Section Reference(s) Section 5 A,B,C,D,E Section 5 A,B,C,D,E Section 5 A,B,C,D,E NA Section 5 A,B,C,D,E NA Section 5 A,B,C,D,E 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH). 2018-19 SCEP-FL 45   Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/SCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG or SIF funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 46  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Berta A. Dreyfus, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Berta A. Dreyfus will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 47  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 48  ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. Berta A. Dreyfus 2018-19 SCEP-FL 49 School-Parent Compact (SPC)  School-Parent Compact (SPC) Berta A. Dreyfus , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 50  ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); 2018-19 SCEP-FL 51  ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 52  ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. Addendum: Community School Partnerships Directions: The Community School (CS) strategy is directly aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. Community Schools bring schools and community partners together and integrate academics, health, youth development, and family engagement to provide students with the tools and opportunities they need to succeed. The Core Services in Community Schools are Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness. Part 1 – Community School Partnerships Goal(s) How is the CS strategy integrated into academic instruction at your school, and what impact has it had on student academic outcomes? Our strategy is to utilize expanded learning time to deliver ELA, math and STEM instruction. Activities such as small group tutoring and innovative hands on STEM experiences will assist students to achieve their academic goals. Our vision is to develop programming that appeals to youth, especially those that may be underserved, by introducing activities that assist them to further develop their skills. The greatest impact that we anticipate will be to assist students to acquire the skills necessary to better prepare them for their academic future. Indicate the summative goal(s) of the Community School for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. By June 2019 -90% of the students will show significant growth in English Language Acquisition and Reading Comprehension: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 53  1. Students in 6th-8th grade will increase at least one reading level as measured by the DRP. 2. Students in 6th-8th grade will reach a 90% core course pass rate. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Community School Annual Goal(s): How will achieving your Community School Goal(s)--in Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness--support your academic goals for students? Achieving our Community School Annual Goals will directly support our academic goals for students. Our ELT activities will include innovative strategies to challenge our participants to become independent thinkers and problem solvers. Activities will include: tutoring, STEM, literacy education, high school transition workshops and community engagement. We also realize that student’s families are the most influential people in their lives. Engaging families to support our program goals is a critical component of our design and is essential to ensure effective program delivery. Our strategy for family involvement begins with keeping individuals informed about program events, new learning strategies and additional resources. A parent orientation will be held at the start of the program to allow them to learn about our expectations, goals and objectives. We will also host two high school information workshops to notify parents about their child’s choices, expectations and requirements for promotion and monthly family engagement events. In response to the number of parents that are non-English speaking, we will also provide ESL, Adult Education & Family Literacy Workshops to assist parents/caregivers to become more active in their child’s education. The Community School Director and the support staff at Dreyfus Intermediate School will work together to implement attendance supports to assist to engage underserved youth to ensure that they are attending classes on time and prepared to be fully active in the classroom. Note: in September Dreyfus will be participating in the Academic Parent Teacher Teams (APTT) program through the Office of Middle School Quality Initiative (MSQI). This program uses family engagement as an instructional strategy and enlists parents as classroom leaders. In addition, it helps participants develop foundational grade-level skills for parent meetings. The CSD will be part of the Dreyfus team that is involved in this program. Assisting students to increase exercise is another essential goal included in our plan to improve their overall health. Introducing soccer and track will teach students fundamental skills in sports which are not readily available in high-risk areas. Organized sports keep youth engaged and eager to participate while fostering dedication, increasing self-esteem and demonstrating a commitment; these skills are essential to academic development. Part 2 – Community School Partnerships Core Services Action Plan Part 2a. Identify the Community-based Organization (CBO) partnerships that you will develop in ELT, Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness, their target student population(s), and scope of the services provided. As well as supporting schools’ supportive environment and attendance work, CBOs should be helping to support your school’s instructional focus. CBO Partnership Target Population Scope of Service SY18-19 SMART Goal Expanded Learning Time 6th-8th JCC Attendance Supports 6th-8th JCC Dreyfus Intermediate School Staff By June 2019, 90% of students will have achieved core course pass rates. By June 2019, the CSD and Dreyfus Staff 2018-19 SCEP-FL 54  Family Engagement 6th-8th Health and Wellness 6th -8th Dreyfus Intermediate School Staff Academic Parent Teacher Team (APTT) JCC APTT JCC will create and implement attendance improvement plans for 6th-8th graders who were chronically absent or late the previous year resulting in 80% of the targeted students missing fewer days than the previous school year By June 2019. 50 parents will attend family engagement activities and become more active in their child’s education. By June 2109, 75% of the students that we serve will increase physical activity to improve overall health and wellness. Part 3 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 3a. Indicate resources your Community Partnership will leverage to achieve your summative SMART goal(s) and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. JCC will restructure the current table of organization to provide for more “hands-on” staff to provide direct services to program participants. In addition, partnerships have been made that will provide Social Work interns who will provide assistance in the areas of attendance and social-emotional learning. These interns will also provide workshops for families in the following areas: adolescent development and behavior, coping strategies and overall health and wellness. Part 3b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside X 21st Century SIG Grant School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 3c. Describe how the school will partner with the Lead CBO to do the following: 1. Community Schools are expected to partner with a community-based partner organization (CBO) and together with members of the School Leadership Team, hire a Community School Director. The Director will lead implementation of the asset and needs assessment process, and other critically important coordinating activities. Indicate how you will leverage this aspect of the work. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 55  2. 3. 4. Community Schools are expected to personalize the needs of all students, through strategic programming and services, as determined by the asset and needs assessment, and must also offer Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and mental health programming. In completing this section, ensure that you think about how: (1) the right services are provided to the right students and families at the right time; and (2) how you will seamlessly coordinate services with instructional programming happening throughout and outside of the school day. Indicate how you will implement this work, and describe other programming you anticipate to be in place to strengthen this initiative. Community Schools are expected to emerge as Partnership Schools, which are places where parents and families feel welcome, actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. Monthly meetings and Community School Forums engaging families and community stakeholders will be a critical part of this family engagement strategy. Describe how you will implement this aspect of the work. Community School Principals are expected to meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. Data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter - and training will be available for schools to use. Indicate how you will implement this aspect of the work. The Jewish Community Center (JCC) and Dreyfus Intermediate School have worked together to develop a common vision to assist students to improve in core courses such as ELA and Math; to increase STEM learning; to acquire the skills needed for high schools; to increase student attendance; to assist parents and families to obtain support and entitlements; to assist parents to become active in their child’s education and to improve health and wellness. Together, they will hire an experienced CSD that will have the ability to manage and deliver an effective program. The CSD will be trained as part of the JCC management team. We will seek a candidate that has extensive experience serving high-risk youth. Under the direction and supervision of the Dreyfus Intermediate School Principal and the JCC’s Assistant Executive Director, the CSD will implement a program that will seamlessly transition from school day to ELT. Working directly with the principal, teachers and the guidance counselor at the school, the CSD will identify the needs of the students and implement strategies to overcome barriers to success. The CSD will also be instrumental in developing a highly successful community awareness component that will engage both parents and students. The CSD and the CS Social Worker will work together with the Dreyfus Intermediate School Support Staff (guidance counselor, school psychologist, social worker) to identify students and families that are underserved and in need of intervention. The JCC’s seventeen years of experience operating a DYCD Beacon Program at the school has shown us that the most successful programs are those that give students a “voice” and an outlet to express what they have learned during the school day in both traditional and non-traditional ways. Our experience has also shown us that activities must constantly change to keep students engaged and interested. The JCC and the administration at Dreyfus Intermediate School have a highly successful relationship and have worked together to identify the needs of the students, developing a program that has the ability to change the course of their academic journey. The principal and assistant principal of the school, will be instrumental in assisting us in designing a program that is aligned with school-day learning. We anticipate that various programs will be in place to strengthen this initiative including: ELT activities; art and culture programs; team sports; additional mental health counseling though Staten Island Mental Health, ACS and Central Life Family Center; Adult Education through the JCC and YMCA; community health care enrollment through the JCC and coordination of food bank services through Project Hospitality. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 56  The CSD will create a safe and welcoming environment for all parents and families. The CSD will attend PTA meetings to participate in conversations regarding the parent’s vision about the renewal of the school. The CSD will be guided by the principles of Joyce L. Epstein, Ph.D. Principal Research Scientist, and Research Professor of Sociology at Johns Hopkins University. In 1995, she established the National Network of Partnership Schools (NNPS), which provides professional development to enable school districts develop research-based programs of family and community involvement. The framework of six types of involvement helps educators develop more comprehensive programs that foster parental engagement. The CSD will encourage the following types of involvement:  TYPE 1--PARENTING: Assist families with parenting and child-rearing skills, understanding different stages of development and setting home conditions that support each of these stages.  TYPE 2--COMMUNICATING: Communicate and inform families about monthly CS events and student progress through effective communications.  TYPE 3--VOLUNTEERING: Involve families as volunteers and audiences for events.  TYPE 4--LEARNING AT HOME: Involve families through learning activities and projects at home.  TYPE 5--DECISION MAKING: Include families in the development of CS activities through meetings, committees, and other parent organizations.  TYPE 6--COLLABORATING WITH THE COMMUNITY: Coordinate internal resources as well as referrals to other community agencies to assist with additional services. The CSD will meet on a weekly basis with the Dreyfus Intermediate School Principal, Assistant Principal Anne Marie Martino and the JCC’s Assistant Executive Director to ensure effective delivery of service. The CSD will also become part of school staff meetings and will become involved with using the Data Sorter to assist in action plans for students. Part 4 – Community School Partnerships Oversight Part 4a. Key Staff and Partners 1. Name and describe the scope of involvement of all community partners working in the school (include partners supporting ELT, counseling, enrichment, etc.) 2. Name the members of your Community School Team and how meetings will be organized and structured to engage all stakeholders and be focused on results. 3. Explain data strategies including the use of the data sorter, and steps that the school will take to ensure that the appropriate interventions are provided to the right students Community partners will assist the JCC and Dreyfus Intermediate School to provide programming to reach our goals in the following focus areas: academic intervention through ELT, parent engagement, and health and wellness. Our community partners include: Staten Island Mental Health- provides counseling services. ACS Social Work Intern- provides counseling services. YMCA/El Centro- provides immigration counseling. NAACP/North Shore- provides family engagement activities. Office of Adult and Continuing Education – provides HES and ENL adult education 2018-19 SCEP-FL 57  Project Hospitality- to provide food bank packages and other resources. The Community School Team consists of the following members: Louis Bruschi - Dreyfus Intermediate School Principal Anne Marie Martino - Dreyfus Intermediate School Assistant Principal Evelyn Herrera – Director, JCC Community-Based Youth Programs Rebecca Gallantar-JCC Assistant Executive Director Anita Bruckmeir-JCC Development Director The CSD will work closely with Dreyfus Intermediate School administration and school support staff to utilize effective strategies to obtain data to ensure that interventions and services are provided at the appropriate time to the right students. Part 4b. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the Community School program. The CSD and all CS staff will work closely with the staff of Dreyfus Intermediate School and the staff of the Dreyfus Intermediate Beacon Program to ensure that all activities in the building can seamlessly occur with minimal disruptions and schedule adjustments. An experienced staff is the most effective human resource to ensure that the program is successful. Instructional resources include engaging curriculum that will excite interest. Part 4c. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. July 2018-August 2019. Part 4d. Mental Health Work Plan Separate from this S/CEP, schools will complete a Mental Health Work Plan that will become an addendum to this document. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 58  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: Berta Dreyfus This school is (check one): DBN: 31R049 conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): K 6 1 7 2 8 3 9 4 10 5 11 12 2018-19 SCEP-FL 59  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: The focus of the Title III morning program will be reading and writing, as these are the areas in which our students show the highest deficient, according to the NYSESLAT data. This data was retrieved by the RLAT and the RNMR reports on ATS. The Title III program will also address the Listening and Speaking modalities, in addition to language and literacy development. The program will focus on English language and vocabulary acquisition. Supports such as the Wilson Intervention system and Great Leaps curricular program will be utilized, which are solely intended for this supplemental program, and differs from the programs used during the regular school day. The program will run for 10 weeks and will be open to all English Language Learners in grades 6 through 8, with a focus on newcomers, ELL SWDs, and long term ELLs. Both programs will begin in December of 2018 and will end in May of 2019. The early morning program will run from 7:30am to 8:15am Monday through Friday. Flexible grouping will be employed to allow the certified ENL teacher to provide direct instruction and support for each group. Additionally, the certified ENL teacher will provide professional development on ENL instructional strategies for the Special Education and General Education teachers who have students in the Title III morning program. The Title III program will be conducted in English, but with home language support by providing ELLs with glossaries, visuals, dictionaries, and translation software. Materials to be used will include, but are not limited to, iPads/tablets, Vocabulary A-Z software, and myON, which will be purchased through Title III funds, and are intended solely for use during Title III programming. Records, including student attendance and program notification in parents’ preferred languages, will be maintained by the ENL Coordinator. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: All teachers in the Title III Program will receive targeted training on literacy strategies by Maryann Diglio and Sylvia Abdelsayed , the current certified ENL teachers. These ENL professional development sessions will be conducted during Monday afternoons, as part of our Professional Development plan. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 60  Part C: Professional Development Dates and topics are as follows: 10/1/18: ENL Program Requirements and Mandates 12/19/18: ENL Strategies to Develop the 4 Modalities 1/14/18: Supporting ELLs in Reciprocal Teaching 3/11/19: Math Strategies to Support ELLs 6/11/19: End of Year Articulation; ENL Program Goals (for September 2019) 6/17/19: End of Year Articulation; Goal Setting for ELLs (for September, 2019) Funding will be utilized for Teachers to attend opportunities offered by DELLSS ad Fordham University to learn specific strategies for supporting ELLS instructionally and socially/emotionally. The teachers who attend professional development will turnkey information and best practices and share materials during the Professional Learning time on Monday afternoons and during weekly department meetings. Records, including meeting minutes, agendas and attendance sheets, will be maintained by the department/grade supervisors. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: A review of the Home Language Surveys and Parent Preferred Language Surveys indicates the need for adult ENL classes and the desire for parents to be able to support their children academically. Parents of ENL students will be invited to three parent workshops. The administration is currently working with Central Life Family Center to provide adult ENL workshops. The tentative schedule is as follows: March 19th , April 23 and May 21. Each session will be a 2-hour duration. In addition, parents/guardians of ELLs will be provided an opportunity to celebrate the work of their children in the Title III program. The ENL teachers will also conuct workshops for parents that will include a Title III Parent Orientation, informational sessions about the ELA, math and NYSESLAT exams, resume writing, and understanding the New York State Common Core Learning Standards. Parents will also learn about opportunities to help their child at home. Parents will be notified through e-mail and letters/notices that will be sent home with their child in their preferred language. Translation services are provided at all workshops upon request, through in-house staff translators and the use of the DOE's Translations unit resources. Records, including agendas, attendance sheets and invitations in parents’ preferred languages, will be maintained by the Parent Coordinator. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 61 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 2018-19 SCEP-FL 62  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 31 School Name Berta A. Dreyfus Intermediate School Borough Staten Island School Number 049 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Louis A. Bruschi Coach N/A ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher MaryAnn Diglio, Sylvia Abdelsa Teacher/Subject Area Danielle DiChiaro-Clifford/ EN Teacher/Subject Area Dr. Brown/ Peer Mediator Related-Service Provider Lisa Rice Superintendent Vincenza Gallassio Assistant Principal Coach N/A School Counselor John Avitto Parent Renee Monge Parent Coordinator Leigh Gonzalez-Ferrmaint Field Support Center Staff Member Kim Seivers Other (Name and Title) Audrey Kiritz C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 1 2 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 2018-19 SCEP-FL 63  D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 536 Total number of ELLs 80 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 14.93% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 0 1 3 2 4 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 0 6 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Teachers utilize teacher-made and program-based rubrics, aligned with the NYS Common Core Learning Standards, as formative and summative data to inform instructional moves and student grouping and provide immediate and explicit feedback. The rubrics capture listening, speaking, reading, and writing proficiency and progress. The ELA programs we currently utilize are Common Core Code X, Word Gen (through the Middle School Quality Initiative support), Teacher's College Running Records, Wilson Intervention System, and Great Leaps Reading Program. The Wilson Intervention System and Great Leaps Reading Program are specifically utilized to support lower-level ELLs in linguistic, fluency and literacy development, as 2018-19 SCEP-FL 64  tiered interventions. The NYC DOE Periodic Assessments and Degrees of Reading Power (DRP) assessment results are used to determine which ELLs receive instructional intervention, including Title III programming. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Dreyfus Intermediate School 49 provides time for teachers to co-plan and meet on a weekly basis. Title III morning programming also allows for additional academic and linguistic support to be provided for our English Language Learners. This year, Dreyfus has developed teacher teams such as the ELA team, the RTI Team, assessment/data team, and math team, to analyze student work and identify trends and patterns in student strengths and areas in need of improvement. The data from the Teacher's College literacy assessments (which are running records and phonemic awareness, letter and word recognition assessments), portfolio progress tracking, Go Math unit assessments, DRP, and Code X unit assessments, are recorded on a spreadsheet for further analysis, to guide instructional decisions and inform intervention strategies for struggling learners. The ENL teacher filters all of this data to identify ELL performance. The data is shared with administration, where it is further analyzed and discussed with the appropriate teacher teams to collaborate on finding best practices to support the ELLs. The school principal ensures that during the teacher team meetings, teachers reflect on instructional practices, and collaborate to identify best practices that will best support student needs. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Dreyfus Intermediate School 49 utilizes the NYC DOE's Periodic Assessment for ELLs, and DRP, which are administered in the Fall, Winter, and Spring as benchmarks to determine progress and areas in need of improvement. The results are also utilized to determine which students are in need of further academic and linguistic support and intervention. Prerequisite skills inventory assessments in math and ELA are administered in the beginning of the year to determine the prior knowledge of each student. Grade-level baseline assessments are administered to determine the content area proficiency levels of each student, and the results are used to guide instruction and further intervention when needed. In the Spring, ELLs are administered the NYS ELA exam (if applicable), NYS Math Exam, NYS Science Exam, and NYSESLAT. Periodic performance assessments such as beginning-of-year, middle-of-year, and end-of-year unit assessments are also administered in ELA and Math. All of these assessments are administered to assess the critical area skills in those content areas, as benchmark and summative assessments. The results of the NYSITELL are used as a baseline for English proficiency, and the NYSESLAT results are used as a measure of student progress at the end of the school year. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Summative assessments are tools we use to help evaluate the effectiveness of our programs, goals, alignment of curriculum, and student placement in specific classes and instructional programs. These timely assessments give detailed data that teachers use to help better understand what a student knows, and what concepts they must focus on to ensure grade-level performance. These assessments are analyzed by the ENL and ELA teachers, in addition to the RTI team (when applicable), to determine student proficiency in reading, writing, listening and speaking. Collaboratively, the teacher and appropriate team(s), including the RTI Team, Data Analysis Team, ENL teacher, and administration, implement strategies, interventions, and additional support services as needed. School leadership ensures that staff are implementing the interventions in the areas of need for the ELLs by conducting classroom walk-throughs, attending weekly teacher team meetings and grade meetings, and collecting monthly data to analyze student trends and implementations. School leadership ensures that staff members are implementing the interventions in the areas of needs for the ELLs by monitoring RTI and AIS team meetings, as well as attending grade-team meetings to ensure data analysis and collaboration in finding best practices. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] N/A 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 65  The NYSITELL, NYSESLAT, ELA and Math NYS Common Core Exams, and classroom assessments (common-core-learning-standards-and-curriculum-aligned rubrics, checklists, and success criteria, in addition to benchmark and unit assessment data) outcomes are used to inform student grouping, instructional goals and strategies and interventions, in addition to informing approproiate programming. The assessment data is used to evaluate and inform Dreyfus' Title III ENL programs such as the morning programming, and RTI decisions for AIS grouping. Once students are placed in the appropriate support programs, the classroom and ENL teachers consistently analyze data to monitor student progress and guide decisions as to whether or not changes in programming and interventions are necessary. The ELL Data Analysis tool is used to focus on the progress toward achievement of language and academic proficiency for ELLs, and to design and implement effective instructional programs and/or interventions for those students. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? In September, all data from the EDAT and RLAT pertaining to these detailed assessments are analyzed and used by the ENL teachers as an informative tool to support the development of individual and group instruction. The RTI teams, teacher teams, and data team meet regularly to collaborate with administration and the ENL teacher to analyze data spreadsheets that track student progress. The findings are shared with the students and all stakeholders to keep lines of communication open, and to ensure that the students are being fully supported in all aspects. The ENL teachers and ENL Coordinator also meet with content teachers to offer support and instructional strategies addressing specially designed instruction for ELLs, aligned with NYS Common Core Learning Standards. In addition, the ENL teachers and ENL Coordinator will work with content teachers to determine the academic language needed to be acquired at each stage of English language development, so that students can access the content and progress towards English proficiency. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. The RLAT and RNMR are used to decipher English proficiency levels, which dictate ELL programming. Entering and Emerging students receive 360 minutes per week of ENL instruction during the scheduled school day as required under CR Part 154. Transitioning and Expanding students receive 180 minutes per week of ENL instruction during the scheduled school day. Commanding students receive 90 minutes of Alternative Pathways to Support Former ELLs' Language Development and Academic Progress, under Option B; Individualized Targeted Learning. The Freestanding ENL Program services the students in 50 minute blocks per day, each day. The blocks that are standalone ENL instruction are designated for Entering and Emerging students, totaling 180 minutes per week, and are split by two-level grade bands, unless a student has an IEP, in which case the grouping may be in three-grade-level bands. The integrated instruction consists of one block for each grade, 6-8, that includes all levels of language proficiency, which are heterogeneously grouped. All ELLs are heterogeneously grouped into one class per grade making it possible for the integrated ENL/ELA instructional program to occur, unless otherwise dictated by their IEPs. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 66  2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? The school ensures that the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in the ENL program, with schedules approved by the District 31 ENL specialists, and by internal school leadership. Entering and Emerging students receive 360 minutes of ENL instruction per week, Transitioning and Expanding students receive 180 minutes of ENL instruction per week, and Commanding students receive 90 minutes of Alternative Pathways to Support Former ELLs' Language Development and Academic Progress. All schedules are reviewed by Dreyfus' Student Programmer/Data Specialist, and are in compliance with CR Part 154. The ENL program at Dreyfus delivers ENL instruction in English 100% of the time by the ENL teachers. New York State Learning Standards are used to teach English in a content-based cross-curricular format, using ENL methodologies and scaffolding strategies to support the ELLs as needed. Standards-based instruction is implemented in the four modalities of language skills: speaking, listening, reading, and writing in English, with the support of the ENL Bilingual Learning Progressions. ENL teacher pushes into designated classes on each grade to support the classroom teachers in meeting the needs of our ELLs in an integrated, co-teaching model. Scaffolding techniques such as modeling, accessing prior knowledge, explicit and immediate peer-and-teacher- feedback, bridging, peer-assistance pairs/groups, schema-building, text representation, metacognition and self-assessment with various rubrics and checklists are implemented. The ENL teachers also implements these strategies to support language development during standalone periods in a small-group instructional setting to meet the mandated minutes for Entering and Emerging ELLs, according to CR-154. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. The ENL program delivers instruction in English, and aligns instructional activities with the core content. The integrated co-teaching ENL program supports the Code X ELA program by providing scaffolded approaches to the curriculum and simultaneous language support. The integrated model is a collaborative approach to the classroom setting, in that the ENL teacher and classroom teacher work alongside each other to deliver instruction through a Universal Design for Learning. The program is student-centered, reflective and expressive, in that students constantly self-and-peer-assess their work, work in small groups and pairs, and provide and receive explicit, written and oral feedback using checklists, rubrics and student exemplars to guide their work. The classroom teacher delivers the core instruction aligned with the NYS Learning Standards, while the ENL teacher scaffolds and supports instruction with further analysis and break-down of the skills, activating prior knowledge and developing vocabulary through various instructional strategies and activities that are differentiated to meet the linguistic and cognitive needs of each ELL. The standalone ENL model supplements the content being taught in the ELLs' classrooms, and focuses on English language development, while simultaneously addressing areas in need of improvement which are discussed between the classroom teacher and the ENL teacher during common planning time and teacher team meetings. Both program models utilize additional strategies and materials such as differentiated graphic organizers, bilingual libraries, translating texts/directions, bilingual dictionaries, facilitating intentional grouping, bilingual and illustrated dictionaries, and instruction in academic vocabulary using knowledge of the home language to support learning. Both program models require rigorous and intensive co-planning, and the ENL teacher is directly involved in that planning process during teacher team meetings and grade meetings. Further support such as iPad keyboards, clear oral language models for students, visual supports (i.e. world walls with visuals), technology (Smartboards, photographs, videos, computers, iPads), materials in the students’ home languages, explicit vocabulary and English instruction, graphics and visual organizers, and leveled texts are provided so that content is comprehensible and accessible for all ELLs. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Dreyfus ensures that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year. Upon admittance, students are given a baseline assessment in their home language, when necessary, and in English to assess language and content proficiency. The NYSITELL and Spanish LAB are administered when applicable, to students who speak Spansih. The 2018-19 SCEP-FL 67  Spanish LAB is used to further support teachers in instructional planning by providing teachers with the students' home language proficiency. Bilingual staff members are utilized whenever possible to conduct oral assessments throughout the year, and to translate written assessments when applicable. Translators and translated materials are provided as needed to further support the assessment process. Many classroom assessments, including Teacher's College running records, unit assessments, rubrics, and checklists are given to the students in their home language in addition to English. Teachers utilize bilingual staff members to translate classroom assessments when written assessments or texts in are not readily accessible. ELLs have the opportunity to complete assessments in their home language, as well as completing the assessment in English to the best of their ability. Tri-annual portfolio reviews are conducted by classroom teachers, the ENL teachers, administration, and specific teacher teams (when necessary) to assess student progress and determine appropriate interventions and programming for ELLs. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. SIFE: SIFE students have access to resources in the ENL and content classrooms, which include picture dictionaries, tablets, books in the home language, leveled books, audio books, headphones, and access to programs and software on iPads and laptops such as the myON reading program. The teachers use scaffolding techniques and ENL methodology to bring the student up to grade-level proficiency and bridge academic gaps. The teachers have created comfortable environments so the student feels safe to make mistakes, and safe to participate in discussions and group activities. The ENL teachers and Parent Coordinator will conduct quarter-annual meeting with SIFE students and their parent/guardian to further support their progress and transition.b. Newcomer: The ENL teachers differentiate instruction for newcomers by providing picture dictionaries, bilingual glossaries and dictionaries, beginning reader books, audio books, books in the home language, tablets, and a set of earphones in the general education classrooms and the ENL standalone classroom. Newcomer ELLs are administered an initial Wilson Reading System assessment, and the Wilson Reading program is utilized for AIS to further support language development. The newcomers have access to iPads and laptops and software such as myON and Vocabulary A-Z. These students participate in AIS, SETSS (when applicable) and Title III supplemental instructional support, and receive scaffolded instruction to activate prior knowledge and build on schema through the use of differentiated and translated materials, illustrated materials (such as texts and directions), and explicit instruction in small-group settings.c. Developing: These students participate in AIS interventions focusing on higher order thinking concepts and questioning, in addition to building content-based vocabulary through scaffolded instructional strategies and additional Title III support such as ENL morning programming. Developing ELLs receive small group instruction, using the Great Leaps Reading Program as intervention support. These students also have access to iPads and laptops to use myON and Vocabulary A-Z, which build upon vocabulary and are used as a supplemental support for developing academic vocabulary, aligned with the NYS Learning Standards.d. Long Term: These students participate in the integrated co-teaching model, where the ENL teacher provides instructional support in the general education classroom, supporting the long-term ELLs in vocabulary development and home language support when necessary, when scaffolding core instruction. These students have access to laptops and iPads, and use software such as myON and Vocabulary A-Z.e. Former ELLs: Former ELLs will receive 90 minutes of Individualized Targeted Learning through the Alternative Pathways to support former English Language Learners' language development and academic progress.. They still are entitled to additional modifications and accommodations, when necessary, in addition to any other specific modifications that may be indicated on an IEP, when applicable. They are also entitled to participate in Title III programming throughout the school year. These students have access to myON and Vocabulary A-Z as a supplemental means of supporting the core content. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? 2018-19 SCEP-FL 68  The instructional strategies and grade level materials that teachers of ELL-SWD use in our school are Common Core Code X curricular materials for grades 6-8, and the Great Leaps reading program and Wilson Reading program for struggling ELL-SWDs in need of additional support in reading, writing, listening, and speaking. These programs lend themselves to tiered academic support, in addition to English language development These programs have listening-strand lessons comprised of teacher read-alouds with extensive activities and ample opportunity for peer interaction and group work for peer-support. Graphic organizers, manipulatives, visuals, charts, anchor charts, dictionaries, glossaries, and teacher directions are all differentiated to meet the academic and individual needs of each student, and accelerate English language development. Formative assessments are included with each lesson through checks for comprehension, peer feedback, student-led conferences, and explicit, immediate teacher feedback. Teachers adapt lessons to meet IEP goals and the goals identified with the RTI Team and the ENL teacher. Dreyfus currently utilizes the GoMath curriculum for all grade levels. Teachers adapt the lessons to meet the needs of IEP goals and the goals of the RTI Team and the ENL teacher. Title III programming offers small groups and individualized supplemental support to all ELLs in the morning. Dreyfus also has a SETSS/IEP teacher and AIS teachers that offer additional instructional support during the school day. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? The ENL teacher co-plans with the classroom teachers and SETTS/IEP teacher during common planning times, which is embedded into the school-day schedule. The common planning meetings also include the special education classroom teachers who teach ELL-SWDs. There are ample opportunities to meet throughout the week during common preparation periods, during the Monday professional learning time, and during "Team Tuesday," time, which is after parent-engagement time. The least restrictive program for ELL-SWDs is the integrated co-teaching model, where the ENL teacher integrates with the general and special education teachers. The ENL teacher's schedule is collaboratively designed to align with the classroom teacher's schedule, so that the content delivered in the integrated model is aligned with the ELL-SWD's areas in need of improvement and IEP goals, in addition to the mandated minutes according to CR-Part 154. All work is aligned with the NYS Learning Standards, and is scaffolded to support language development in addition to the skills that the ELL-SWD must meet identified on the IEP. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Dreyfus' classroom teachers use Common Core Code X for the ELA Curriculum. Interventions such as small group reinforcement, peer support activities, and one-to-one conferencing is impemented to further develop skills. Teacher-made assessments and activities are created collaboratively among teacher teams and the ENL teacher during common planning time. Targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA include myON and Vocabulary A-Z software, and Great Leaps and Wilson reading programs. All of the targeted intervention programs and strategies are scaffolded to meet the needs of the individual student, and offer materials that are offered in multiple languages. The IEP/SETTS teacher and AIS teachers also conduct small group intervention for additional support when applicable. Dreyfus also offers Title III morning programming that targets different skills of varying proficiency levels across content areas. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Based on data and trends analyzed by the ENL teachers and ENL Coordinator, many of our ELLs are lacking in academic and basic vocabulary. Dreyfus is considering adapting Achieve 3000 software for the upcoming school year, to supplement core content and help improve our ELLs' academic vocabulary through individualized instruction and assessment. Dreyfus recently implemented professional learning communities, which will also be more inquiry-based and data-driven, to better support our ELLs in the upcoming school year. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 69  11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All after school and supplemental programs are offered to every child at Dreyfus, including ELLs. Title III morning programming is available specifically for ELLs, in addition to programs that are available to all students, which include academic morning and after school programs for Common Core state test-readiness, enrichment programs, band program, and basketball programs. The parent coordinator works with the ENL teachers to invite ELLs into the programs by providing translated permission slips and by conducting follow-up telephone contact to ensure ELL participation in the programs. School leadership ensures that ELL students are attending the various programs by maintaining accurate attendance records, and analyzing the attendance trends to implement next steps as to whether or not parent outreach is being conducted effectively. If programs do not have adequate participation or attendance among the ELLs, further parent outreach is conducted, in addition to informational community and parent-workshops when necessary. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. We have purchased bilingual books and materials for our classrooms that reflect the multilingualism and multiculturalism of our school community. The ENL teachers and classroom teachers also collaboratively create materials to support the scaffolded instruction for ELLs. These materials include vocabulary cards, sight word cards, graphic organizers, checklists and reminder sheets, games and other materials in students home language that are specifically designed to meet each students' needs. The technologically instructional materials used to support the ELLs in the general education classroom during the integrated co-teaching periods include Smart Boards, iPads, and laptops to utilize supplemental programs such as myON and Vocabulary A-Z. The classrooms that consist of ELLs have bilingual dictionaries, bilingual reading materials in the classroom library, differentiated graphic organizers (which are translated when necessary), translated glossaries. The classrooms implement intensive small group instruction and peer-interactions to build social skills and trust among the classroom community. Teacher's College reading running records, word study materials and assessments, word and letter recognition materials and assessments, and additional supplemental assessments are further used to support ELLs. Great Leaps and Wilson comprehension, phonics and literacy materials and assessments are also used to support ELL-SWDs. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Home language support is assessed and delivered in the integrated co-teaching model by the ENL teachers, general education teachers, and special education teachers, in the general education, ICT, or self-contained settings. Every assessment that is given is translated orally by a bilingual staff member, or provided in written form in English and in the ELL's home language, when necessary. The ENL classroom has bilingual libraries and content area materials to support independent practice of skills in the students' home language as well. The ENL teacher also provides each teacher of ELLs with bilingual student-readers, bilingual dictionaries and glossaries, and scaffolded and differentiated graphic organizers which are translated from English to the home language when necessary. In the integrated model, the ENL teacher supplements the core instruction by scaffolding NYS Learning Standards to meet the linguistic and cognitive needs of each ELL. In the standalone model, the ENL teacher focuses on specific areas in need of improvement, identified on classroom assessments and NYSITELL and NYSESLAT modalities. The ELLs and ELL-SWDs are assessed in the home language and in English, so that all teachers of ELLs are aware of the ELLs' strengths and areas in need of improvement in the home language and in English. Dreyfus currently does not have a DL or TBE program. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All required services support and correspond to ELLs ages and grade levels at Dreyfus Intermediate School 49. Upon arrival in the beginning of the year, students are given baseline and prerequisite skills inventory assessments. In the middle and end of the year, the ELLs are given similar assessments that cover the skills that correspond to that specific time of year. These assessments are given in English and in the home language when necessary, and they appropriately assess grade-level content proficiency, which helps inform instructional decisions to further support the ELLs according to their age and grade levels. For ELLs who are below or significantly below grade-level expectations/proficiency, the assessment data is analyzed and further academic support is implemented. The ENL teacher scaffolds instruction to reinforce skills that the ELLs need further development in, as well as reinforcing grade-level content. Materials and instruction correspond to the New York State 2018-19 SCEP-FL 70  Learning Standards according to grade and age levels. Differentiated instruction is delivered according to needs of each ELL, but in alignment with the NYS Learning Standards for content-based support. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Dreyfus shares a building with the Eagle Academy for Young Men. We share curricular resources and staff members for translations, when necessary. Many community events, such as attendance incentive and health events, are held for both schools. In this case, staff members come together to ensure that all students are supported. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Newly enrolled ELLs complete a battery of baseline assessments upon arrival, before beginning the school year in their new class placements. The assessments will be conducted in English and in the home languages, when necessary. Additionally, newly enrolled ELLs are given grade-level, content-based assessments. The data from these assessments, including the NYSITELL, informs instruction for the teachers of ELLs. Dreyfus is working towards a new protocol for newly enrolled students, including ELLs. The new protocol includes a team of students (one student who is the same age as the new admit and one who is older), accompanying the new student, the ENL teacher, ENL Coordinator, and Parent Coordinator, on a tour of the school. Currently, the ENL teachers and ENL Coordinator work closely with the classroom teachers to make sure that student needs are met, and that they are participating in the appropriate academic and linguistic-based support services throughout the school year. Throughout the year, newcomer ELLs have the opportunity to participate in Title III morning programs. Student-led portfolio reviews are also conducted to showcase pieces of student work that the ELLs are most proud of. The ENL teacher and ENL Coordinator provide the teachers of ELLs with a toolkit of scaffolded strategies and differentiated materials. This toolkit includes alternate assessments with home language support, and additional materials that include a bilingual, illustrated picture dictionary and glossary, and translated materials. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Spanish is currently the only foreign language class offered at Dreyfus. Spanish instruction is offered to students in grades six through eight. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Dreyfus' professional development program will be continuous and informative for all staff responsible for the delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. In order for our ELLs to be successful, the teachers must be fully equipped with a bank of knowledge and resources as to how to best meet the needs of each student, holistically.The ENL teacher will conduct a beginning-of-year Professional Development workshop to explain ENL terminology and programming, in-class scaffolding, 2018-19 SCEP-FL 71  differentiated instruction, language support, supplemental programs that enhance linguistic development, and general resources to support ELLs. The staff will be informed of instructional strategies and scaffolded approaches to ELL instruction, in addition to the ELL identification, placement and assessment process. The ENL teacher will also provide teachers of ELLs with a toolkit of instructional and linguistic materials and resources needed to fully support their ELLs academically, socially, and emotionally. At the end of the school year, the ENL teacher will facilitate a final professional development session which will allow for data analysis and reflections of student progress, to identify areas in need of improvement and discuss best practices in supporting the ELLs. The PD will also address ways to support home language and content-based instruction at home, to prepare the ELLs for the following academic year. The PD will be to support the families of ELLs by providing the teachers of ELLs with opportunities for parents of ELLs to learn the content and vocabulary itself, as well as providing them with ways of sharing the learning process with their children throughout the summer.The ENL teachers and ENL Coordinator will also be sent on multiple Professional Development workshops and trainings to stay informed of best practices and new implementations, testing updates, and ENL regulations, throughout the year. The attendees will turnkey any new information to administration and staff, so that everyone is aware of how to best support our ELLs. The ENL teachers will also meet once a week to analyze student work, collaborate with grade teams to identify best practices, and offer differentiated instructional strategies that will best meet the needs of the ELLs. Tentative Internal Professional Development Schedule (Facilitated by the ENL Teachers and/or ENL Coordinator):December 2018: Strategies to Develop the 4 Modalities; January 2019: Supporting ELLs in Reciprocal Teaching; March 2019: Math Strategies for Supporting ELLs; April: NYSESLAT Review; June 2019: End of Year Reflection 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Every Monday there is extended day for Professional Development at Dreyfus for all teachers, including teachers of ELLs. The ELL-related workshops are facilitated by the ENL Coordinator, ENL teachers, and classroom teachers of ELLs. Workshops will be scheduled to meet the new mandates of CR Part 154 (15% ENL workshops for teachers of ELLs). The pupil accounting secretary will maintain agendas and attendance records of all professional development attended and facilitated. The ENL teachers will facilitate 4-5 staff-wide Professional Development sessions throughout the year, as well as facilitating informal, monthly informational sessions for teachers of ELLs during common planning time. The Professional Development sessions will address language acquisition, best practices for co-teaching strategies, and integrating language and content instruction for ELLs. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? The ENL teachers will schedule weekly parent/guardian meetings on Tuesdays after school during the Parent Engagement time. Notices are constantly sent home and followed up on with phone calls to make sure the parent is aware of scheduled meetings and events, in addition to student progress. If translations are necessary, bilingual staff members are utilized, in addition to utilizing the DOE's Translation and Interpretation Unit to translate any parent/guardian notices. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. School family events are inclusive of all families, including families of children who speak a language other than English at home. The school facilitates family fun nights which include various arts and crafts, music and food. At these events the ENL teachers and the parent coordinator are available to speak to all parents about the value the school places on multilingualism and their role as an ELL teacher in the school. When official letters go home, these letters are sent home in home languages as 2018-19 SCEP-FL 72  well as English. All of the ELL parents are encouraged to request information in their home languages. Specific parent involvement opportunities include volunteering in the classroom, volunteering in the lunchroom, attending extracurricular school events and teaching about special family traditions or knowledge. All parents, inclusive of parents of ELLs, are also invited to participate in parent committees such as the PTA and the SLT. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. None 2018-19 SCEP-FL 73 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Louis A. Bruschi, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 74  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Dreyfus Intermediate School DBN: 31R049 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Louis A. Bruschi Title Principal Joanne Aguirre Assistant Principal Leigh Ann Fermaint-Gonzalez Parent Coordinator Maryann Diglio ENL/Bilingual Teacher Renee Monge Parent Danielle DiChiaro-Clifford Teacher/Subject Area Dr. Marilyn Brown Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach John Avitto School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Audrey Kiritz Other School Counselor Lisa Rice Other IEP/SETTS Teacher Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 12/20/18 12/20/18 12/20/18 12/20/18 12/20/18 12/20/18 12/20/18 12/20/18 12/20/18 2018-19 SCEP-FL 75  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 31 School Name: R0 Superintendent: Anthony Lodico The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. At registration, parents are required to fill out the Home Language Identification Survey form where they indicate their preferred language of communication. Parents who speak a language other than English are given the form in their native langauge. Additionally, the main office has a Language Identification Guide to help school staff identify the language of a limited-English-proficient parent and a mulitlingual Welcome Poster is posted in the main office. After a parent has completed their HLIS form, entries for preferred language are entered on ATS to indicate the language commonly used at home and for which all communications should be provided by the school. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 76  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language The languages perferred by parents for both written and oral communication are Spanish, Chinese, Albanian, French, Italian, Urdu and Arabic 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Our school disseminates a monthly newletter, field trip forms, calender notices and parent- teacher conferences notifcations in Spanish. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide The formal face to face meetings will take place during open school night in September, Introduction to ENL morning workshop in October, interpretation service(s)? 2018-19 SCEP-FL 77  Parent -teacher Conferences in November and March, and Cultural Night in May. Every Wednesday morning is Parent Outreach, staff will contact parents to up date student progess as needed. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) At the security desk all necessary language interpretatioin documents such as the Language ID guide can be accessed to assist parents. The Welcome Poster and the Parents Bill of Rights is located in the main office for easy parent access. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Parents will have the opportunity to complete a parent survey during Parent-Teacher night, inaddtion parents are encouraged to speak to the Principal, Assisstant Principals, ENL teachers and the Parent Coordinator to give feedback on their child's education. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 78 
