 07X001 School Name: P.S. 001 COURTLANDT SCHOOL Principal: JORGE PERDOMO 2018-19 SCEP-FF 1  School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Section 4: SCEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 SCEP-FF 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: PS1x The Courtlandt School 07X001 School Number (DBN): 320700010001 3K – 5 th Grade 335 East 152 nd Street, Bronx, NY, 10451 718-299-3700 718-292-2227 Phone Number: Jorge Perdomo Fax: jperdom@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Email Address: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Jorge Perdomo Brenda Cartagena Evelyn Reyes Gloria Jimenez YudelkaMendez x x x District Information Geographical District: 07 Superintendent’s Office Address: Rafael Alvarez Superintendent: 501 Courtlandt Ave. Bronx, NY 10451 Ralvarez4@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-742-6400 Phone Number: 718-742-6548 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 SCEP-FF 3  FSC: Bronx Executive Director’s Office Address: Jose Ruiz Executive Director: 1230 Zerega Ave., Bronx, NY, 10462/One Fordham Plaza, Bronx, NY 10458 Jruiz2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: Phone Number: Fax: 718-828-7776/718-741-8895 718-828-6280 2018-19 SCEP-FF 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the SCEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Jorge Perdomo Brenda Cartagena Evelyn Reyes Laura Aldea YudelkaMendez Polanco .N/A .N/A N/A Gloria Jimenez Renee Douglas MayelinFlorentino *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBORepresentative Member/ teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher 2018-19 SCEP-FF 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Luisa Valentin KariaidyPadilla BetsaidaVargas Guadalupe Rios KiyonBarnes Heather Werner Caban Melissa Martinez JeseniaMorales LanaVogelle Member/ teacher Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ parent Member/ Teacher Member/ Parent Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher 2018-19 SCEP-FF 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) is a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. The process of developing and implementing the SCEP is aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding SCEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and informed by New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and SCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a 2018-19 SCEP-FF 7  comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality 2018-19 SCEP-FF 8  Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the SCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the SCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for SCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 9   Step 4: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 5: Build consensus around activities, strategies and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 6: Implement at least one USDE Turnaround Principle (e.g., redesign the school day, week, or year; modify the instructional program to ensure it is Evidence-based, rigorous, and aligned with State academic content standards; provide time for collaboration on the use of) beginning no later than the 2018-19 school year.  Step 7: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 8: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 10  Section 4: SCEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Mission Statement At PS1x, our vision is to establish a healthy, happy, and peaceful school community where all students can learn and grow into leaders in a variety of academic, social and/or artistic areas. We are able to accomplish this through an engaging, student-centered curriculum where students take an active role in the learning process. Additionally, our School Vision at Public School 1 aims to create a learning community that is dedicated to fostering ethical, caring, self-reflective and independent thinkers with a life-long love for learning. Our School Mission at Public School 1 is to develop leaders in every member of our learning community. As a result, our learning community will develop the critical thinking and social interaction skills of all learners, in a nurturing and collaborative environment so our learners achieve high academic standards and are becoming productive citizens in the 21st century. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Contextual Information At PS 1x, we have aligned our instructional program to meet Common Core expectations, aligned to the Framework for Great Schools in that we implement high level, rigorous modules in ELA, and Engage NY for mathematics. As we continue to develop a common understanding of the work. We will continue to refine the instructional focus to integrate our theory of action on how students learn best, respond to the needs of all students, and attend to the professional growth of all staff. Our teachers utilize a blended model for instruction where students rotate between guided practice, independent practice and online programs such as IXL, Ready, Reflex and Myon. Through these implemented programs, our students have undertaken an inquiry, student centered approach to learning where they are actively involved in their learning and go deep into the content for greater levels of understanding and application. Our teachers emphasize peer-to-peer learning and in depth conversation and questioning in cooperative learning groups so students can learn and teach each other in a variety of contexts and subject areas. Throughout the 2018-2019 school year, school leadership and teacher teams will monitor, for evidence of impact and reflect on, implementation of effective corrective strategies in their teacher teams during common planning plan. This reflection will inform adjustments to practice and structures, in service of increasing student progress. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 11  Some of our special partnerships are Team First, a community based organization that facilitates our after school program where students are exposed to various artistic endeavors, such as dance, music, video and community action. These various clubs are based around a common theme aligned to our school mission/vision, such as empathy, peace, and trustworthiness as well as the 8 habits of highly effective people. These themes are expressed through culminating performances such as in a “Talk Show” format where students play a role in every aspect of the show, such as production, presenting, interviewing, and the performances, further emphasizing our effort for students being at the center of all of their learning and experiences. We are engaged in a school-wide transformative leadership process that is aligned to our school vision, common language, and culture within the PS 1x school community. We have also collaborated with Franklin Covey in bringing the Leader in Me to our school for the past several years and we have recently received a grant to continue this program for an additional five years. Through The Leader in Me process our students are exposed to direct instruction and various other events and activities around the 7 Habits of Highly Effective People such as: learned leadership, accountability, adaptability, initiative and self-direction, cross cultural skills, responsibility, problem solving, communication, creativity and teamwork. The Leader in Me philosophy emphasizes the leader within all of us and through discussion, experiences, and teaching, all of our students, teachers, and community members can strive to be the best they can be in whatever area of their choosing. Through symbolism, teaching, conversation, professional development, and culminating events, we have seen significant growth within our learning community by all members. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Special Student Populations PS1x, The Courtlandt School is an elementary school with 645 students from 3 kindergarten through grade 5. The school population comprises of 23% Black, 75% Hispanic, and 2% White, and 0% other. The student body includes 29% English Language Learners and 21% students with special needs. Boys account for 50.44% of the students enrolled and girls account for 49.56%. The average attendance rate for the school year 2017-2018 was 91 percent. Our English Language Learner population receives support through two programs, our bilingual program where we have one bilingual class in every grade, and through our English as a New Language program servicing students throughout the grades in a push in or pull out model. These students need support in language acquisition, reading comprehension, and listening/speaking skills in the English language. Our teachers, both in the bilingual/ENL program and in the general education settings support these students with differentiated instruction, Total Physical Response (TPR), the use of multi-sensory teaching through visuals, video clips, audio recordings, Thinking Maps, vocabulary instruction and other ELL best practices to support their development. For our students with Individualized Education Plans (IEP), we support these students through various research-based programs and supportive classroom environment. In each grade, we have an Integrated Co-Teaching environment (ICT), where a general education and special education teacher leverage their expertise in instruction work together 2018-19 SCEP-FF 12  to plan and implement lesson that are rigorous and differentiated to meet the needs of each individual students in the classroom while still exposing every child to high level, rigorous, grade appropriate material. We also have multiple self-contained, bridge classes where the student population does not exceed 12 students. Through this program, the special education teacher can provide individualized support while tailoring the instruction to meet the needs of every child. Additionally, we have a SETTS teacher who provides pull out services in small groups, implementing the Wilson Reading Program to ensure the students are developing their reading skills in order to support comprehension and the ability “to read to learn.” We also have a number of trained teachers in intervention programs, such as Reading Recovery, Reading Rescue, Great Leaps Reading and Math, and Wilson Reading. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Elements of the Framework for Great Schools The Elements of the Framework for Great Schools that we have made the most progress in this year is developing a supportive environment and providing rigorous instruction for all of our students. We have created a number of systems and structures in order to support the development in these two areas. In developing a supportive environment our initiative to implement the Leader in Me at PS1 has made a significant contribution in this area. The School implements the Leader in Me process to improve the culture of the school and to maximize students’ academic performance. This philosophy, based on the The 7 Habits of Highly Effective People by Stephen Covey, engaged the entire school community in activities, lesson, conversations, and celebrations around leadership, positive behavior, and service to the community and gives students leadership roles of responsibility, personal accountability and independence that is crucial to college and career readiness. As a result, the school has experienced a dramatic decrease in behavior programs, referrals and suspension throughout the year.” Our school culture and character building initiatives are aligned with our vision of creating a healthy, happy and peaceful learning environment for all members of our learning community. PS 1x has adopted the Leader in Me process developed by author and teacher, Stephen R. Covey. TheLeader in Me is an “innovative, school wide model that increases teacher effectiveness, student engagement, and academic achievement, while preparing students to be leaders in the 21st century. “ Through this effort, our school is developing leadership qualities within all members of our school community; students, teachers, support staff, parents, and community members. This was accomplished through direct instruction of the 7 Habits of Highly Effective People, established school-wide rituals and routines around leadership, team building, goal setting, and community action, and our monthly theme celebrations and events. For the next element we have made significant progress in is providing rigorous instruction.The school successfully partners with families around supporting students towards expectation connected to college and career readiness.” Our philosophy for professional development is based on the principles of a highly effective “Professional Learning Community.” 2018-19 SCEP-FF 13  Consequently, as best research practices suggest, we create many opportunities for teachers to learn from each other, facilitate and lead staff development, observe each other, and turnkey information gained at workshops they have attended and in their areas of expertise. Our approach is a multi-faceted strategy, where teacher teams meet regularly, share best practices, attend workshops, turnkey their learning to their colleagues and apply the best practices. Additionally, we utilize a “Lab Site” model, where teachers plan together, teach together with groups of students, reflect on their learning and plan instruction based on their learning. This effort ensures that our students are exposed to best pedagogical practices in a variety of instructional areas, that teachers are sharing these practices throughout their grade teams, and school teams to solidify a consistency of practices that help students meet their goals. We have seen the results of our work in an increase of students meeting proficiency level on the 2017-2018 ELA and Math assessments. Our ELA scores increased from 13.7 to 28.2% which is a 14.5 percentage points; in Mathematics we saw a 10.4% gain from 10.7% to 21.1% of our students at proficiency. The element of the Framework we are focusing on for the school year 2018-2019 is to further develop Collaborative Teachers, where each teacher is contributing to the learning community in a significant way. We have already developed systems and structures to ensure this by creating “Teacher Trainers” in a number of areas where teachers are provided with high-level professional development. For example, for targeted interventions such as Reading Rescue and Thinking Maps, where teachers are now expected to provide the professional development to their colleagues during common planning and/or staff development days. Through this process, we will be building capacity among all of our teaching staff and developing our teachers as leaders where they hold each other accountable for high-level instructional practices to meet the needs of all of our students. The following Turnaround Principles (3) will be implemented in the coming 2018-2019 school year. PSx1 was re-identified as a Focus schools that is not meeting the needs of students based on subgroup performance in the latest NYS Assessments. We are required to implement researched-based intervention, which are explicitly focused on the subgroups that placed the school in focus status. At PSx1 the principal has develop and promoted a coherent strategy plan for implementing the school’s vision, which includes, high expectations to staff, rigorous and coherent standards-based curriculum, clear measurable goals, aligned to researched based strategies and a plan for monitoring progress (use of observation data). Additionally, the school will engage in a continuous improvement cycle to ensure the achievement of learning goals for all students, including SWD and ELLs. 5. Identify at least one USDE Turnaround Principle (e.g., redesign the school day, week, or year; modify the instructional program to ensure it is Evidence-based, rigorous, and aligned with State academic content standards; provide time for collaboration on the use of data) to be implemented in the 2018-19 school year. Turnaround Principles Turnaround Principles Number 3: 2018-19 SCEP-FF 14  At PSx1, teachers will utilize research-based, rigorous and effective instruction to meet the needs of all students and that are aligned with State Standards. As part of meeting the turnaround principle regarding strengthening the school’s instructional program based on student needs, the school has implemented the following best practices and programs that are aligned with State Standards: Teachers will be required to:  Ensure that student-learning objectives are specific, measurable, attainable, realistic and timely, and are aligned to the standards-based curriculum.  Use multiple instructional strategies and multiple response strategies that actively engage and meet student learning needs.  Use frequent checks for understanding throughout each lesson to gauge student learning, and to inform, monitor and adjust instruction. Teachers will be provided with professional development in order to successfully implement Turnaround Principal 3. In order to support USDE Turnaround Principal number 3, PS1 has implemented the following- Researched-Based Programs that support teacher instructional best practices: Fountas and Pinnell Reading level system and Common Core Aligned School based created curriculum   Engage NY Instruction Program   Thinking Maps  Reading Rescue iReady Instructional Program The administration will monitor the progress made via: Administrative walk through and collecting data Informal and formal teacher observations Lesson plans, examples of student work and assessments as posted on School 4 One4. Data Source: NYS ELA/MATH 2017-2018 Assessments. OORS and Attendance Data 2018-19 SCEP-FF 15  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 07X001 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 663 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual YES Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 62 62 15 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 23 18 10 11 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 98.0% % Attendance Rate 96.4% % Reduced Lunch 28.2% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.0% 75.6% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 1.5% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 12.25 4% 22% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 28.2% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 57% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No No Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups Black, ED Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO N/A NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 58 56 8 89.5% 1.7% 22.0% 22.5% 0.5% 0.0% 4 6% 7 21.1% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No Yes NO N/A N/A NO NO NO N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FF 16  2018-19 SCEP-FF 17  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed X X X X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Reflection Our teachers are fully immersed in the blended model of instruction The high level of professional development in this area will ensure that our teachers and students have an in depth understanding of the components of the blended model which maximizes time on task, and small group direct instruction. We have seen how the use of blended model of learning has contributed to an increase of our ela scores across all grades and with all sub groups. Strengths Our teachers incorporate the blended model for learning in grades grades k-5. Our blended model are comprised of three groups: group 1 is facilitated by the classroom teacher with 1/4 of the class; the second group is working independently on enrichment and or previewing upcoming skills and or strategies. The last group of students are utilizing online independent programs such as IXL, IReady, Myon, and reflex math. As a result of incorporating the blended model of learning we have a rigorous instructional plan which is Common Core aligned, and supports college and career readiness in a variety of areas 2018-19 SCEP-FF 18  Priority Needs In order to ensure a consistency of practice in implementing the Blended Model of Learning across the grades, during the fall of 2018, we will continue to provide professional development for all teachers and staff who are newly hired. the professional development will be based on effective application of the blended model when creating rigorous academic tasks. This will be accomplished by utilizing our staff developers, consultants, The sole purpose is to turn key the professional development, their learning and knowledge to their colleagues in a meaningful, purposeful manner. This process will ensure that all of our staff, classroom teachers, support staff, paraprofessionals and students, especially ELLs and SWDs,will build upon their rigorous habits and higher-order thinking skills, as emphasized by having a high level understanding. One of the barriers that we must address is the coherence and effectiveness of teacher teams. Developing strong and effective teacher teams is a priority of the District 7. We are in the process of implementing in our school the Data Wise system on how to effective look at data and drive instruction. All grade teams will be given PD data analysis. They will use these best practices learned in professional development sessions to create modify curriculum rigorous tasks for their students that meets their academic needs. Teacher teams will have the opportunity to plan and discuss in their planning time how to use data to drive instruction and incorporate what has been learned in PD in actionable steps to increase student performance and outcomes. Data Source: F&P, iReady data, Curriculum Review, Professional Development Calendar, Advance Data, Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all teachers will incorporate rigorous tasks into all current ELA curriculum as measured by a 10% increase in all students, including students with disabilities and English Language Learners ,achieving one years progress on Reading and Writing Benchmarks. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 19 Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) School Leadership Team, Instructional Team, Grade Teachers Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Research-based instructional programs , professional development, and/or systems and structures need to impact change. All Students Sept 2018-June 2019 1. School wide focus (Student engagement, Quality of Questioning, and Assessment) to enhance the level of instruction rigorous tasks to ensure that our students are making progress in meeting grade level expectations for the development and understanding of academic language. 2. Our teachers will participate in a series of trainings and professional development including research based and effective strategies for creating rigorous tasks that also incorporates teaching comprehension with the use of Thinking Maps to support incorporate rigorous tasks into all current ELA curriculum. 3. Implement coaching cycles and learning opportunities for teachers to support student data analysis and to develop strategies to address the needs of all students and sub-groups. 4. Develop rigorous tasks that include Academic Vocabulary (Tier 2 and Tier 3). These tasks will be highlighted around the building, during morning announcements, all bulletin boards and student work, and in vocabulary notebooks. Scaffolding of speaking and listening skills through schoolwide use of academic vocabulary and discussion sentence stems. Improving the level of instruction around academic vocabulary and to ensure that students are making progress in meeting grade level expectations for the development of their vocabulary and understanding of academic language. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 20 At-risk students, Ells Sept 2018-June 2019 Assistant principals, Coaches 5. Additionally, we have invested in a number of resources, such as Spelling/Vocabulary City, iReady Reading, Great Leaps Reading, Sadlier Interactive Vocabulary and additional materials to support the development of rigorous tasks that incorporates reading and vocabulary development at a high level. Technological Support- Myon To supplement the development of rigouros tasks and in support of our ELLs the school will provide Myon. Myon is a complete literacy solution that reinvents the ways in which students and teachers interact with text. Myon provides anytime, anywhere access to a library of more than 10,000 enhanced digital books with multimedia supports, real-time reporting and assessments and embedded close reading tools. The digital literacy platform allows students not only to read, but to read closely, to engage with digital texts in new ways that will transform the entire learning experience. Teachers will be trained on how to use Myon effectively as a tool in providing differentiated instruction strategies (Learning Stations). Myon will provide scaffolds for at-risk students and sub-groups to ensure these groups are provided with multiple entry points to support literacy development. Strategies to Address the Needs of Students with Disabilities and English Language Learners All Students Sept 2018-June 2019 School Leadership Team, Instructional Team, Grade Teachers In order to support our English Language Learners and Students with Disabilities, teachers are provided with resources at various levels, in order to meet the students at their individualized instruction level in order to push them closer to the expected grade level standards. The following intervention programs are available: Reading Rescue Great Leaps, Reading Recovery, and Wilson Reading to support individual students in the areas of phonics, phonemic awareness, word attack skills, and comprehension. The effectiveness of the Professional Development around creating rigours task will be monitored through the next cycle of student work, benchmark assessments, Coaches actionable feedback, teacher observation notes, post-intervention assessments, as well as through formal and informal observations conducted by the administrative team. Additionally, the instructional cabinet will meet with the principal weekly to monitor the effectiveness of the implementation of this strategy. Based upon these cycles of observation, the professional development team will make modifications to the professional development plan to ensure that teachers are provided with additional training to support the development of rigorous tasks and use of data. Teacher Sept 2018-June 2019 Assistant Principal, Principals, Instructional Team Grade Team Leaders, Professional Development Team 2018-19 SCEP-FF 21  Strategies to Increase Parent Involvement Our parents have been and will be provided with workshops to inform them of these practices access to the web based programs at home and are communicated to by the teachers the ways in which they can support their child’s school work. All Students Sept 2018-June 2019 School Leadership Team, Instructional Team, Grade Teachers Teachers will consistently monitor and adjust curricula to support the instructional shifts of the Common Core learning Standards and the New York State content standards. Teachers September 2018-June 2019 Administration Summer school curriculum will be develop to support ALL of our summer school students (especially the ELLs and SWDs) and enrichment programs. In addition, educational trips and activities will be offered to support the social and emotional needs. All students July 2018 to August 2018 Assistant Principal, FW, and PA 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will be invited to Curriculum night and professional development will be offered to parents so that they are knowledgeable as to academic expectation of the content and what their students are expected to learn. Parents will be full partners in the development and implementation of these activities. The literacy coach and the assistance principal will be responsible for the implementation and oversight. This family engagement activity will take place throughout the year. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. In order to achieve the goal set forth in this action plan, we will need a number of resources to support our achievement. The instructional resources we need to implement this action plan by providing the following teacher resources to develop rigorous tasks: Thinking Maps desk maps, and Vocabulary Notebooks for each student. We are utilizing Title 1 SWP funding in order to equip the entire school with these resources. For our After School Program, we are targeting specific students who have demonstrated areas of need in the development of their vocabulary. As a result, we will be utilizing Title 1 SWP funding in order to pay teachers Per Session to work afterschool, every Wednesday, Thursday, and Friday from 2:45-4:45 where our teachers to modify curriculum and develop rigorous tasks that incorporate vocabulary development. This will supplement the instruction during the school day in order to provide additional exposures to the vocabulary during this afterschool time. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other 2018-19 SCEP-FF 22  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, all students will increase 5% as measured by i-Ready Reading assessment. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (Grade level benchmark, F&P I-Ready). Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 23  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. X X X X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Reflection At PS 1x, our school wide focus on character development and developing leadership skills amongst all stakeholders and students warrants an Effective and Highly Effective Rating. We have established a number of school wide systems and structures for building strong emotional and social development, in creating a shared vision for the school, and to create a data driven culture that focuses on improved student outcomes. After a full year in implementing “The Leader in Me”, we have seen a significant culture shift throughout our building and an increase in student leaders exemplifying what The Leader in Me stands for. As a result, we have seen a decrease in student suspensions and referrals and an increase in students as leaders throughout the building, supporting their peers in their classrooms and around the school. According to SOHO (Suspensions and Office of Hearing Online ) report, we have reduced the number of suspensions in our school building from 15 in school year 2013-14, to 10 in school year 2016-16. Strengths Since the Spring of 2014, our school has adopted the Leader in Me philosophy aligned to Stephen Covey’s 7 Habits of Highly Effective People. This is a school wide program, involving all facets of our school community, in order to develop highly effective daily practices and to foster leadership qualities in everyone, especially the student population. As per 2018-19 SCEP-FF 24  our 2015 Quality Review, “The School implements the ‘Leader in Me’ process to improve the culture of the school and to maximize students’ academic performance. This philosophy, based on the 7 Habits of Highly Effective People by Stephen Covey, engaged the entire school community in activities, lesson, conversations, and celebrations around leadership, positive behavior, and service to the community and gives students leadership roles of responsibility, personal accountability and independence that is crucial to college and career readiness. This program along with professional development, guidance counselors, and partnerships with CBOs supports and sustain student's social and emotional health and academic success. As a result, the school has experience a dramatic decrease in behavior programs, referrals and suspension throughout the year.” Priority Needs Our challenge is to further infuse this approach, with our school support staff, kitchen, building staff, and family members. We will continue to provide opportunities, through parent workshops, staff trainings, and events to further communicate these ideals and to demonstrate the benefits of this in everything we do. Data Source: OORS, NYCDOE Surveys, SOHO Report Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools –Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, students will participate in The Leader in Me Process and activities which will support students social and emotional well-being to increase student voice and ownership through goal settings as evident by a 5% increase of students utilizing leadership notebooks to set and track their goals. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 25  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Research-based instructional programs , professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change All Students Sept 2018-June 2019 Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) School Leadership Team, Instructional Team, Grade Teachers We will facilitate professional development for our entire teaching staff aligned to the Leader in Me Process in order to develop a positive school culture, student leaders, and community action which will have a positive impact on meeting the social emotional needs of our students and increase student outcomes. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English Language Learners All Students In order to support English Language Learners and Students with Special Needs, we will include our ENL, Bilingual and Special Education teachers in this process in order to share high level, ENL methodologies, practices for differentiated instruction, and pertinent data in relation to students in sub-groups that will improve instructional practices throughout the building not only for these students, but for all students struggling as a whole throughout the grades. Strategies to increase parent involvement and engagement Parents Parents will be included in this process, in that they will be invited to school events, workshops, and informational sessions held by our Instructional Team, Parent Coordinator, and others in order to engage the parents in the learning and pedagogical approaches associated with improved student outcomes and increased levels of proficiency, and the Leader in Me Process. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement September 2018-June 2019 School Leadership Team, Instructional Team, Grade Teachers September 2018-June 2019 School Leadership Team, Instructional Team, Grade Teachers How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 26  Monthly calendar of activities will be created and distributed to parents to keep them informed of what is happening in the school. The assistant principal and the PC will work collaboratively to implement and keep oversight of the initiative. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. In order to achieve this goal, we will need our teachers and support staff to attend professional development regularly during our Monday Professional Development time and when necessary provide Per Session Training during after schools hours or outside of their regularly assigned hours or on Saturdays. Additionally, when needed, we will utilize Per Diem funds 1 in order to fund substitute teachers to cover assigned teachers during the school day so that teachers can be available for inter-visitations or workshops during the regular school day. We will also allocate funding in order to facilitate professional development aligned to the Leader In Me Process and pay per session to teachers participating in the professional development outside of their regular work hours. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, students will participate in The Leader in Me Process and activities which will support students social and emotional well-being to increase student voice and ownership through goal settings as evident by 50% students utilizing their leadership notebooks to set and track goals. In addition, we will look at the number of events and workshops aligned to the Leader in Me and plan accordingly to ensure we meet our goals. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Student data, such as: SOHO, OORS, attendance from last year; decreased incidents/suspensions; increase after-school participation; increased extra-curricular activities/programs participation. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 27  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. SOP(s) Addressed x x x 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Reflection At PS 1x, we have established a number of school wide systems and structures for developing high level, in depth units of study and lesson plans that meet our student goals and needs. We have worked closely with Teacher’s College in order to ensure that our units of study in reading and writing are Common Core aligned and prepare students for college and career. We have been able to accomplish this through extensive professional development and collaborative planning, facilitated by our instructional leadership team and Teacher’s College staff developers during planned calendar days. Teachers have used this process to establish a common alignment of objectives and planned outcomes throughout the grades and for special populations such as students with special needs and English Language Learners. Additionally, Thinking Maps furthers this process, by creating a common language and tool used throughout the school in all grades, with increasing levels of complexity as the students progress to the next grade. We plan on using professional development time in order to address our developing areas in 4.2 to 4.5 in order to ensure that our teachers cooperatively and are properly aligning all lesson to Common Core expectations and to differentiate in order to meet the needs of all learners. Additionally, building Teacher’s Leadership Capacity through the Learning Partner’s Program (LPP), our school is grounded in the spirit of collaboration and reflection. Through the Learning Partners Program, we will fully implement 2018-19 SCEP-FF 28  and expand on this collaborative practice by opening our building to educators and strengthening our learning through reflection and the revision of best practices. We will partner with host schools to share exemplary practices that directly impact children in their classroom such as: use of protocols to look at student work and the sharing of effective instructional programs and structures. In this capacity, staff has disseminated what they have learned, through host and partner visits, in a series of organized Professional Learning Communities (PLCs) where members of the LPP and the model teachers facilitate looking at student work with a content focus. During these meetings, coaches, school leaders and staff, discuss the work, monitor its development and share feedback as to its impact on teacher effectiveness. Strengths Through extensive professional development and targeted classroom instruction, our school community has developed the shared understanding of highly effective instructional practices and we continue to reinforce these ideals around the school, in the classrooms through explicit teaching and in depth conversation, and among the parent community. We have now trained and established teacher leaders in various areas, such as Thinking Maps, who will now be able to train new teachers and provide more in depth training to those who already received a level of professional development. Priority Our challenge is to ensure that current and new staff members and support staff are proficient in intervention practices in order to provide high quality interventions for our special populations of students in order to meet grade level standards. Data Source: iReady Diagnostic Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teachers will work collaboratively to update the ELA curriculum maps to improve Reading skills as measured by a 10 %( increase (from 58% to 68%) in students reading informational text as reflected on the June ELA Instructional Report. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 29  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Research-based instructional programs , professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change Teacher will work collaboratively on incorporating coherent strategies on improving curriculum and tasks that supports and enhances our approach in working with special populations, including English Language Learners and students with Individual Education Plans. We will improve the implementation of Thinking Maps, school wide, in order to support students in making their thinking visual, understanding the cognitive language associated with each map, citing sources of their information, among others. School leaders will provide professional development focusing on creating data driven instructional plans and the effective implementation of teacher best practices such as curriculum maps modified, teacher lesson plans and tasks' We have purchased a new student engagement platform called “Clickers” from All in Learning. With this tool, teacher will be able to instantaneously assess student for content mastery, engage student in learning and use the data generated to make critical in the moment decision to re-teach content or move on. Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Students with IEPs, English Language Learners September 2018-June 2019 School Leadership Team, Instructional Team, Grade Teachers Teachers Teachers September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 School Leadership Team, Instructional Team, Grade Teachers Teachers, Coaches Coaches support and continue to collaborate and teacher development by: Teachers September 2018-June 2019 School Leadership Team, Instructional Team 1) Facilitating Professional Learning Communities (PLCs) around Looking at Student Work, focused on a particular content area; 2) One-on-One intensive coaching in which best practices are demonstrated, or modeled for colleagues; 3) Engaging in Special Projects which highlights their strengths i.e. modeling classroom practices for a new teacher; facilitating 2018-19 SCEP-FF 30  curriculum team meetings; presenting to staff the theory and practice of educating ELLs. Teachers will engage in Clinical Instructional Cycles: Teachers 1. Pre- observation conference 2. Classroom observation 3. Analysis and strategy session 4. Conference stage 5. Post- conference in order to improve pedagogical best practices. Internal literacy and mathematics coaches and external consultant scheduled to aid in the facilitation of horizontal and vertical planning sessions. Teachers Students with IEPs, English Language Learners Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners 1. As a result of this effort, we will be supporting our students with Special Needs and English Language Learners by having more teachers trained and proficient in these research based approaches. These students will be targeted for RTI and after-school, so that these interventions can be implemented in extended school hours. Additionally, throughout our enhanced RTI program (Reading rescue), we will support students who are struggling, limit the amount of referrals, and reduce the number of English Language Learners throughout the building and increase the number of English Proficient children throughout the school. Strategies to increase parent involvement and engagement Parents 1. We will be making an effort to increase parent communication, by notifying all parents of those students receiving Tier 2 Interventions. They will be notified by letter in both English and Spanish, and will receive ongoing communications by our teaching staff as to the progress their children are making as a result of the interventions and regular classroom instruction. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement September 2018-June 2019 School Leadership Team, Instructional Team, Grade Teachers September 2018 June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 School Leadership Team, Instructional Team, Grade Teachers School Leadership Team, Instructional Team, Grade Teachers September 2018-June 2019 School Leadership Team, Instructional Team, Grade Teachers How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. School leaders with the collaboration of the PC will develop and implement workshop on how to strengthened parent teacher collaboration to support student learning at home. These workshops will be offered before and after school. APs will be responsible for monitoring workshops. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 31  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We will allocate funding in order to train additional teachers and enhance training in conferring during the 2018-19 school year. Additionally, we will use Per Diem funding in order to cover professional development. Funding will cover the cost of securing developers and teacher development outside of teaching hours. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February of 2019, 25% of testing students will be approaching grade level as evident by F & P,. ELA benchmarks and I-ready Assessments. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. curriculum maps modified, teacher lesson plans and tasks. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 32  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). X X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. During school year 2017-2018 at PS1x, we established 3 clear and succinct goals that reflect student achievement and measurable targets over the course of the school year. First, we have communicated school wide that we are targeting reading comprehension, that by June 2019: Every student in grades 1 -5 will read a minimum of 3 books fiction and non-fiction with 95% fluency, accuracy and comprehension as measured by the in-book assessment and TC level benchmarks. This process has been emphasized throughout our school community so that we will collaborate as grade, vertical , and school wide teams in the planning, preparation, implementation, and analysis of the data as a result of the assessment. Next, our goal for students is to achieve 90% or better of the grade level expectations for vocabulary. As a result of this goal, we have established school wide efforts in instructional approaches, online resources, professional development, and planning in relation to our achieving our goal. Finally, our goal for all students to achieve proficiency in basis math skills, as evidenced by our school created assessments. We have established that leadership and vision planning begins with clear goal setting that can be measured periodically over the course of the year so that ongoing conversations can be had to ensure that we make significant progress towards the completion of the goal. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 33  Priority Needs: Based on our most review of the data our need is to use data effectively to improve the rigor and effectiveness of our professional development goals so that teacher can effective use what is learned in these pd to analyse data, drive instructions, and use school resources available to them to meets the educational need of all students, especially our SWD and ENL population. Data Source: F&P, iReady Diagnostic Assessment Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART– Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June of 2019, school leaders will create and implement professional development plans to build teacher capacity to use differentiated instruction in Math, resulting in a 15% increase in students fluency in solving fractions as reflected in the Math June Instructional Data Report. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 34 Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) All Students School Administration, School Leadership Team School Administration, School Leadership Team, Classroom Teachers/Grade Teams Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Research-based instructional programs , professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change We will provide extensive, targeted, and expanded learning for all students at PS1x. Students will be provided with the opportunity to stay after school an additional 2 and ½ hours every Wednesday and Thursday and for 3 hours on Saturdays. During this time, our students will be provided with targeted, research based instructional programs and interventions, Reading Rescue, a reading intervention program, Great Leaps, an intervention focusing on reading and math fluency, among others. Teachers will be trained on the successful implementation and use of assessment results as data tools to support instructional and progress monitoring. Administration will engage all teachers in a data talk, reviewing student data based on NYSED assessments and baseline assessments. Teachers September 2018-June 2019 School Administration, School Leadership Team Teachers will collaborate to identify the appropriate supports for students based upon their needs. At the conclusion of this meeting, teachers will identify a goal for the student achievement during the year. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 35 School Administration, School Leadership Team, Classroom Teachers/Grade Teams Teachers will engage in two subsequent data talks during the school year, a mid-year check-in to review benchmark assessment results, and a final meeting in late May to review student progress and develop a goal for the next school year. Students will be provided with a program designed to improve student writing. Teacher will attend professional development sessions provided by the district, and consultants. Teachers, students September 2018-June 2019 After attending these sessions, in collaboration with the school professional development committee, professional development will be regularly conducted on the implementation with selected teachers. The program will provide the structures and supports necessary to improve student writing through strong classroom instructional strategies and more time spent on writing. ELLs will receive additional supports from push-in services. Progress will be monitored through the observation process and instructional walkthroughs. Teacher Inquiry Teams will analyze running records data in order to identify trends in students’ reading comprehension and decoding skills. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners This process will support our students in meeting grade level expectations, as they will be provided with targeted interventions that support their movement towards grade level standards and expectations. All Students September 2018-June 2019 School Administration, School Leadership Team, Classroom Teachers/Grade Teams Strategies to increase parent involvement and engagement All Students Administration will work with parents in order to increase the level of engagement and communication amongst the parents and school staff. We will do this through collaboration with September 2018-June 2019 School Administration, School Leadership Team, Classroom Teachers/Grade Teams 2018-19 SCEP-FF 36 School Administrator September 2018-June 2019 Principal and Assistant Principal various Community Based Organizations such as Studio in a School, Project Leap, Bronx Arts Ensemble, and 21st Century. Administrators will engage in continuous observation and feedback cycles. Each cycle will last approximately four to six weeks, and will provide teachers with actionable feedback and next steps for improvement. Teachers will be provided with targeted professional learning opportunities based upon each cycle of observation, with next steps including, but not limited to, intervisitations, in-house professional learning opportunities, outside professional learning opportunities, buddy teachers, and Learn modules. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Administration in collaboration with the SLT and the PC will encourage parents to participate all SLT and PC meetings in order to increase and empower parents active participation in decision making. The administration will be responsible for the implementation and oversight of all Family Engagement activities. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We will allocate funding in order to train additional teachers and enhance pd during the 2018-19 school year. Additionally, we will use Per Diem funding in order to cover professional development. Funding will cover the cost of securing developers and teacher development outside of teaching hours. We will utilize our instructional coaches to provide support to teachers as to proper assessment techniques. Additionally, we will provide professional development to teacher teams in order to effectively use data to inform instruction and to accurately assess progress as per the running records. Schedules will be adjusted, using the lab site model, in order to free up whole grade teams for the before mentioned sessions. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP X Title I TA Title I 1003(a) Title III PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, we will have a 10 percent increase on grade level benchmark assessment. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 37  Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (Grade level benchmark, I-Ready). Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 38  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. na x na x SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Reflection At PS1x, our goal has been to increase and enhance the levels of parent engagement for all parents of students in our school. Our school goal is to provide parents with meaningful and consistent information as to student progress by means of data reports, report cards, and one on one meetings with teachers on a regular basis, utilizing our Tuesday Parent Communication time, Special Events, and workshops in order to provide resources and information to parents on a regular basis. We work hard to have at least one parent event per week and use such events as a way to bridge the gap between the school and parent community. We continue to work with teachers, throughout professional development on an ongoing basis, on the effective use of data sources and how teachers can use the data to provide clear, consistent, and accurate information to parents on a consistent basis and give data based on grade level standards. Strengths We work closely with various community-based organizations, such as Project Leap, Vacamas Glow, Studio in a School, and others to provide meaningful experiences to our parents, students, and members of the community on a weekly 2018-19 SCEP-FF 39  basis. Our culminating events, such as Talk Shows, Performances, Orchestral performances, among others, serve to enrich our learning community and establish our school as a community center. PS 1x has a number of viable data sources utilizing our web based programs, such as iReady, ST Math, Sadlier Interactive Vocabulary, and MyOn eLibrary program, that provides teachers and school staff members with in depth and extensive information regarding student progress in a multiple academic areas. As we assess our children on an ongoing basis, we have the ability to look in depth at students’ areas of strength, areas of need, and specific instructional approaches that can be utilized in order to address the needs of the individual child. Priority Need We continue to provide specific training to our teachers to unpack the data sources and communicate with parents on low-inference, data based observations on student progress and provide specific next steps that are aligned to grade level and common core expectations. We also continue are efforts, now utilizing our Tuesday Parent Communication time to establish regular intervals of communication with our parents, through phone calls and/or conferences throughout the school year. As a result, parents will be fully aware of the progress of the children and the ways that they can support the progress at home. Data Source: School Survey, PD Logs, Parent Coordinator feedback Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teachers, school staff, and administrators will increase the frequency, quality, and method of communication with parents which will result in a 5% increase in favorable responses on the NYC School Survey. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 40  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Research-based instructional programs , professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change School Community Sept 2018-June 2019 School Teachers, Administration /Parents At PS 1x, we have emphasized the importance of consistent, meaningful, and accurate feedback being provided to our parent community amongst our teaching and school support staff. We have worked with our teachers and school staff in providing parents with accurate data about student progress in relation to grade specific standards. We have also implemented School 4 one as a means to capture student data. We have started by providing teachers with professional development around data and the resources we have in our building for the display, analysis, and communication of school data for all of our school stakeholders, especially our parents, who are entitled to receive ongoing reports about their children’s progress that is aligned to the expectations of the grade. We will utilize our web-based resources to provided consistent data to parents and provide numerous workshops throughout the year to inform parents as to our programs and instructional strategies. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners School Community/Parents September 2018-June 2019 School Teachers, Administration This effort will support the needs of the students with disabilities in that our teachers will further their development in taking a data based approach to identifying and addressing specific academic needs of the students and provide targeting approaches and interventions based on this clear and accurate data. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 41  Furthermore, parents who are more informed in their child’s progress will have a better understanding of their child’s growth and development and specific ways in which they can support their child’s progress at home. Strategies to increase parent involvement and engagement We have provided our teachers with clear expectations about the ways in which to utilize our Tuesday Parent Communication time effectively and efficiently in order to maximize the time and meet our target for parent communication as per the goal mentioned above. School Community/Parents September 2018-June 2019 School Teachers, Administration,SLT Parents will participate in professional development that will focus on understanding new data tool (Skedula) used at PS1 and how it will be used to collect data and present this data to parents. Parent Coordinator in collaboration with the SLT will also provide pd to increase parental involvement . 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. .School leaders with the collaboration of the Team First, and members of the 21 Century Grant will develop and implement workshops on how to strengthen parent support in accessing school community resources . Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We will utilize Title 1 Funding in order to support programs such as, Project Leap, Bronx Arts Ensemble and others. Monies will be spent in order to provide these programs with supplies, personnel and additional expenses. These programs will predominately be used for after school Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other 2018-19 SCEP-FF 42  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, we will see an increase of 20% in parent participation as evidenced by an increase of parent attendance at meetings.. This data will be utilized in order to make necessary adjustments to our programs in order to increase involvement. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2018-19 NYC School Survey. parent attendance sheet, pd logs Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 43  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) State Exams, Independent Reading Assessments, Units of Study, iReady Reading, Teacher In-Class Assessments State Exams, iReady Math, Go Math! Unit Assessments, In Class Assessments Projects, Inquiry Assignments, Teacher Observations, Projects, Inquiry Assignments, Teacher Observations At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) State Exams, School Wide Assessments, Behavior Referrals, Teacher Observations Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Independent Reading, Guided Reading, Interactive Writing Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small Group, Whole Class, Individualized Instruction During School, After School, Saturday Academy Guided Groups, Math Tasks, Small Group, Whole Class, Individualized Instruction During School, After School, Saturday Academy Whole Class Instruction, Small Group Instruction, Research based projects Whole Class Instruction, Small Group Instruction, Research based projects RTI, Second Step, Character Counts Small Group, Whole Class, Individualized Instruction During School, After School, Saturday Academy Small Group, Whole Class, Individualized Instruction During School, After School, Saturday Academy Small Group, Individual Group During School, Afterschool 2018-19 SCEP-FF 44  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) Presently we have a total of 120 students that are identified as Students in Temporary Housing. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Students are provided with ongoing counseling by our school guidance counselor and social worker. Additionally, conferences and workshops are designed to address the specific needs of the student population. We provide these students with book bags and school supplies and metro cards as needed. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). . 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 45  . 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. . 2018-19 SCEP-FF 46  Section 8: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. At PS 1x, we believe in fostering strong professional ties with our staff in order to promote retention and developing our teachers with high degrees of investment in our school and the children and families we serve. One concrete step we have taken to ensure this is we have developed a partnership with Lehman College’s Math Up program. Through this program, Lehman College provides us with a number of teacher interns that are partnered with a Master Teacher within our building. These Master Teachers train the interns over the course of the entire year, with the interns working closely with the teacher in planning and preparation of lessons, facilitating instruction and small groups, and looking closely with the teacher at student data and outcomes. Over the course of the year, the school leadership observes the progress of the interns and considers each intern for hiring the following year. At this point, we have had 12 interns in the past 3 years and have hired 5 teachers who are now on our staff. In order to make certain that our school reaches 100% of high quality teachers, professional development will be on going in providing teachers with best instructional practices that support the grade/program of our teachers. In addition, on-going professional development opportunities will be offered to all members of the instructional community, specifically our newest teachers. Weekly grade conferences, AIS meetings, etc. are conducted covering a variety of topics, including but not limited to: differentiated instruction, curriculum unit planning, formal and informal observation guidelines, all curriculum related activities, and student support instructional activities. Furthermore, our partnership with Teacher’s College Reading and Writing Project has enhanced our levels of professional development, with multiple calendar days scheduled throughout the year where staff developers provide on site workshops and trainings to all of our teaching staff. Additionally, our teachers also are provided with professional development at Columbia University. Teachers turnkey their learning to the staff during our Monday Professional Development time or during scheduled common planning periods during the regular school day. Finally, we have 3 instructional coaches, 2 literacy coaches and 1 math coach who provide targeted support to all teachers throughout the building based on the needs of the student and the observed areas for improvement during building walk through, informal and formal observations. Professional development is provided through demo lessons, study groups, and/or individual conferences. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 47  2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Our philosophy for professional development is we are all learners and we can all be facilitators of other teachers’ development. Our approach is a multi-faceted strategy, where teacher teams meet regularly, share best practices, attend workshops, turnkey their learning to their colleagues and apply practices. Additionally, we utilize a “Lab Site” model, where teachers plan together, teach together with a group of children, and then reflect afterwards and plan instruction based on their learning. We have started the process of including paraprofessional and support staff in professional development activities, especially in specific intervention strategies and programs. As a result, paraprofessionals and support staff can assist in providing high quality interventions to students throughout the building. Teachers develop a deeper understanding of their professional development needs, are aware of the professional development supports available to them and know whom to go to and how to access resources and information to enhance their individual professional growth, teaching and learning performance and collaborative and team processes skills. Understandings: ● Teachers understand the difference between quality teaching and effective teaching ● Teachers understand the importance of knowing themselves and of communicating professional development needs to peers, colleagues, supervisors, coaches, mentors and support organizations. ● Teachers prioritize, develop a personal learning plan, and reflect on their professional growth regularly (twice a month) to enhance their teaching and learning environments. ● New teachers understand the importance of being proactive in their accessing, utilizing and seeking/researching resources that will enhance their teaching performance. ● New teachers understand the importance of participating and completing units of support outlined by the administration during their first year of teaching. ● Teachers understand the benefits of planning as a team, participating in study groups and sharing best practices with each other. ● Teachers use the Internet and the technology available to take and give courses, research information and access resources to address their individual professional development needs. ● Teachers create and use their blogs to share best and effective teaching practices and to display exemplary student work. ● Teachers understand the importance of completing surveys, sharing individual needs and reaching out to colleagues and support staff for additional support. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. NA 2018-19 SCEP-FF 48  3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). We utilize a number of strategies to assist preschool children from early childhood to elementary. First, we provide tours of our school for pre-kindergarten families throughout the school year to familiarize the students and parents of the programs we offer and the instructional supports we provide. Next, our Pre-Kindergarten teachers are included in professional development sessions with the entire staff to support communication amongst all teachers and alignment of instructional practices that will serve the students. Our Pre-Kindergarten program and kindergarten teacher meet periodically throughout the year to share practices and discuss student progress in order to support all the teachers in the development of the students and in to ensure readiness. Additionally, the Pre-Kindergarten teacher work closely with our School Assessment Team in order to determine intervention needed for students who are demonstrating challenges in meeting the grade level expectation in order to prepare them for the next level of their education. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Our school’s Instructional Leadership Team, in conjunction with lead teachers, work closely together during weekly staff meetings to discuss assessment processes that will accurately determine student progress and provided valuable information to teachers and school staff in order to determine instructional next steps to ensure that all student meet grade level standards by the end of the school year. This year, we have placed a high emphasis on Independent Reading Assessment, which provided student opportunities to read an entire book at their pre-determined reading level and respond to comprehension questions reflecting various grade appropriate skills student must have mastered by the end of the school year. Our staff has been provided with in depth professional development with the author of the assessment herself, throughout the fall and ongoing in order to ensure that teachers understand the assessment, implement it properly with their students, and make informed decisions about next steps as a result of the data the assessment provides. Additionally, our teacher are utilizing a number of research based intervention, such as Wilson Reading, Great Leaps, and Reading Rescue in order to provide Response to Intervention for those students in need of additional support. Our teachers have been trained in these interventions and are then instructed to turnkey their learning for the other staff members in order to promote school wide proficiency in the implementation of the intervention services. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools 2018-19 SCEP-FF 49  Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (SCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) X x x x Column B Section Reference(s) 5A part 3 5B part 3 5C part 3 5D part 3 5E part 3 5A part 3 5B part 3 5C part 3 5D part 3 5E part 3 5A part 3 5B part 3 5C part 3 5D part 3 5E part 3 5A part 3 5B part 3 Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Title I Part A (Basic) Federal Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Federal 595,460 16,979 98,332 Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Federal Title II, Part A Federal 100,978 2018-19 SCEP-FF 50  22,862 0 3,634,762 x x Title III, Part A Federal Title III, Immigrant Federal Tax Levy (FSF) Local 5C part 3 5D part 3 5E part 3 5A part 3 5B part 3 5C part 3 5D part 3 5E part 3 5A part 3 5B part 3 5C part 3 5D part 3 5E part 3 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 51   A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/SCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 52  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. PS 1X, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. PS1x will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 SCEP-FF 53  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● Maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 2018-19 SCEP-FF 54  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● Providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Template School-Parent Compact (SPC) PS1x, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic 2018-19 SCEP-FF 55  achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 2018-19 SCEP-FF 56  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs. II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 2018-19 SCEP-FF 57  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; 2018-19 SCEP-FF 58  ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● Always try my best to learn. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 59  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): K 6 1 7 2 8 3 9 4 10 5 11 12 100 2018-19 SCEP-FF 60  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 4 4 0 Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Rationale Our Title 3 program's goal is to increase the number of English Language Learners reaching proficiency levels as per the NYSESLAT exam. For the 2017-2018, 22% of our students achieved proficiency on the NYSESLAT out of a total of 180 English Language Learners. For the 2018-2019 school year, our goal is to have 40% of our current 147 English Language Learners reach proficiency with the support of the Title III program. We will be targeting students in the following levels ( entering, emerging, and transitioning) Our Saturday Program will focus on language development through content area study, with teachers focusing on Academic Language and Vocabulary instruction, speaking and listening, reading and writing in the content areas, and students engaging in project based learning. Teachers utilize ESL methodologies, such as TPR (Total Physical Response), strategic grouping, visual aids, graphic organizers, explicit vocabulary instruction to address the language and academic needs of the students. Additionally, we will utilize web based programs in order to diagnose areas of need and which will create individualized programs for reading, vocabulary, and math instruction. We will be utilizing 60% of the Direct Instruction Funding for Teacher Per Session, approximately $20,000 of the funding, from November to May, in order to facilitate approximately 30 Saturday sessions within this time period. Subgroups and Grade Levels Served Grade Level #Entering #Emerging #Transitioning #Expanding #Commanding K 0 3 0 0 0 1 1 5 5 15 1 2 1 12 12 5 1 3 3 8 7 16 4 4 0 8 8 8 10 5 3 7 7 8 17 Total 8 43 39 52 33 2018-19 SCEP-FF 61  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Language of Instruction The language of instruction will be based on levels of proficiency of each student. Our bilingual teachers will teach a percentage of the time in Spanish and a percentage of English based on the needs of the children. As the program progresses, teachers will adjust the balance of English and Spanish based on students' language development. # and Types of Certified Teachers Our plan includes 4 teachers, 2 of whom have a bilingual license and 2 who have an ESL license. Types of Material Used Our teachers will supplement our Teacher's College Units for Reading and Writing with additional resources focusing on language development, reading and writing, vocabulary, and mathematics. Programs include: Hot Topics- High Interest Social Studies and Science articles with infused with vocabulary, assessments, and web resources. Students create "replications" where they replicate the non-fiction writing with their own articles based on topics of their choosing. iReady- A diagnostic/Prescriptive web based program which diagnoses students' reading and math levels and prescribes a program based on the student needs. MyOn- A web based library where students choose or are assigned books in both fiction and non-fiction at their levels and respond to questions in order to determine levels of comprehension. ST Math- Students are introduced to Common Core aligned concepts and complete rigorous and challenging tasks in a non-verbal fashion in order to progress through various levels of complexity. This program is extremely beneficial to English Language Learners in that the program is not reliant on language to communicate the challenges, and instead explores the topics through visuals and symbols. Seeds of Science- A comprehensive science program that addressed various topics at different grade levels. Each kit explores a specific topic, such as water, space, etc. Teachers are provided with leveled texts, hands on resources, and tasks aligned to the topic within each kit. The additional 20% of OTPS funding, in part will be utilized in order to purchase additional materials, such as Hot Topics Kits, student notebooks, and other materials needed to facilitate the Saturday Program. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration 2018-19 SCEP-FF 62  Part C: Professional Development topics to be covered   name of provider Begin description here: Each teacher serving students in the Title 3 program will receive training (after school hours) in the above mentioned instructional approaches. At least 4 teachers will participate in 3 afternoon session for 2 hours per session. The topics covered will include teaching Academic Language, Project Based Learning and exploring English Language Development. Facilitators will include school administration, instructional coaches, and support. We will use Per Session Training Rate in order to pay teachers and facilitators to attend the trainings. This 10% allocation will be approximately $3,000 of the total funds. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Rationale Through Title 3 funding, we will be providing engaging experiences for parents of English Language Learners. We will invite parents to participate in sessions, with partnerships from Community Based Organizations, in order to further bridge the connection between the schools and these parents. We will schedule a number of workshops for parents in our ENL and Bilingual programs in the arts, healthy living, and academic support in order to better support their children in their academic development. We will utilize 10% of the funding, approximately $3,000 to pay the vendors. Schedule We will hold a series of workshops during our Saturday program for parents from 9 to 11 am. Topics We will cover the arts (drawing, painting, sculpting), healthy living (Zumba, dance, etc.) and academic supports for the children. Name of Provider Studio in a School, Bronx Arts Ensemble, Learning Leaders Notification 2018-19 SCEP-FF 63 Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Parents will be notified of the programs through parent letters in their native language, phone masters sent to parents, posting on the school website, posters and announcements around the building, and with the support of our Parent Coordinator and Parent Association. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 64  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 07 School Name PS 1 The Courtlandt School Borough Bronx School Number 1 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Jorge Perdomo Coach Rogelio Herrera ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Ms. Alberto Teacher/Subject Area BilingualMs. Valentin/ 5 th B Teacher/Subject Area Mr. Nunez / Technology Related-Service Provider Ms. Bez Superintendent Elisa Alvarez Assistant Principal Henry Ramazzotti Coach Gina Debellis School Counselor Estabania Hernandez Parent Evelyn Reyes Parent Coordinator Karina Rojas Field Support Center Staff Member Wanda Morales Other (Name and Title) Ms. Riddick, Pupil Accounting C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 0 1 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 2 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 6 0 D. Student Demographics 2018-19 SCEP-FF 65  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 664 Total number of ELLs 187 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 28.16% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 2016-17 1 1 2 1 4 1 3 1 K 1 Lang. spanish Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 1 1 1 1 1 5 1 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 6 0 0 0 0 0 6 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? We regularly use TCRWP and computer designed programs: Fountas and Pinnell, TCRWP, Great Leaps, I-Ready, and Reading Rescue. The insight that the data provides is very similar to the data provided by the NYSESLAT Modality Report from ATS. It helps us determine reading levels in order to guide student groupings and short/long term goals for each student. We use assessment to inform instruction in guided reading groups, reading conferences, and small/whole group instruction. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? We have a data team led by the assistant principal and monthly the entire staff engages in datatalk regarding all of our students including the Ell students. Bilingual teachers get individualized data report detailing strengths and weakness of their ell students. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 66  3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? In the school year 2016-2017 32 students were advancing to the next proficiency level; however, zero students tested proficient on the NYSESLAT. As a result, of zero students testing proficient on the NYSESLAT in Spring 2016; In the 2016-2017 school year, after a more critical look at our data, teachers changed their instructional approach. Furthermore, we saw a large number of students (51) remaining at the same level. In Spring 2016-2017 , ten (10) ELLs tested proficient on the NYSESLAT. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? As a result, we reorganized our TBE program and purchased full curriculum and assessment series (ENIL). Additionally, we are being supported by Maria Guerrero from the BFSC. Teachers will administer the ENIL 4 times a year along with following the schoolwide assessment calendar. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Based on the NYSITELL and NYSESLAT scores as well as classroom assessment, teachers of ELLs identify students who will benefit from Tier I and Tier II instruction. ELLs in grades K-2 identified as needing Tier II interventions receive Reading Rescue, a literacy based intervention, and Sounds in Motion, a phonemic awareness, early literacy, and auditory perception program. ELLs in grades K-2 identified as needing Tier I interventions also receive Sounds in Motion instruction. In general education classes, all ELLs receive Fundations. Students in 3-5, who have been identified as needing Tier I or Tier II interventions, receive small group instruction during after school, Saturday Academy, and class periods. More specifically, PS1x has an afterschool Response to Intervention program that is co-taught by a general education and ENL teacher. These students receive support using our research based interventions in order to target specific instructional areas of need, such as fluency, word attack skills, phonics, and/or comprehension. The programs we utilize are Great Leaps reading/math, Reading Rescue, Wilson, and I-Ready diagnostic instruction. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The NYSESLAT data shows that ELLs very few students are making progress on the assessment by moving to the next proficiency level. Most of the students from second grade and above are advanced. Special education ELLs score intermediate on the NYSESLAT. ELLs, who are at the beginning level, are newcomers. PS1x has consistently increased or maintained the pass rate based on student demographics on the NYSESLAT from the year 2015-2016 to 2016-2017. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? NYSELAT scores results are disseminated to staff during staff conference where we engage in data talks to analyze patterns and trend. Other ELL assessments results are distributed to the teacher via Dropbox. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. All students in the Freestanding ENL program will be placed heterogeneously in one class for each grade level K-5. For example, all kindergarten students whose parents have opted for Freestanding ENL will be placed in the same kindergarten class. Entering, emerging, and transitioning students will receive both stand-alone ENL and integrated 2018-19 SCEP-FF 67  ENL. These students will receive integrated ENL four class periods per week, which will be co-taught by a certified ESOL teacher and a certified K-6 elementary school teacher. Further, entering students will be pulled-out for stand-alone ENL for 180 minutes per week, and emerging students will be pulled-out for stand-alone ENL 90 minutes per week. Expanding and commanding students will receive four periods of integrated ENL per week to further support their language development. b. TBE program. If applicable. All students in the Transitional Bilingual Education program will be placed heterogeneously in one class for each grade level K-5. Students will receive one unit of native language instruction, which will be achieved through whole group instruction. Students entering and emerging will receive instruction in the bilingual content area subjects (math and science) through small group instruction 2 units per week. Students transitioning and expanding will receive instruction in the bilingual content area subjects (math and science) one unit per through small group instruction. Students entering and emerging will also receive 360 minutes per week of stand-alone ENL, which will be achieved through a combination of stand-alone ENL and integrated ENL/ELA, which will be at the discretion of the teachers . Transitioning and expanding students will receive 180 minutes per week of integrated ENL/ELA, which will be co-taught by a common branch teacher with a bilingual extension and a special education teacher. During the stand alone ENL student grouping to help them based on proficiency levels to perform task at hand and in integrated ENL/ELA, the students are working with peers and serve as collaborate partners to reinforce skill learned and teacher expectations through out all modality. c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? ENL/ELA will be achieved through stand-alone and intergrated ENL. All students will receive 180 minutes of ENL through whole group instruction. Entering and emerging students will receive an additional 180 minutes of stand-alone ENL, which will be done through small group instruction, which will total 360 minutes of ENL/ELA instruction. All students in the TBE program will receive one unit of home language arts, which will be delivered through whole group instruction. In addition, students entering and emerging in the bilingual program will receive math and science in their native language, and students expanding and commanding will only receive science in their native language. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Transitional Bilingual Content area instruction will be delivered using the following curriculum: for ELA, Spanish Curriculum/ENIL from American Reading Company and for Math, Go Math! The Go Math! curriculum is available in English and Spanish. For science and social studies the teaches create units that follow the New York State Scope and Sequence. Additionally, teachers untilize Hot Topics for science and social studies curriculum. ELA instruction is delivered in the home language. The teachers use translating strategies to support language development in Math. Teachers teach vocabulary explicitly using the Frayer Model, Thinking Maps, and others vocabulary teaching strategies to support language development through comprehensible input. Students vocabulary development is assessed several times a year through Sadlier, a vocabulary development computer software. Additionally, teachers use scaffolds (the SIOP Model) and differentiation to make content comprehensible and meet the demands of the Common Core. Moreover, native language instruction is available in the content areas in math, science, and social studies. It is delivered according to proficiency levels provided by the NYSESLAT data. English as a New Language 2018-19 SCEP-FF 68  The ENL instructors support literacy via the Spanish curriculum. Additionally, ENL teachers willl plan thematic units around the New York State Scope and Sequence for science and social studies. Each unit has targeted language goals that are supported through specific language objectives, which guide students as they master the grammatical and lexical features of English. Moreover, units are also planned around Common Core Speaking, Writing, Reading, and Listening Standards and the New Language Progressions. In terms of instructional approaches, teachers use visuals, realia, scaffolds, thinking maps, and differentiation to meet the needs of students. ENL teachers also consult the ESL State Standards when planning lessons and units. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? We currently use the Spanish LAB to determine native language proficiency in Spanish. We also use informal assessments to monitor progress throughout the year. We also use the ENIl to assess student reading proficiency in additional to other assessments in the assessment calendar. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. SIFE The parent survey is utilized to gain background information to better service the student. Materials chosen are based on information required, and the academic needs of the student. We participate in the Title III summer enrichment program, Saturday program, after school RTI (taught by an ENL teacher and a general education teacher), and support from an off-site agency when needed (Leadership Program). These supports mentioned above offer students with opportunities to develop their language and content skills through extra support and small groups focused around their needs. In addition, native language support is provided to SIFE students through books, bilingual dictionaries, and audio books in their native language. Some of these students come with social and emotional needs that may require counseling, which is addressed by our counseling staff on a referral basis. b. Newcomers Data retrieved from ATS includes: the Modality Report, Years of Service, Exam History, Attendance, etc. Materials and instruction in the four modalities are provided to meet the needs of students. Since NCLB requires ELA testing for ELLs after one year, these students are given ELA academic intervention services. These students attend Title III after school and Title III sumer school enrichment programs. Within the classroom, there is small group instruction and partner work in which students are paired according to language ability. Classroom libraries are filled with resources in Spanish and books on various levels to meet the needs of the students. The International Children's Library is also used for languages other than Spanish. Also, newcomers are pulled out in small classes by ENL teachers to further support language development. In addition, next year PS1x will purchase System 44 a scholastic foundational reading intervention program that supports newcomers and beginning and early intermediate ELLs 3-6. Furthermore, newcomers also have access to ESL Brainpop in their classrooms, which is a computer program that supports language development in each of the four modalities. c. Developing Data retrieved from ATS includes: the Modality Report, Years of Service, Exam History, Attendance, etc. Students who have been in the program for more than three years, continue to receive extra support. Many of these students are still mastering CALP so their instruction is focused in the reading and writing modalities. This support includes but is not limited to: aft school programs, early morning programs, parent meetings, and personal conferences with the students and the opportunity to participate in our ELL academies. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 69  d. Long-Term ELLs Data retrieved from ATS includes: the Modality Report, Years of service, Exam History, Attendance, etc. We have very few long-term ELLs at PS1x. These students are assessed in order to determine what skills need to be developed for language acquisition. These students participate in our academic intervention programs. In addition, ENL and ELA is provided during the afterschool program. Some long-term ELLs might be referred for evaluation to determine what, if any, is delaying their proficiency in English. Students who may fall under this category may receive SETTS, and there needs are often supported through small group instruction with targeted objectives. e. Former ELLs Former ELLs (3-5) receive test accommodations such as, time and a half, separate location, native language support, and exams may be translated in their native language (if available) up to two years after passing the NYSESLAT. In addition to testing accommodations, former ELLs receive integrated ENL in their classrooms four periods per week, which is co-taught by a licensed ENL teacher and a licensed general or special education teacher. These students are monitored closely for academic progress. Classroom teachers and ENL teachers communicate on a regular basis to ensure that sufficient academic progress is being made. Moreover, former ELLs serviced through the Transitional Bilingual program remain in that program for two years following testing proficient. Students serviced via ENL are involved in ENL book buddies as well as other special events hosted by the ENL instructors. Teachers in the TBE and general/special education classrooms continue to use ELL specific scaffolds and differentiation during ELA instruction. Explicit vocabulary instruction also continues in the classrooms. Students also have access to ESL Brainpop in their classrooms to further support their language development. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? ELL-SWDs are taught using grade-appropriate Spanish Curriculum and Go! Math. Teachers use a number of instructional strategies to provide access to academic content and English language development such as focused weekly goals, Total Physical Response, direct vocabulary instruction, small-group instruction, bilingual scaffolds, written and visual scaffolds, and the SIOP model. Teachers also provide additional curriculum support through programs such as Fundations, Sounds in Motion, JIJI, I-Ready, and ST Math. Teachers of ELL-SWDs have an increased number of personal in the classroom to assist with providing extra support to include para-professionals and student teachers. Additionally, some ELL-SWDS receive support via the SETTS coordinator using the Wilson Foundations. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? To ensure that all ELL-SWDs receive mandated services, all service providers have access to the students' IEP. Bilingual teachers in ICT settings are able to be flexible to meet the needs of ELL-SWDs by using small group instruction throughout the day. This model of co-teaching allows for centers in which students access content and language at their level, which exemplifies flexibility in all areas. ENL teachers of ELL-SWDs are able to provide the least restrictive environment by not exceeding twelve students in small groups. Additionally, ELL-SWDs receive push-in and pull-out small group instruction so as to support them within the curriculum as well as for their specific needs. Overall, these students have already received Tier One and Tier Two interventions and as a result, ELL-SWDs receive small group / one-on-one instruction with a hands on approach to learning. In addition, there is an emphasis on visual and technical support (such as, SMART boards, document cameras, Learn pads, I-pads, and flip cameras. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Targeted interventions for ELLs in ELA in the content areas include: Thinking Maps, Wilson Foundations, Fountas and Pinnell Lessons, Sounds in Motion, Reading Rescue, Reading Recovery, and ESL Brainpop. Based on multiple assessments, Response to Intervention Services (RTI) are provided to students who show a need for support in ELA and the content areas. These students are routinely given Great Leaps in ELA and in math. In addition, several ELLs attend a RTI afterschool program that is co-taught by an ENL and general education teacher. This afterschool program provides at-risk services to several struggling ELLs. Targeted interventions for Math, Science, and Social Studies takes place through small groups instruction to address specific 2018-19 SCEP-FF 70  needs in both language and content. Next year, we anticipate ENL teachers pushing-in not only during ELA instruction, but also during Math and Science instruction. These services will continue for two years after ELLs exit the program. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? In the upcoming school several improvements will be made to the programming at PS1. In grades K-5, ENL teachers will be working with one classroom teacher to provide language support in the classroom to ELLs. Overall, this will infuse more language support into classroom instruction and will assist the general education teacher in meeting the needs of the ELLs. Finally, ENL teachers will be able to attend grade level meetings to plan and to infuse more language support into all classrooms. Another affordance this change provides is smaller, more focused groups for entering and emerging ELLs who will receive additional instruction outside of class. This will also help ENL teachers to provide more focused support to ELL-SWD in smaller, more homogeneous groups. Other improvements include additional curriculum supports for bilingual and ENL instruction , bilingual texts, and more. Finally, PS1 received a 21 century grant to expand summer programs, which will concentrate instruction on the modality. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? At this time, no programs or services will be discontinued for ELLs. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All students within our school building are invited to and attend afterschool programs. At PS1x, we have specified Title III programs that are tailored to support our English Language Learners within our bilingual and ENL programs. However, we also offer a number of other academic related programs, such as Hot Topics afterschool and writing insititues. Additionally, we offer programs that expose students to the arts and music, such as Bronx Arts Ensemble and Vacamas Glow. These programs include our English Language Learners, which exposes students to various artistic media, such as theater, visual arts, film production among others, supporting their speaking and listening skills, and enriching their overall educational experiences. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. At PS1x, we utlize a number of instructional supports and supplemental material in order to support language development. Beginning in the Spring of 2015, we have adopted "Thinking Maps", an instructional approach that utlizes 8 visual maps that each are aligned to a specific cognitive approach, such as sequencing or listing. Students then organize their thinking into the maps , within their notebooks or on chart paper. This process supports our students English language development in that they are making clear connections between the map and the cognitive language and tier 2 and 3 vocabulary aligned to their thinking. Additionally, the maps can be used for vocabulary development, text based evidence, metacognition, among others. Next, we utilize content based programs, such as Hot Topics and Seeds of Science to expand our students' experiences in the social studies and science and to build their language development and exposure to academic vocabulary. Finally, we utilize ST Math or Jiji Math which is a mathematics program that uses visual means of exposing students to Common Core aligned math concepts. No language is required in order to be immersed in the program. As a result, regardelss of the students' language proficiency level, they are exposed to the grade level standards in an engaging manner. Furthermore, we have numerous devices, such as iPads, Learn Pads, and computers so teachers can individualize the learning for each child using a number of different programs. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? In the Transitional Bilingual classrooms, students will receive a minimum of two periods of content instruction in Spanish. For example, the Spanish math curriculum GO! Math is used. Bilingual teachers will organize this instruction based on the proficiency level of the students to determine if small group or whole group instruction is used. Bilingual teachers also provide 2018-19 SCEP-FF 71  one period of Spanish language instruction. Bilingual teachers have various resources available to include bilingual math curriculum, Spanish libraries, MYON bilingual library, and translating strategies. In the coming year, we are aiming to add additional bilingual support via increased Spanish text and curriculum resources. In the ENL classrooms, home language support is provided through a variety of translating strategies such as (but not limited to) four corners discussion, bilingual word walls, preview, view and review with shared language pairs, and bilingual written work. Additionally, ELLs enrolled in the ENL classrooms receive similar supports as the students in the Transitional Bilingual classrooms to include Go! Math in Spanish, bilingual libraries, and MYON bilingual libraries. ENL teachers often use Google translator to assist with vocabulary support. ENL teachers support home language by discussing openly the transfers between English and the home languages either through cognates, similar grammatical structures, or similar phonemes. Moreover, the differences between the languages is also discussed so as to build meta-linguistic awareness. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Upon enrollement, Ells are placed in the grade level appropriate to their age. If there is concern raised by the parent as well as the teacher of the student, a discussion is had with the administrative team to determine if the student should be placed in a different class. Regardless, Ells receive mandated services based on their proficiency level deteremined by the NYSITELL. The resources and services they receive during ENL and classroom instruction are grade level. Language is supported and scaffolded via ENL methodology so students can access grade level content. Bilingual support is provided when necessary. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? At PS1x, we utlize a number of instructional supports and supplemental material in order to support language development. Beginning in the Spring of 2015, we have adopted "Thinking Maps", an instructional approach that utlizes 8 visual maps that each are aligned to a specific cognitive approach, such as sequencing or listing. Students then organize their thinking into the maps , within their notebooks or on chart paper. This process supports our students English language development in that they are making clear connections between the map and the cognitive language and tier 2 and 3 vocabulary aligned to their thinking. Additionally, the maps can be used for vocabulary development, text based evidence, metacognition, among others. Next, we utilize content based programs, such as Hot Topics and Seeds of Science to expand our students' experiences in the social studies and science and to build their language development and exposure to academic vocabulary. Finally, we utilize ST Math or Jiji Math which is a mathematics program that uses visual means of exposing students to Common Core aligned math concepts. No language is required in order to be immersed in the program. As a result, regardelss of the students' language proficiency level, they are exposed to the grade level standards in an engaging manner. Furthermore, we have numerous devices, such as iPads, Learn Pads, and computers so teachers can individualize the learning for each child using a number of different programs. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Newly enrolled ELLs and their parents meet with the ENL teachers and the parent coordinator at the beginning of the school year or upone enrollement to the school. Parents are welcomed and invited to all activities such as Zumba, extracurrilar parent workshops such as jewelry making and bilingual literacy events. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? N/A 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? 2018-19 SCEP-FF 72 N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? We apply research-based coaching and teaching strategies to support teaching and learning communities. We are also committed to effective differentiated professional development opportunities for systemic change. Staff development for our bilingual teachers and ENL teachers throughout the year are numerous. They include ENL strategies in the content areas, Reading Rescue training, re-occuring TCRWP professional development, Thinking Maps professional development and coaching, Sounds in Motion staff development, ELL study groups, and Vocabulary study groups. Additionally, teachers seek out professional development opportunities offered by the Office of ELLs and outside resources such as Scholastic, Bank Street, and conferences. These trainings have included a RTI institutue for ELLs, TESOL International Confererence, Language Series on Language and the Brain, and ELL strategies workshops. When ELL personnel attend these trainings, they turn key the information during the profesional development sessions on Mondays to the staff in order to share best practices. In particular, Bilingual and ENL teachers participate in trainings using the study group format during the Monday time allocated for professional development by the department. These focus on building academic language, ESL methodologies, targeted interventions, vocabulary, and Common Core Learning Standards. We have several cycles of training over the school year. The instructional team, including the administrative team, mentors, and coaches provide support as well as teachers. Intervisitation also occurs so that teachers can observe instruction, and reflect on teaching practices observed during study group. Professional Development Calendar Whole Staff ENL / Bilingual Teachers* September/ October/November • Garcia: Robust Vocabulary for ELLS • Alberto: Supporting ELLs with Interactive Writing and Shared Reading • Duolingo (10/16) • Thinking Maps Kick-off (10/19) • Vocabulary study group (Every other Tuesday beginning 10/20) • Word Detectives (10/5) • Struggling Structures to Support the Teaching of Phonics and Spelling all year long (10/8) • On the run, Transferable small group work that can really move readers and writers (10/16) • Tap the Power of Books: Read alouds, Mentor texts, Close reading, and Reading plans can make a difference (11/24) • Inter visitations • Learning Community Partners • Garcia: Supporting ELLs with Interactive Writing and Shared Reading (Ongoing Study group) • melo: Robust Vocabulary for ELLS (Ongoing Study group) • Duolingo (Vargas, Perdomo, Alberto) • Reading Rescue training (RTI- Estrada, Diaz) • Thinking Maps (Estrada, Werner, Florentino) • ELLs ways to use non-fiction texts to develop oral language and support information reading (10/23 – Kellogg) December/January • Alberto: Robust Vocabulary for ELLS • Garcia: Supporting ELLs with Interactive Writing and Shared Reading • Duolingo Training for Staff: Vargas and Garcia • Thinking Maps with Ellen Todd 2018-19 SCEP-FF 73  • Vocabulary study group (Every other Tuesday beginning 10/20) • Teaching Small Groups that HAVE Big Impact with ELLs (Werner) • Inter visitations • Learning Community Partners • Garcia: Supporting ELLs with Interactive Writing and Shared Reading (Ongoing Study group) • Garcia: Robust Vocabulary for ELLS (Ongoing Study group) • Teaching Small Groups that HAVE Big Impact with ELLs (1/13 – Werner) • Pathways to Proficiency Thinking Maps with ELLs (ongoing: Garcia and Tirado) • Reading Rescue training (RTI- Estrada, Werner, Diaz) February/March • Opong: Robust Vocabulary for ELLS • Garcia: Supporting ELLs with Interactive Writing and Shared Reading • Thinking Maps with Ellen Todd • Vocabulary study group (Every other Tuesday beginning 10/20) • Duolingo (Lepkowski) • Pathways to Proficiency Thinking Maps with ELLs (ongoing: Alberto and Melo) • Inter visitations • Learning Community Partners • Debellis: Supporting ELLs with Interactive Writing and Shared Reading (Ongoing Study group) • Melo: Robust Vocabulary for ELLS (Ongoing Study group) • Pathways to Proficiency Thinking Maps with ELLs (ongoing: Alberto and Garcia) • So Much to Say (3/16- Garcia) • Reading Rescue training (RTI- Estrada, Werner, Diaz) April/May/June • Thinking Maps with Ellen Todd • Vocabulary study group (Every other Tuesday beginning 10/20) • Duolingo (Melo) • Pathways to Proficiency Thinking Maps with ELLs (ongoing: Garcia and Garcia) • Inter visitations • Learning Community Partners • TESOL Convention Best practices for ELLS (Alberto) • So Much to Say (Garcia) • Critical Literacies (5/4) • Garcia: Supporting ELLs with Interactive Writing and Shared Reading (Ongoing Study group) • Alberto: Robust Vocabulary for ELLS (Ongoing Study group) • Pathways to Proficiency Thinking Maps with ELLs (ongoing: Alberto and Garcia) • TESOL Convention (Alberto) • Reading Rescue training (RTI- Estrada, Diaz, Werner) • NYSESLAT Training for all ENL and Bilingual teachers * Professional development is turn keyed to whole staff in most situations There are several programs at our school that provide professional development to teachers to assist in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards. All teachers of ELLs will continue to receive Thinking Maps professional development and coaching throughout the year, which is aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards. Thinking Maps is an instructional tool used schoolwide to develop deeper thinking around content, and it is a school wide common language. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 74  As a result, teachers continue to be trained in using specific language that targets the eight ways our brain thinks. Teachers also participate in online learning modules and grade level professional learning communities to learn more about and to discuss further successful implementation. Additionally, ENL teachers will be trained in a specific module that provides additional scaffolds and approaches for ELLs. Furthermore, all teachers will engage in professional development through TCRWP coaches. These sessions will include strategies for aligning ELL instruction with the Common Core Learning Standards as well as sharing and modeling best practices within professional learning communities. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Bilingual and ENL teachers work with parents and the guidance counselor to assist in the transition from elementary to middle school for ELLs. The guidance counselor holds parent workshops where parents can ask questions about this transistion. Furthermore, students visit middle schools and get to view programs. As mentioned above, all teachers in the school receive professional development in Thinking Maps and TCRWP, which include support in ELL methodology, strategies and scaffolds as well as preparing ELLs for the Common Core Learning Standards. Also, bilingual and ENL teachers, who attend outside workshops specific to ELLs, turnkey information in an on-site training during the Monday professional development time to all teachers. These sessions meet the 15% of hours for all teachers in ELL specific professional development. Bilingual and ENL teachers receive specific professional development to include the above trainings via study groups, professional development from the department of ELLs, professional development from other institutions such as Bank Street, conferences, and webinars. The combination of these learning experiences will fulfill the 50% of total hours for ELL-specific professional development. In order to track this data, in school trainings keep an agenda and attendance record. Teachers are required to keep their agenda from all outside trainings to ensure attendance. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Each year ENL and bilingual teachers hosts a parent information session on the NYSESLAT. During this parent information session, parents are informed of the dates of the upcoming exams and gain familiarity with the four sections that their children will encounter on the upcoming exam. This year ENL and bilingual teachers explained the changes to the exam and the new levels of proficiency that will be assessed on the exam. Parents are also given sample questions that students may use to practice. Parents are also invited every week to discuss their children's language development needs during Tuesdays parent outreach time. Additionally, parents receive an ENL newletter, which outlines the goals for the ENL program and a Cluster Team newsletter that explains the monthly instructional goals of ENL. Finally, ENL and bilingual teachers frequently contact parents individually by phone to discuss language development progress, using the DOE Office of Translation services when necessary. 2. (Could not answer below) Records are kept in a secure area in the ENL classroom. An attendance sheet for each ELL parent meeting is kept for our records, and copies of parent outreach letters are also kept securely in a binder in the ENL classroom. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 75  2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Our parent coordinator assists the ENL instructors with the compliance meetings for the parents of our ELL population. As previously noted, these take place at the beginning of the school year as well as throughout the year on a case by case basis. Parents after themselves as volunteers for many programs at our school. ELL families are invited to participate in regular meetings that happen Tuesday during parental involvement time. Invitations are sent in the parents native language. In addition, Learning Leaders is a group of parents that volunteer at our school, and they also help with translation during our meetings. Furthermore, parents are invited to participate in classroom activities as well as shows and performances we host in the building. All communication is sent home in the parents native language or translated to them over the phone. The parent association plays a key role in supporting the academic, social, and cultural areas that support the success of English Language Learners. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FF 76 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Jorge Perdomo, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 77  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: PS1 The Courtlandt School School DBN: 07X001 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Jorge Perdomo Title Principal Henry Ramazzotti Assistant Principal Karina Rojas Parent Coordinator Yeimy Albertoi/Iris Melo ENL/Bilingual Teacher Krystal Padilla Parent Luisa Valentin Teacher/Subject Area Anthony Nunez Teacher/Subject Area Rogelio Herrera Katrina Garcia Coach Coach Estebania Jimenez School Counselor Elisa Alvarez Wanda Morales Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 10/30/17 10/30/17 10/30/17 10/30/17 10/30/17 10/30/17 10/30/17 10/30/17 10/30/17 10/30/17 10/30/17 10/30/17 10/30/17 10/30/17 10/30/17 2018-19 SCEP-FF 78  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 07x001 School Name: PS1The Courtlandt School Superintendent: Elisa Alva The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Sharin Tirado AP yes yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Home Language Identification Surveys (HLIS) and parent teacher conferences are used to determine what translation services are needed. According to the HLIS, the majority of the families (over 90%) at our school speak Spanish. Additionally, as per the HLIS documentation, we have 6 families that speak Arabic, one French, one Fulani at the current time. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 79  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Our parents' preferred written language is in English and/or Spanish. Additionally, our parents who speak Arabic and Fulani request that documents be translated if possible in their home language to help them understand school communications, event notification, and student progress. . . . Spanish 44 spanish 44 . . . . . . . . . . . . 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. n/a Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families School Calendars Newsletters Monthly Monthly How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Parent Coordinator translate all monthly calendar Parent coordinator translate all news letter At PS1x, we work to ensure that our parents of various native languages are provided with translated documents in order to have a clear understanding of school events, key information and student progress. Documents that are not available from the DOE website are 2018-19 SCEP-FF 80  . . . translated by in-house school staff and/ or outside providers. All parents of English Language Learners receive documents at the beginning of each school year. We provide signs where parents can point to the language of their choice in order to call or make appointments so an interpreter can be available. All other parent communication is distributed to parents at the same time. We use software available on the internet, such as Google and Babel to translate documents for parents. Written translation is provided by school staff in Spanish. The Office of the Parent Coordinator holds a list of interpreters. Some of the documents we translate for parents include: letters, brochures, flyers, notices, handouts, forms, surveys, reference guides, and special calendars as soon as parents are identified as speakers of other languages. The ESL team, which includes the Principal, the ESL instructors, and the Parent Coordinator, determine and plan for interpreters. Interpreters from the translation units of the Department of Education are called as needed. The current language status of each family is maintained in the ATS system and our ELL compliance binder. The data is provided for parents in their program selection form and from the HLIS. All documents are sent home in native languages. . . . . . . 2018-19 SCEP-FF 81  2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide .3 times a year September/October 3 times a year Monthly interpretation service(s)? .During the school year, we conduct a number of important meetings, events, and informational sessions to parents in order to provide them with key information and clear understanding of the education being provided to their children on a daily basis. We start the year with our ELL Parent Orientation meetings in September and October where we inform the parent community of the programs we have at PS1 to support the English language learners in the building. Next, we provide a number of workshops, facilitated by our Parent Coordinator in Spanish and English, to inform the parents of our school programs, such as the Leader in Me, Studio in a School, Cookshop, Leap Programs such as arts and crafts and Zumba. We also hold our Parent/Teacher conferences 3 times during the school year and provide staff members to assist with translation when needed around the building. These meetings are held on a weekly basis either in the morning or the afternoon to accommodate different parent schedules. Our attendance teachers, family workers, and parent coordinator work closely together as a team to communicate to parents about their students' progress and needs in the school. These staff members are bilingual and can support the teachers in translating and effectively communicating to the parents. . . Parent Teacher Conferences Ell Parent Orientation Leadership Day Student of the Month Celebration . 2018-19 SCEP-FF 82  . . . . . . 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. We have several members that speak languages other than English. Additionally, phone master is sent to parents also in Spanish. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Staff members will be made aware of Chancellor regulation during our initial staff conference in September. They will be made aware of all the resources available for them to make sure that parents have full access to services as stated in Reg. A-663. Our parents preferred written language is in English and/or Spanish. Additionally, our parents who speak Arabic and Fulani request that documents be translated if possible in their home language to help them understand school communications, events, and student progress. PS1 ensures that parents that are Limited English Speaking are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child's education. Written translation is done by school personnel for Spanish speaking parents, and we use outside systems, such as Google Translate to support translation for other languages as needed. If needed, the Translation Unit as well to help with translation. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Our parent outreach team, consisting of the school administration, parent coordinator, family workers, and community assistants will work as a unit to ensure that we fulfill all obligations set forth by the Chancellor's Regulations A-663. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 83  As a team, we will together review the requirement and make necessary adjustments if needed to ensure we meet all four of these items in the checklist. We will meet on a bi-monthly basis to oversee the status of these items and revise our plan as needed. We will use the A-633 as a guide to monitor our progress over the course of the year. We will also post additional signage around the school in the languages spoken by the all the parents who have children at your school. Also, staff using Language Line to let the parents know that they can speak to staff in their preferred language. We will inform and post in the main office might use Language Line to let the parents know that they can speak to staff in their preferred language. This will allow staff to access 200 plus languages so they can speak to all parents regardless of preferred language. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? We will utilize key staff, such as our Parent Coordinator, Family Workers, and Community Assistant in order to gather information from parents as to how effectively we provide access to our school data through interpretation and translation. We will also look at survey data to help us determine the needs of the parents and school community. Finally, we will analyze attendance data from our events and workshops to determine if we are effectively raising attendance levels at the various programs we offer. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 84 
