 10X023 School Name: P.S. 023 THE NEW CHILDREN'S SCHOOL Principal: SHIRLEY TORRES 2018-19 SCEP-FL 1  School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Section 4: SCEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: The New Children’s School 321000010023 School Number (DBN): 10x023 Pre-kindergarten through 5 th Grade 2151 Washington Avenue Bronx, New York 10457 (718) 584-3992 (718) 584-7252 Phone Number: Shirley Torres Fax: Storres3@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Shirley Torres Mildred Gonzalez Yenny Guzman Tiffany Kallman Jenny Francisco N/A N/A N/A District Information Geographical District: 10 Superintendent’s Office Address: MaribelHulla, Superintendent: One Fordham Plaza, Bronx, New York 10458 MHulla@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-741-5852 Phone Number: 718-741-7098 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 3  Bronx FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Jose Ruiz Executive Director: One Fordham Plaza, Bronx, New York 10458 JRuiz2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-828-7776 Phone Number: 718-828-6280 Fax: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the SCEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Shirley Torres Mildred Gonzalez Yenny Guzman Jenny Francisco N/A N/A AlejandraTejeda *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/Parent 2018-19 SCEP-FL 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Grisel Pizarro Amariylis Feliz JennyFrancisco Francisca Almanzar Tiffany Kallman Bryan Honstetter Matthew Gennaro HemansuMangal N/A N/A N/A Member/ Parent Member/Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/Teacher Member/Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Secretary Member/ School Aide (DC 37) Member/ 2018-19 SCEP-FL 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) is a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. The process of developing and implementing the SCEP is aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding SCEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and SCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 7  In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement 2018-19 SCEP-FL 8  NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the SCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the SCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for SCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 9   Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 5: Build consensus around activities, strategies and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 6: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 7: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 10  Section 4: SCEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? The shared mission of P.S. 23's school community is to create and support a learning environment where children, staff and parents can learn, share and grow together. Our focus is to create a school community that fosters strong family community ties and provides professional growth for teaching staff, ensuring rigorous instruction within a supportive classroom and school environment where students, feel safe, supported and challenged by the demands and clear expectations set by their teachers. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. During Professional Learning and Common Planning times, the teachers and paraprofessionals look at student work in connection with the Writing and Math curriculum and share common trends within grades and classrooms. They collaborate to develop lessons that can support their students needs. They share their classroom experiences and observations in order to improve their teaching practices and to support student growth. To support our instructional focus work around Reading and Writing through the entire school, classroom teachers, support teachers and supervisors participate in professional learning with our schools' Literacy Coach. We are in our first year of "The Leader in Me". P.S. 23 has been a P.B.I.S. school for the last five years, and we now felt we needed additional support with Social Emotional Learning (SEL). It teaches 21st century leadership and life skills to students and creates a culture of student empowerment based on the idea that every child can be a "leader". It enables educators to unleash each child’s full potential as a leader. "Leader in Me" has now been endorsed by CASEL (Collaborative for Academic, Social, and Emotional Learning as a "CASEL SELect" program. We are also forming a relationship, with "New York City Mental Health Services" in hopes of improving the mental health of our population. We are hopeful that the implementation of these programs will result in more on task behavior in-turn creating a stronger commitment of student learning. In addition, participation in the ARTS (Dance, Visual Arts, Music) has had a positive impact on the students in our school. We have found that by participating, not only in a social emotional leader program, but also infusing the ARTS into our daily curriculum, the students have had improvement in paying attention, being motivated, regulating emotion, and understanding others. This past school year (2017-2018), we began a new partnership with Education through Music. The participation in Music had a positive impact on the students. Music provided an emotional outlet for children. Students learned to manage their feelings by listening to music to calm them down, give them energy, or help lift their mood. Our students were involved in music-rich experiences of singing and listening. We intend to continue this partnership through the 2018-2019 school year. During the 2018-2019 school year, school administrators will continue to be supported by a Teacher Development Evaluation Coach (TEDC) from the Superintendent's office around the Danielson Framework. Teachers will also continue to work and to deepen their knowledge of Advance, assessment of student progress, and the Danielson Framework for Teaching. Teachers will reflect and grow as they meet their students' needs while developing teacher leadership which will result in: ● Teachers facilitating Professional Learning. ● Teachers working in cohesive teams to enhance their professional knowledge, engage in peer coaching conversations, and strengthen their teaching practices using the Danielson Framework for Teaching. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 11  3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. The New Children's School, P.S. 23, is a Pre-K to Grade 5 school with an enrollment of 482 students located in the Tremont/Fordham section of the Bronx. Over the past six years, our schools' enrollment has steadily decreased as a result of our changing from a Pre-K to 2 school to a Pre-K to 5 school. The decline in enrollment is also because of the new school zoning laws that were implemented in 2012. In our last Quality School Snapshot (2016-2017), the student demographics at P.S. 23 read: Asian: 0% | Black: 37% | Hispanic: 61% |White:1% / English Language Learners - 14% / Students with Special Needs - 32%. Many of our English Language Learners are not first generation and parents request English as a New Language services instead of Bilingual Education. Presently, we have two teachers for this population of students, Kindergarten through 5 th grade. Students receive stand-alone and integrated ENL services. P.S. 23 is a barrier-free building. Our special needs student population has varied needs. Some of our students are in wheelchairs or use walkers. Some students solely receive related services, others are in an integrated setting and still others are in self-contained classes with a ratio of 12:1:1. At P.S. 23, there are two physical therapists, three occupational therapists, three speech teachers, adaptive physical education, and related service counseling. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. According to the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, this past year, P.S. 23 made the most progress in the following focus areas: Collaborative Teachers, Effective School Leadership and Trust. Open and honest communication has always been encouraged, and staff members demonstrate humor and trust, especially on days of celebrations interspersed throughout the months of the school year through festivities with students and parents.. During the 2016-17 school year, we worked towards building and reinforcing Strong Family and Community Ties. In addition to our Cook Shop Program, ENL workshops and Monthly Newsletters, the Food Pantry Program, Bingo for Books, Chorus, and Powerplay for Girls (a team-building program for girls) encouraged a stronger Home-School Connection at P.S. 23 . Our students were also given the option to be part of a program through a grant - "Empire State". This is a five-year grant that will give the students the opportunity to participate in an after-school program until 5:45 pm. The program involved the students in Game Design, Academics, Sports, Theatre and will include Music and Dance in the 2018-2019 school year. In the 2018-2019 school year, we will continue to support and build upon Strong Family and Community Ties, as well as strengthen teacher pedagogy to help inform teaching strategies, teacher actions, and teacher understandings of students and their needs, and the backgrounds and interests of individual students. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 12  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 10X023 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 488 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 105 103 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 22 20 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 92.0% % Attendance Rate 91.8% % Reduced Lunch 19.1% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.0% 63.3% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 1.0% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 9.08 0% 9% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 17.3% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 84% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No No Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups Hispanic Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities N/A YSH N/A NO YSH Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 41 40 89.8% 0.4% 24.0% 34.8% 0.4% 0.4% 4 4% 7.4 13.0% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No Yes YSH N/A N/A N/A YSH YSH N/A N/A YSH NO N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 13  Economically Disadvantaged N/A ALL STUDENTS N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 14  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed X N/A N/A N/A Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. After reviewing the feedback from our Principal Performance Observation, it was noted that instructional strategies are becoming consistent across classrooms, thus reflecting higher order thinking. Additionally, our feedback from the superintendent noted that teachers are applying strategies in their questioning, thus promoting critical thinking by most students across grades. Therefore, we want to continue to build upon this strength and increase consistency in instructional strategies across classrooms in the 2018-2019 school year. Results from the New York State Math Assessments revealed that 16% of our students in grades 3 through 5 received a proficiency score of 3 or 4, as compared with 19% of students in grades 3 through 5 in the comparison group. Based on the Math State scores, we noticed that our students performed better in multiple choice questions than on extended responses. Therefore, as a school, we have decided to continue the use of Exemplars with the addition of Spanish copies of Exemplars. The program has provided support and is improving the students' problem solving and communication skills. It has also engaged students and helped them develop critical thinking and reasoning skills. Our priority need in the area of rigorous instruction is based on our instructional cabinet's observations of teachers in Domain 1 and Domain 3. This is supported by the feedback from another Principal Performance Observation (PPO). During this visit, it was noted that while some teachers' lesson plans are planned to emphasize rigorous habits, teachers 2018-19 SCEP-FL 15  are not addressing the needs of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. Additionally, it was noted that not all students are participating in appropriately challenging tasks and there are uneven demonstrations of student thinking. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all classroom teachers will implement instructional practices to meet the diverse needs of their students while promoting intellectual discovery and rigorous thinking leading to an increase of 2% in proficiency on the New York State Math Assessment. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 16  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teachers on a grade level will meet during common planning time to prepare upcoming lessons/activities and discuss how to differentiate the content in order to meet the needs of all sub-groups including SWDs and ENL students. Enrichment activities can also be planned as needed in order to promote rigorous thinking for students who are excelling. During this time, teachers can also discuss how to incorporate language objectives into their lesson plans to meet the needs of ENL students. All classroom teachers will participate in mandated Professional Learning sessions around implementing instructional practices to meet the diverse needs of all students (ex: mathematical language, interpretation of words problems, Exemplars etc.). During these sessions, the Math Coach will work collaboratively with teacher teams to create, embed and implement instructional strategies that meet the needs of all sub-groups. iReady Math diagnostic and instruction will be used to supplement the current math curriculum. The diagnostic will be given three times a year to monitor student growth in grades 2 through 5. The diagnostic results will provide individualized online and teacher-led instruction targeted to each students' unique needs. Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Grade leaders, math coach All classroom teachers Kindergarten through Grade 5 Once a week throughout the school year beginning in September 2018 and ending in May 2019 All staff Kindergarten through Grade 5 September 2018-June 2019 (ongoing) Administration, math coach Data specialist, math coach All classroom teachers and students in Grades 2 through Grade 5 September 2018- June 2019; diagnostic tests will be given three times per year in the fall, winter and spring N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 17  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Families will be invited to workshops that will support their understanding of the mathematical content and academic expectations in order to support their children at home. Parents will be given access to online activities, through Think Central and iReady, as well as hands-on mathematical games and activities which will support and enhance student learning. All classroom teachers Kindergarten through Grade 5 along with Parents, Math Coach and Administration will take part in these workshops/activities. iReady will provide parents with a detailed action plan on their next steps of instruction. These workshops will be planned and implemented by the Math Coach periodically throughout the school year. These will be scheduled from September 2018 through June 2019. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. -Schedule adjustments for teachers for common planning -Substitute teachers will be hired to provide coverage for teachers in order for them to attend Professional Learning Sessions during the school day -iReady Math diagnostic and instruction -After school program (Title I and Title III) -Math Coach to target instruction and student engagement Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In February 2019, teachers will assess students in grades 3 through 5 in Math using the iReady Diagnostic. Teachers will use the proficiency projector of the iReady Diagnostic tool to compare the baseline diagnostic to the midline diagnostic to see a 1% increase in proficiency across the grade. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 18  iReady Diagnostic Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 19  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. SOP(s) Addressed X N/A X N/A Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Our school is in our second year of "The Leader in Me" program that addresses the social-emotional learning of our students. We felt that our children needed a social emotional program that promoted leadership and positive life skills. The "Leader in Me" program teaches leadership and life skills to students and creates a culture of student empowerment based on the idea that every child can be a leader. Based on the 2017-2018 School Learning Survey, 91% of staff and parents responded positively to questions involving social-emotional development of students, which is 6% higher than the district average. Our priority is to continue to build upon our successes in this Framework component. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools –Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 20  By June 2019, 100% of classrooms teachers will implement "Leader in Me" approaches into social/emotional learning, resulting in a 3% increase in staff members responding on the School Learning Survey to "a lot or all of the adults at their school teach students the skills they need to regulate their behavior (i.e. by focusing their attention, controlling their emotions, or managing their thinking, behavior, and feelings)”. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 21  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) The Student Learning Action Team will create a timeline and/or pacing calendar that will assist teachers in implementing Leader in Me lessons into their daily instruction. Classroom teachers A Family Newsletter will be developed by the Family Learning Action Team as well as the Leadership Environment Action Team in order to provide information to all stakeholders on the Leader in Me curriculum and upcoming events. Teachers, parents, students September 2018-June 2019 (ongoing) Student Learning Action Team, Lighthouse committee Four times per year (September, January, March, June) Family Learning and Leadership Environment Action Team Leaders and team members Monthly assemblies will be held for students in grades Pre-k through 5. Students will perform in assemblies to reflect their understanding of the 7 Habits. Families will be invited to attend assemblies. These assemblies will be planned and organized by the Shared Leadership and Leadership Events Action Teams. Teachers, students, families Once per month beginning in October Shared Leadership and Leadership Events Action Team Leaders and team leaders The Professional Learning Action Team will plan and lead monthly "boosters" around the Leader in Me curriculum in order to deepen the understanding of all staff members. Teachers Professional Learning Action Team and team leaders Once a month beginning October 2018- June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Workshops will be given throughout the school year, during the school day and during Parent Engagement Time to inform the parents about the 7 Habits and support the social emotional well-being of our families. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 2018-19 SCEP-FL 22  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. -Administrators -Classroom Teachers -All school personnel -Students -Grants ("Leader in Me") -Outside organizations such as "The Leader in Me" Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In February 2019, the Lighthouse Committee will develop and conduct a mock survey similar to the learning survey to assess staff members opinion in regards to the social/emotional learning and teaching occurring at the school, resulting in a 1% increase in staff members positive responses; compared to 2017-2018 Learning Survey. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2018-2019 School Learning Survey Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 23  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. SOP(s) Addressed N/A 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. N/A N/A 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. X 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. After reviewing the feedback from Principal Performance Observation visits, as well as, observations from the instructional cabinet, it was noted that our school needs to continue to engage teachers in work that ensure teachers develop, design and effectively implement practices, such as the use of standards-based rubrics and teacher-to-student feedback that raise the level of student work in writing. This work needs to be extended to include students in Grades 4 and 5 in the process of peer-to-peer feedback. End-of-year Data Analysis for the 2017-2018 school year has revealed that 84% of students in Grade 1 through 5 have advanced at least half of a benchmark using the Teacher's College Writing Continuum. We want to build upon last year's successes by increasing the percentage of students who have advanced at least half a benchmark from 84% to 88%. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 24  By June 2019, all classroom teachers will incorporate the use of standards-based rubrics and teacher-to-student feedback resulting in 88% of students in First through Fifth Grade advancing half a benchmark using the Teacher's College Writing Continuum as measured by Assessment Pro. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 25  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Throughout the school year, classroom teachers will participate in mandated Professional Learning sessions around giving quality feedback to students based on standards-based writing rubrics. Teachers will work on developing a classroom structure for implementing teacher-to-student feedback. Teachers in Grades 4 and 5 will begin to work on developing a classroom structure for implementing student-to-student feedback. A group of teachers in Kindergarten through Grade 5 will be providing academic intervention services to a targeted group of students (including students with disabilities and English Language Learners) during the instructional day. Students will be provided with scaffolded instruction based on their needs. Additional after-school instruction (including Title III) will be provided for students in Grades 1 through 5 (including students with disabilities and English Language Learners) where they will receive targeted instruction to improve their writing using the "Time for Kids" program. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Classroom teachers, students October 2018- June 2019 Administration, Literacy Coach, Universal Literacy Coach Classroom teachers, targeted students Students in Grades 1 through 5 October 2018-June 2019 Administration, classroom teachers September 2018- June 2019 Administration, Empire State Program How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. At the end of each writing unit (approximately every two months), classroom teachers will invite families to a Grade-Level Author Celebration on Tuesday Afternoons during Parent Engagement Time. During this time, parents will have the opportunity to look over their child's baseline writing piece, as well as their published pieces in conjunction with the rubric in order to see their growth. At the end of the celebration, teachers will explain how to use the writing rubric and assist parents in providing feedback to their children on their writing. By June, parents will be invited to at least 4 Author Celebrations. These celebrations will be planned by Grade Leaders, Literacy Coaches and Administration. In addition to the Author Celebrations, families will be invited into school during the instructional day to attend workshops that will be given by the Literacy Coach and Universal Literacy Coach. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 2018-19 SCEP-FL 26  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. -Schedule adjustments for teachers for Common Planning -Substitute teachers will be hired to provide coverage for teachers in order for the teachers to attend Professional Learning Sessions during the school day -iReady Literacy diagnostic and instruction -Literacy Coach and Universal Literacy Coach to target instruction and student engagement -After school program (using "Time for Kids" curriculum) Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, teachers will assess students in Writing using the Teacher’s College Writing Continuum to monitor if 44% of students in First through Fifth Grade advanced half a benchmark using the Teacher's College Writing Continuum as measured by Assessment Pro. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Teacher's College Writing Continuum (as measured through Assessment Pro) Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 27  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, SOP(s) Addressed Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. N/A N/A 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). X X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. After reviewing the feedback from our 2017-2018 Principal Performance Review, it was noted that classroom teachers should continue to strengthen their pedagogical practices within Domain 3, specifically in component 3D - Using Assessment in Instruction. Our superintendent stated that inquiry work at teacher team levels, combined with ongoing tracking and monitoring of student growth, enhances teacher practices in the use of formative assessments (i.e. checks for understanding). Additionally, we should begin to engage students in self and peer assessments in order for teachers to better scaffold their instruction. When school leaders meet at as a team with their TDEC, it has been noted that after an informal observations their ratings are normed. End-of-year analysis of 2016-2017 Advance data has revealed that 71% of teachers have been rated Effective or higher within Domain 3. Specifically, within component 3D - Using Assessment in Instruction, 59% of teachers were rated Effective or higher, which is the lowest percentage out of all three components in Domain 3. Part 2 – Annual Goal 2018-19 SCEP-FL 28  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART– Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the instructional cabinet will improve their level of targeted feedback to teachers with a focus on assessment practices resulting in a 3% increase in teachers being rated as Effective or higher in Component 3d (Using Assessment in Instruction) as measured by Advance. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 29  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). The instructional cabinet will target teachers to attend out-of-school professional development sessions around content areas as well as other topics as needed. Teachers The instructional cabinet and the District Advance Coach will calibrate observations to ensure consistency of targeted and actionable feedback with a particular focus on Component 3D - Using Assessment in Instruction. Teachers Teachers During post-observation conferences, teachers who are rated ineffective or developing in Component 3D will be provided with support through targeted inter-visitations. The instructional cabinet will suggest inter-visitation partnerships that will pair ineffective/developing teachers with effective/highly effective teachers. Teachers will be responsible for coordinating schedules to make the inter-visitations. At the next post-observation conference, the instructional cabinet will follow-up with teachers to see how they were able to incorporate their new learning into their practice. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) October 2018- June 2019 Administration, Teacher Development Coaches Administration, District Advance coach Administration Three times per year beginning in Fall 2018 and ending Spring 2019 October 2018-June 2019 How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. During School Leadership Team meetings once a month, parents will be informed about the Danielson Framework for Teaching. As the school year progresses, parents will be invited to visit classrooms during the instructional day to see pedagogical practices in action. Parents will also receive feedback about student progress during the four Parent Teacher Conferences that are scheduled across the year. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 30  -Schedule Adjustments for teachers for intervisitations -Substitute teachers will be hired to provide coverage for teachers in order for the teachers to attend Professional Learning Sessions during the school day -Classroom Teachers -Principal & Assistant Principals Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In February 2019, teacher observation data in Advance will be reviewed to assess if there was a 1.5% increase in teachers being rated as Effective or higher in Component 3d (Using Assessment in Instruction) as measured by Advance. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 31  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school X X X community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. N/A SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Data from our 2016-2017 School Quality Snapshot has revealed that 33% of our students were chronically absent as compared to 21% of students within all of New York City. Over the last several years, our school population has changed with an influx of students who live in temporary housing (including shelters and "doubling up"). Currently, we have 125 students who live in temporary housing which represents 28% of our student population. According to the Framework for Great Schools, it is important to bring together the strengths of schools and their communities to support students and their families in decreasing chronic absenteeism and promoting good attendance habits to boost student achievement for all students. Our priority is to increase parent participation and involvement within our school community and use our resources provided to us by the Bridging the Gap initiative to address the specific needs of students in temporary housing . Based on the results of the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide , we received a scaled score of 3.42 in the area of Strong Family and Community Ties. We want to continue to strengthen our relationship with families and encourage all students to come to school on a daily basis. Part 2 – Annual Goal 2018-19 SCEP-FL 32  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all school staff will enhance parent understanding of the importance of attendance and how it affects student achievement resulting in a 1% decrease in chronic absenteeism by students in temporary housing and an overall improvement in school attendance to 93% as measured by the Chronic Absenteeism Attendance Tool. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 33  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Attendance Team will analyze the Chronic Absenteeism Attendance Tool (CAAT) data on a monthly basis to identify students who need to be monitored with a particular focus on students that are in Temporary Housing. Attendance Team will share data at monthly meetings with the Administration and the Parent Coordinator to monitor the attendance of students who are chronically absent. The Bridging the Gap social worker will coordinate outreach to temporary housing facilities for students who are currently living there and are chronically absent. We will design an incentive program that provides quarterly recognitions for the students with improved attendance. Some of the rewards may include: lunch with teacher/administrator, extra computer time, etc. Every first Wednesday of the month beginning in October 2018 and ending in June 2019 Four times per year Chronically absent students All students in Kindergarten through Grade 5 With the support of their classroom teachers, students will self-monitor their attendance in their Leader in Me student binders. Students will use the data in their binders to set goals for their attendance and lateness. All students in Kindergarten through Grade 5 Weekly basis beginning in September 2018 until June 2019 Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Attendance Team, Teachers, Administration, Parent Coordinator, Bridging the Gap Social Worker Attendance Team, Teachers, Administration Attendance Team, Teachers N/A 3b – Parent and Family Engagement N/A N/A N/A If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Our Bridging the Gap social worker will conduct outreach to shelters (including making home visits and visits to the shelter units). She will target students who are chronically absent and are living in temporary housing by making contact with parents/shelter administration to ensure that students are attending school on a consistent basis. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 34  -Classroom Teachers -Parent Coordinator -Bridging the Gap Social Worker -Parent Association -Attendance Team Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, all school staff will enhance parent understanding of the importance of attendance and how it affects student achievement resulting in a 0.5% decrease in absenteeism of students that are in temporary housing and have been identified as chronically absent as measured by the Chronic Absenteeism Attendance Tool. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Chronic Absenteeism Attendance Tool Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 35  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Groups will be determined based on current TC reading levels. Grades 3-5 Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Tier I – Universal Response to Intervention Small Group (Grades 1 - 5) by Tier II – Response to Intervention classroom teacher Small Group (Grades 1 & 2) (Grades 3, 4 & 5 as needed) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Academic Intervention Services (During the instructional school day) During the instructional school day During the instructional school day Literacy Language Development for English Language Learners in Native Language (Newcomers) Literacy Language Development for all mandated students Mandated Academic Intervention Services/Test Preparation After school Small Group (Grades 1, 2, 3, 4, 5) Small Group (Grades 1, 2, 3, 4, 5) Small Group (Grades 3, 4, 5) Small Group (Grades 1 & 2) (Wed. & Thurs.) beginning in November, 2018. Saturdays (10 sessions beginning in February, 2019) During the instructional school day & After school (Wed. & Thurs.) Mathematics Math Intervention Groups will be determined based on current Go Math levels. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 36 Math vocabulary instruction for all mandated students (Grades 3, 4 & 5 as needed) beginning in November, 2018. Mandated Math Intervention Services/Test Preparation Saturdays (5 sessions beginning in April, 2019) SmallGroup (Grades 3, 4, 5) Science Intervention Small Group – Science Social Studies End of Unit Assessments End of Unit Assessments Social Studies Intervention At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Information received from school behavior instrument used. Social Skills and Emotional Discipline During the instructional school day During the instructional school day As needed, during the instructional school day All Grades Small Group – All Grades Small Group (Grades K-5) One-to-One (Grades K-5) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 37  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. 135 students All of our Students in Temporary Housing will receive: *Universal Meals (Daily Breakfast/Lunch) *Instructional Supports from Title I funding - Academic Intervention Support during the academic school day in Literacy and Math. - After school Test Prep (Grades 3 through 5 beginning in February, 2019 for ELA and beginning in April, 2019 for Math) - After school Academic Intervention Program that supports Literacy/Math (Grades 1 through 5 beginning in November, 2018) *Resources from Title I funding - Basic Emergency School Supplies such as a book bag, consumables, socks, sweatshirt, sweatpants, t-shirts, books, etc, up to $100.00. - A school-based liaison person who keeps track of the Students in Temporary Housing population by name (Bridging the Gap Social Worker). *Additional Resource assigned to the school from the Office of Safety and Youth Development - STH Family Worker. This person will support the connection between the shelter and the school. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 38  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 39  Section 8: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. 1. Administrative staff regularly attends hiring fairs to identify and recruit highly-qualified teachers. 2. School-based personnel - Principal, Assistant Principals and Teachers – are involved in the process of interviewing and hiring, giving everyone greater ownership of the hiring process and making it much more effective. 3. The Administration works closely with the District Human Resource Manager to ensure that non-Highly Qualified Teachers meet all required documentation and assessment deadlines. 4. School-based Mentors are assigned to support beginning teachers, teachers new to the school system. 5. All teachers attend selected calendar days at Professional Learning Institutes provided by the Department of Education, as well as, on-site Literacy Staff Development Workshops as provided by the school's Literacy Coach and Universal Literacy Coach in Reading and Writing (Pre kindergarten-2) & (3-5). 6. All teachers attend on-site Math Staff Development Workshops as provided by the Math Coach (Pre-kindergarten-2) & (3-5). 7. Teachers meet in grade groups during Monday Professional Learning (Pre-kindergarten-5) to analyze the progression of Common Core-Aligned Curriculum for the purpose of improving student achievement. 8. Teachers meet in grade groups during Common Planning Time (Pre-kindergarten-5) to collaboratively plan for the purpose of improving student achievement. 9. Teachers attend on-site/off-site Professional Learning opportunities provided by both the Literacy & Math Coaches, Opportunities for English Language Learners, New York University World of Words, New York City of School Wellness, 10. Pre-kindergarten Work Sampling System, the New York City Public Library, the Office of Early Childhood and Leader in Me. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 40  11. Teachers are involved in Professional Learning around ADVANCE using resources on LEARN and from the Teacher Effectiveness Office. 12. Teachers are involved in ADVANCE Professional Learning using the Danielson Framework as a lens. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). 1 . All teachers (by grade) and Administration (Supervisor-in-charge of Grade) participate in Professional Learning with the Literacy Coach and the Math Coach to improve and increase their knowledge of the core academic subjects in Literacy and Math. 2. Differentiated Professional Learning experiences emphasizing ongoing collaboration experiences that are clearly focused on building the content knowledge of the discipline and fluency with the discipline’s critical skills and processes. 3. All Administration, Teachers and Instructional Paraprofessionals meet in grade groups during Monday Professional Learning afternoons (Pre-Kindergarten-5) to analyze the progression of Common Core-Aligned Curriculum for the purpose of improving student achievement in Writing. 4. Opportunities to examine student work to determine achievement gaps in student knowledge between the Learning Standards and the Common Core Standards during Grade Meetings and Common Planning times, as well as on Monday afternoons during the 80 minute Professional Learning time. 5. Opportunities for teachers to engage with other Teachers, Coaches and Administrators and participate in “Learning Walks” about content in order to improve their own knowledge and expertise and their readiness to meet the Common Core State Standards and to compete in the 21 st century workplace. 6. Promote the use of Data with Classroom Teachers, Coaches and Administration to improve instruction in order to group students and support the success of all, including our students with special needs and English-Language-Learners. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 41  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). 1. Professional Learning activities of the Pre-kindergarten and Kindergarten teachers is shared in order to align curricula and goals. 2. Intervisitation between the Pre-kindergarten and Kindergarten teachers is done to simulate the processes used in the Kindergarten classrooms, such as the expectations, language, progress reports, and so on to prepare students for the systems in the coming year. 3. Ongoing communication during Grade Meetings and Monday Professional Learning regarding students in order to align with appropriate supports and interventions such as speech for language development, occupational therapy, physical therapy, etc 4. The Pre-kindergarten teachers are involved in the Work Sampling System (WSS) online. This research-based evaluation system provides the Kindergarten teachers with student portfolios and a written record of their learning during Pre-kindergarten. Sharing information about a child’s expectations from Pre-kindergarten is particularly important in cases where a child may need extra support in order to experience success in school. It also gives the Kindergarten teacher the opportunity to build on the skills that a student has already mastered. 5. Pre-kindergarten staff together with the Assistant Principal and Pre-kindergarten Social Worker (if available) share information and address parental concerns at Parent Conferences throughout the year before a child moves to Kindergarten. 6. Parents are provided with information about how to register for Kindergarten with the Kindergarten Directory. 7. PreKindergarten parents are invited to a planned Professional Learning Parent Engagement Workshop on a Tuesday afternoon with the PreKindergarten teachers to the Kindergarten teachers classroom to discuss expectations for their children for the following year.. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. With the new teacher evaluation system, ADVANCE, 40% of a teacher’s overall rating continues to be based on Measures of Student Learning. The Measures of Student Learning are selected to fit within the school’s coherent system of assessments by a team composed of 4 selected members by the Principal and 4 selected members by the United Federation of Teachers Chapter Leader. P.S. 23’s Local Measures committee includes the Principal and the United Federation of Teachers chapter leader. The members of the team that are selected represent the constituencies across the school. The committee works together to achieve an ideal combination of Local Measures at the beginning of the school year. The Principal and the Measures Of Student Learning (MOSL) Committee make decisions together about the Local Measures, target population and growth measurements. Professional Learning regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction 2018-19 SCEP-FL 42  1. The staff, together with the Data Specialist and Administration, are involved in unpacking the assessment results from the State English Language Arts, Math and Science to improve instruction and academic achievement. 2. Throughout the year both in Literacy and Math, as we work with Coaches in Reading and Writing / Math, we continue to analyze student work in order to inform and adjust the instruction. 3. Teachers College Assessment Pro informs the work in November, January, March and May. The teachers work together with our school Literacy Coach and Data Specialist. 4. End of Unit Chapter Assessments in “Go Math” core program are reviewed with the school Math Coach. Results are then sent to the Data Specialist and Principal. A spreadsheet is kept updated monthly after each end of Unit Assessment. Planning is based around results to improve instruction for small group instruction. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (SCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) $400,254 X Title I Part A (Basic) Federal Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Federal Federal Federal Federal N/A $59,817 N/A $12,366 N/A X N/A X Column B Section Reference(s) Section 5A Section 5B Section 5C Section 5D Section 5E N/A Section 5B N/A Section 5A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 43 Title III, Immigrant Federal N/A $2,965,032 N/A X Tax Levy (FSF) Local N/A Section 5A Section 5B Section 5C Section 5D Section 5E 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/SCEP. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 44   Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 45  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. P.S. 23 , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, and the Elementary and Secondary Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a Parent Involvement Policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. P.S. 23 will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● Providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● Providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● Fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● Providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● Sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 46  ● Providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The purpose of the P.S. 23 Title I Parent Involvement Policy is to help strengthen the Parent/School Connection and support student achievement by navigating through the New York City school system and to become partners in their children’s education, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. This plan has been developed in consultation with parents across the years, modified and changed as the needs of our parents change. An annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of our school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys, including the learning survey and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. Assessed, as well as requested needs of the families who comprise our school community have also impacted on our plan each year. We also utilize our parent questionnaire at the beginning of each school year to identify interest, strengths and needs of our entire parent community. P.S. 23 will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● Providing families in temporary housing and foster care parents with support from our Parent Coordinator, Guidance Department, and the Bridging the Gap Social Worker, Specific support groups and workshops will be designed or employed to target these families. Our Parent Coordinator is in place to support parents with identified needs. Communication and parent programs offered at P.S. 23 will increase parent involvement across the year; ● Sending parent and student rights and responsibilities with clear expectations in the Principal’s beginning of the year letter to parents, as well as placing them in our School Website. Additionally, Parent Curriculum Orientation, which takes place within the first week of school, also includes Student and Parent Rights and Responsibilities as it applies to daily classroom application and immersion in curriculum assigned by grade; ● Maintain a Parent Coordinator to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend our school and will work to ensure that our school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office; ● Putting in place a system for parents to communicate their concerns directly with school staff. They are able to contact the teacher via telephone and leaving a message, or by making an appointment or sending a written request in the child’s book bag for an appointment; ● Automatically making parents members of the P.S. 23 Parent-Teacher Association at registration. All parents are encouraged to become active members of the Parent-Teacher Association. It helps them become a part of the school community and helps foster a greater understanding of their child’s education; ● Conducting parent workshops on a regular basis. All parents are invited to attend whenever possible. Workshop times are held mornings, and afternoons on Tuesday’s. Translation is available at all workshops in Spanish. For those parents who speak other languages, we will continue to use the Department of Education’s Unit of Translation & Interpretation; ● Providing workshops such as: 5 th grade application process workshops for Middle School, What is bullying?, Common Core workshops, Preparing for your child’s state exams, The Leader in Me, Response to Intervention (RTI), Special Education workshops explaining Integrated Collaborative Teaching, 12:1:1, Special Education Teacher Support 2018-19 SCEP-FL 47  Services, and Individualized Education Plan’s including Individualized Education Plan workshops for Parents with children leaving to Middle School; ● Informative meeting topics including: asthma, hygiene, sexual abuse, domestic violence, foster care, parenting, nutrition, conflict resolutions and fire safety, in addition to parent requested topics. Our Guidance Counselor, Bridging the Gap Social Worker, and Parent Coordinator, together with our consultant from School Mental Health of New York City work to identify speakers or support Community Based Organization personnel who can deliver workshops to parent groups based on their expressed needs and interests; ● Providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., Literacy, Math and Use of Technology; ● Providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● Providing an English as a Second Language program for parents weekly; ● Sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● Providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● Fostering a caring and effective Home-School Partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● Actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● Engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to schools to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● Ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in our Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● Support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), Title I Parent Committee and the Comprehensive Educational Plan of the School (CEP) . This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● Provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA /State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● Host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 48  ● Schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● Develop and distribute a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and/or student progress; ● Providing written Progress Reports 4 times a year informing parents of their children’s progress . Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including the parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this Parent Involvement Policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve Parent Involvement and School Quality, the school will: ● Actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● Engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● Ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● Support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● Maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● Conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: Parenting Skills, Understanding Educational Accountability, Grade-Level Curriculum, and Assessment Expectations; Literacy, Accessing Community and Support Services; and Technology Training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 49  ● Provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA / State Accountability System, Student Proficiency Levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● Host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under ESSA; ● Schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● Translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● Conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage School-Level Parental Involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● Holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● Hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● Encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● Supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● Establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● Encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● Providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● Developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● Providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) P.S. 23 , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, and ESSA, is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the 2018-19 SCEP-FL 50  means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. School Responsibilities: Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● Using academic learning time efficiently; ● Respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● Implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● Offering high quality instruction in all Content Areas; ● Providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the ESSA. School Responsibilities I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● Conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● Convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● Arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● Respecting the rights of English-as-a-New-Language families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● Providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● Involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● Providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● Ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year. I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff 2018-19 SCEP-FL 51  School Responsibilities Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: ● Ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with non-English speaking parents; ● Notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● Arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● Planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences. School Responsibilities I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● Creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● Assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● Sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● Supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● Ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● Advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● Monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time, as well as, follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● Ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● Check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 52  ● Read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● Set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● Promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● Encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● Volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● Participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● Communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● Respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● Become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● Participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● Take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● Share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child. Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. I am expected to … ● Be respectful and polite to ALL . 2018-19 SCEP-FL 53  ● Follow directions and school expectations. ● Keep my hands and feet to myself. ● Walk quietly in the hallways, stairwells, and restrooms. ● Be respectful of school property. ● Always use appropriate language. ● Be dressed in my school uniform EVERYDAY. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 54 Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components: 1. 2. 3. The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers. Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. 1. 2. 3. 4. High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” 1. Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences. Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. 1. These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): K 6 1 7 2 8 3 9 4 10 5 11 12 2018-19 SCEP-FL 55  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the · · · · · · rationale subgroups and grade levels of students to be served schedule and duration language of instruction # and types of certified teachers types of materials Begin description here: Rationale: Our school will be implementing an After School program to provide supplemental instruction to our English Language Learners this school year, as we have done in the past few years. English Language Learners continue to be an under-performing subgroup of our school population. We seek to provide supplemental instruction to these students in order to help them acquire academic knowledge, as well as English-language skills, using strategies that are targeted to their language learning characteristics and instructional needs. Our program will provide small group instruction, and focus specifically on our entering, emerging and transitional level students in grades one to five. English Language learning will occur through literacy and mathematics, our core areas of instruction. We intend to provide a learning environment in which our students participating in the program can gain some degree of growth in the areas of reading, writing, listening and speaking, as well as in mathematical language, thereby providing the vocabulary and English language skills they need to be successful academically. In addition, we will also continue to work with the newcomers after and during school in native language support. We will be actively and continuously cultivating their home language in order to build upon what they already know. We will promote native language and literacy development as a foundation for English language and academic development. -Subgroups and Grade levels of students to be served : · with disabilities,&nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; Economically Disadvantaged Students&nbsp;Grades 1 to 5 Subgroup Data: Results from NYSITELL and NYSESLAT 1st Grade- Entering - 1 Emerging -3 Transitioning -4 Expanding -5 Commanding - 0 2nd Grade- Entering -3 Emerging -6 Transitioning -6 Expanding -2 Commanding - 0 3rd Grade- Entering -3 Emerging -5 Transitioning -1 Expanding -4 Commanding - 0 4th Grade- Entering -4 Emerging -2 Transitioning -3 Expanding -1 Commanding - 0 5th Grade- Entering -4 Emerging -2 Transitioning -4 Expanding -1 Commanding - 0 -Schedule and duration: Twice a week (Wednesday & Thursday - 2:45 - 4:15 p.m Beginning on October 17 , 2018 until the last Thursday in May 2019. Attendance will be recorded on monthly class lists in order to monitor the attendance consistency of each student attending the twice a week program. These will be kept by the Supervisor of the program in the Main Office. -Language of instruction: English English Language Learners, &nbsp;Hispanic/&nbsp;LOTE&nbsp;Students, Students 2018-19 SCEP-FL 56  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information -Number and types of certified teachers: 3 teachers – two ENL certified teacher and one bilingual certified teacher (Jennifer Irurueta, Mildred Gonzalez, Carmen Lopez) -Types of materials: Sundance Newbridge Avenues (Hampton Brown) Graphic organizers, visuals (pictures, charts) Guided Reading Books English Now! Intervention Program (Attanasio & Associates) Please Note: These materials will be of no cost to Title III. These materials already exist in the school building. rationale teachers to receive training schedule and duration topics to be covered name of provider Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. · · · · · Begin description here: Rationale: -Professional development for teachers of English as a Native Language for the Title III program, as well as other staff members who are responsible for instructing and servicing ELLs during the school day will be provided throughout the school year, both by outside agencies and on-site turn-key Professional Learning by teachers attending out of school opportunities in ENL. Many of these opportunities will be through the Division of English Language Learners & Student Support. -Teachers will be supported in a variety of ways (workshops, grade meetings, integrated team teaching) in order to ensure their knowledge of standards-based common core curriculum and ENL methodology. -Fundamental teacher training is designed around informing our teachers of ELLs of pertinent ENL policy (including the allocation of English and Native Language throughout instruction, drawing on the LAP Principles of a Coherent LAP and High Quality Teachers, as well as, the use of key instructional materials available within the school. -Professional development sessions include review work in understanding the Language Arts Progressions in order to scaffold the instruction for the different acquisitions of language levels in Reading, Writing and Math. -The use of resources from Engage NY for literacy and mathematics, “Scaffolding for English Language Learners: Resource Guides for English Language Arts and Mathematics” (Diane August and Diane Stehr Fennel throughout the school year). The ENL teacher's will receive professional development through the Division of Specialized Instruction and Student Support: Department of English Language Learners (DELLS), and any available professional development provided by NYS/NYC Regional Bilingual Education Resource Network throughout the school year and will be at no cost to Title III. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 57  Part C: Professional Development Records of agendas and attendance for all outside or in-house professional development will be maintained and kept by the principal, as well as by each teacher receiving professional development. Topics to be covered: -Getting to know the ELLs in your classrooms: The characteristics of the ELLs in each of the Language Proficiency Levels -Understanding the New Language Progression in order to scaffold the instruction for the different language acquisition levels. -The New Language Progression - Grade K - 5 -Integrated Co-Teaching model vs. Stand-alone ENL -Helping Teachers to Educate ELL's In English Only Classes -Organization of lessons to fulfill the different language proficiencies of the ENL students -Language objectives -Integrate Advanced Literacy instruction to promote Ells' Achievements (Hallmarks of Literacy for Ells') Name of Providers: Jennifer Irurueta (ENL Teacher) & Mildred Gonzalez (ENL Teacher) rationale schedule and duration topics to be covered name of provider how parents will be notified of these activities Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. · · · · · Begin description here: Rationale: ELLs in particular are in great need of a home-school connection to ensure their academic success. The families of these students often feel alienated from the new culture and English-dominant environment of their children’s school. Additionally, the students may begin to lose connection with their families and native culture in assimilating to their new language and environment. Through our ENL course for families of ELLs, we develop English language proficiency in these adults working on everyday life skills with them. Pedagogues guide parents’ practice in their English language development, as well as other issues that arise for new immigrants. We plan to include field trips to our parent component this year. Trips will be scheduled for both parents and children. They will be taken to sites in New York City, such as museums, cultural institutions. We will incorporate Cookshop for Parents and Children, as well as, attend sessions at the Pajama Reading Program with students in the early grades. We want parents to learn how to become more involved in their child's education. Workshops in English Language Arts and Mathematics engage parents with strategies to support their children at home. We will be using laptops with parents purchased through our Title I Focus/Priority Parent Engagement monies for parents in order to help parents be prepared to work in the 21st. Century. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 58  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities These activities are aligned with the Common Core and with the Units of Study used throughout the grades to help support all 4 modalities of our ELL's. Schedule & Duration: Friday mornings beginning November 2018 through June 2019 Time: 8:30- 9:15 a.m Name of Providers: Jennifer Irurueta (ENL Teacher) Mildred Gonzalez (ENL Teacher) Means of notifications to parents will be through - fliers, parent newsletters, phone calls, school calendar, letters Parents will be informed of workshops, classes, etc., in a language that they understand (large majority of our parents are Spanish-speaking). All of the fliers that go home, will always go home in Spanish and in English. Additionally, if we need help with any language other than Spanish, we will reach out to the Division of English Language Learners and Student Support (DELLSS) and have a conference using the interpreter from DELLSS and the parent. Appropriate interpretation services are also available and offered during workshops that allow parents to participate in a meaningful way. OVER-THE-PHONE INTERPRETER SERVICES are made available for languages other than Spanish. 24 hours Access to Language Line interpretation services in over 200 languages 24 hours a day 7 days a week will be used. Agendas, fliers and sign-in sheets for all parent workshops provided will be maintained and kept by the parent coordinator as well as the ELL coordinator. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) 1. 2. Purchased services 1. Per session Per diem High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials 2. Must be supplemental. Additional curricula, instructional materials. Must be clearly listed. 3. 4. Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Educational Software (Object Code 199) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 59 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Travel Other TOTAL 2018-19 SCEP-FL 60  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 10 School Name The New Children's School Borough Bronx School Number 23 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Shirley Torres Coach Katherine Slattery ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Jennifer Irurueta Teacher/Subject Area Mildred Gonzalez/ ENL Teacher/Subject Area N/A Related-Service Provider Maria Aponte Superintendent Maribel Hulla Assistant Principal Susan Nelson/Carole Cooke Coach Elise Lucas School Counselor Margaret Harvey Parent N/A Parent Coordinator Yvonne Flores Field Support Center Staff Member Florentino Rosa/ Maria Guerrer Other (Name and Title) Maria Almanzar/ Bil. Psych C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 4 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 2 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 2 2 2 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] D. Student Demographics 2018-19 SCEP-FL 61  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 456 Total number of ELLs 101 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 22.15% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 2 K 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? The formative assessments and curriculum-embedded assessments that our school uses to guide instructional planning for our ELL's are the following: Estrellita- K-2 ELL's, We use Estrellita as the assessment tool to assess the native language arts early skills (Spanish) of our ENL students. El Paso - 3-5 ELL's 2018-19 SCEP-FL 62  An advanced Word Study program in Spanish: Palabras a Su Paso word study program with materials that help discover spelling patterns, affixes, accents and derivations. Gives clues to word meaning. Fundations - K through 3 ELL's receive Fundations instruction in their classrooms, focusing on: Targeted students receive extra instruction during Academic Intervention Services (AIS) or Afterschool. There are end of the unit assessments given routinely to assess students progress and to help determine ELLs individual needs. Write TIME FOR KIDS® is a writing curriculum designed by Teacher Created Materials that addresses the four major genres of writing identified for college and career readiness: Opinion Writing, Informative Writing, Narrative Non-fiction Writing, and Narrative Fiction Writing. Designed with research-supported instructional practices in mind, this program emphasizes writing, language, and reading standards. Explore four writing genres using high-interest Mentor Text Cards, designed with relevant content from TIME FOR KIDS®. Provide creative and interactive lesson plans. Encourage progress in writing through student rubrics, assessments, and exemplars. Institute a successful blended learning environment with digital support to build close reading skills and further develop the writing process. Enhance student language acquisition and background knowledge with Audio Recordings of Mentor Text Cards. Write Time - Targeted students receive write time instruction during afterschool. Adapted TCWRP - We use a school adapted Teachers College Reading and Writing program. Students writing skills are assessed at the end of each writing unit using the TCWRP writing rubrics. Reading assessments are done 4 times a year to help assess progress and help teachers develop small Guided Reading Groups. iReady - Targeted ELL's in grades 2-5 use the formative iReady diagnostic tool in both Reading and Math. Assessing occurs 4 times a year. Math - Our ELL's receive their Math instruction through the Go-Math curriculum. We also use Math Exemplars with our ELL's. Our school has purchased them in Spanish to use them with newcomers. Students are assessed on their math skills at the end of every unit. Social Studies - This school year, our school will be using Passport as our Social Studies curriculum for grades K-5. The Social Studies assessments will be aligned with the TCWRP assessment calendar schedule. Science - ELL's receive science instruction using Hartcourt-Mifflin and are assessed in science at the end of each science unit. Current Data- We administer the New York State Identification Test for English Language Learners (NYSITELL) to new incoming students to determine their English proficiency levels. Currently we have 18 new admits in Kindergarten who were administered the New York State Identification Test for English Language Learners (NYSITELL) . 8 are Entering. 2 are Emerging. 5 are Transitioning. 3 are Expanding. We received 1 new student in the 3rd grade, his proficiency level is Entering We received 3 new students in the 4th grade, 1 is Entering and 2 are Transitioning We received 3 new students in the 5th grade, the 3 are Entering 2018-19 SCEP-FL 63  Of the 75 students who took the NYSESLAT in the of spring 2017 , 45% remained at same proficiency level as the previous year 40% advanced 1 proficiency level 10% advanced 2 proficiency levels .01% advanced 3 proficiency levels 0% advanced 4 proficiency levels .02% advanced to commanding .02% regressed 1 proficiency level Further analysis of the data reveals that from the 45% of ELL's who remained at the same proficiency level 35% remained at the Expanding level 24% remained at the Transitioning level 15% remained at the Emergent level 21% remained at the Entering Level Based on the analysis of standardized assessments, we see growth in our students' English language skills as students' NYSESLAT overall proficiency levels increase throughout the grades. Across all grades and language proficiency levels, it has been noticed that most of our children perform strongly in listening and speaking, and struggle more in reading and writing. Our students gain proficiency in reading and writing progressively, from kindergarten to fifth grade. As a result, the information provided by the data analysis is correlated to the school's instructional plan. We modify the language of instruction throughout the year as the benchmarks change each assessment period for our group of newcomers. Teachers plan for instruction ( short, interim and long term goals) that then support the challenges the students face throughout the year promoting language learning as well as content comprehension. This data shows us that we need to focus on moving our ELL's who have plateaued. In hopes of improving students writing skills and increasing movement of proficiency levels, we will embed strategies to support vocabulary development such as the use of audio books, pre-exposure to vocabulary, focusing on cognates, and provide opportunities for oral and written language use. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Integrated ENL, Stand-Alone ENL, Native Language Instruction, Small-Group Instruction, Whole-Class instruction, Afterschool Academic Intervention services (A.I.S) , Common Planning Times, Grade Meetings 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The summative assessment and baseline/benchmark assessments that we use to identify baseline, progress and areas of need are: Ell Periodic Assessment - Quarterly Assessment for our Native Language Speakers Adapted TCWRP - Students writing skills are looked at 3 times during the school year. A baseline, a midline and an endline piece are collected from all students and assessed using a TCWRP rubric to identify students strengths and weaknesses and areas in need of improvement. Math Exemplars - This program provides support at improving students' problem solving and communication skills. It engages students and helps them develop critical thinking and reasoning skills. Exemplars will be used as a summative assessment at the end of a unit. Once the tasks are completed, teachers will meet to discuss and assess student work using the Exemplars rubric. Teachers will then use this data to plan for small groups. Exemplars assessment tasks have been differentiated to 2018-19 SCEP-FL 64  include a "more accessible" and a "more challenging" version of the original problem. This will allow teachers to meet the needs of students at various levels (specifically ENL and Students with Disabilities) as they explore and practice new math concepts. iReady - Targeted ELL's are assessed with the summative iReady diagnostic tool in both Reading and Math. Assessing occurs at the end of each unit Area(s) of Need - Throughout the grades and language proficiency levels, it has been noticed that most of our children perform strongly in listening and speaking, and struggle more in reading and writing, which of course translates into difficulty in Math and ELA constructive responses. To evaluate the area of needs of our ELLs' throughout the grades, at the beginning of the school year, the ENL teachers meet to analyze the results of the NYSESLAT. We use the data collected from the ELL Data Analysis Tool (EDAT), to see which students have progressed or regressed in proficiency levels so we can develop instructional goals for our ELL students at each proficiency level. Based on our analysis, this year our instructional focus needs to be on writing. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Presently, the interventions are: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) - AIS is provided by the classroom teacher to all students who require small group remedial instruction. Students who show a deficit in phonological awareness and early reading and writing behaviors are provided with double dose instruction using Fundations. Title III Afterschool for English Language Learners . During the afterschool program which takes place from October to May, ENL certified teachers provide instructional support in vocabulary language development writing and oral language skills. The ELL students receive instruction during afterschool that reinforces the current units of studies and curriculum they are receiving in their individual classrooms. On an as needed basis, through formal and informal conversations the ENL Teachers meet with classroom teachers and other school-based support staff to discuss observations of student work. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] We review student data received from the results of the NYSESLAT, the NYSITELL and ELL Periodic Assessment in order to make informed decisions to tier our support and instruction provided for ELL's within the RTI framework. Tier 1 (Instructional Core) In Tier 1, we use the following instruction and differentiate the use according to the students and their needs. These components include: • Shared Reading • Guided Reading-grouped by needs according to Teachers College assessments/informal running records • Read-Alouds • Independent Reading/Conferencing • Guided Reading - As part of the Tier 1 intervention, all students will receive Guided Reading in their classroom during the literacy block in small group. • Integrated ENL will be used for Tier 1 instruction. Teachers also make language comprehensible for our ENL population by modifying their speech (e.g., slower rate, simpler grammatical structures, restricted length of communication) and making use of extra linguistic cues (i.e., gestures, actions, and pictures) to convey meaning. Reading activities provide opportunities for further language input. Predictable books are 2018-19 SCEP-FL 65  particularly useful because of their highly repetitive language and simplified text. Chants and songs also offer students the opportunity to gain familiarity with content vocabulary and language patterns. Teachers scaffold the language of the text through engagement such as Read-Alouds and Shared Reading. Tier 2 All Tier 2 intervention work with students will utilize assessment data as basis to inform teaching and will be progress monitored once every two weeks. Interventions are delivered in small group formats (no more than 5 or 6 students per group); groups are homogeneous. • At least 3 times a week, 20-30 minute periods • Students’ needs will indicate appropriate intervention services • Program management to ensure that students do not miss Literacy and Math block instruction or the same subject more than 1 time per/week. • Duration of 6-8 weeks • RTI team will check in on student’s progress to make recommendations • Tier 2 data will be tracked and analyzed and the results will be shared with classroom teachers to help determine if subsequent intervention is necessary. Tier 3 Additional supplemental and customized interventions will be provided (at least 30 minutes per session, 5 times per week) in addition to the 90+ minutes provided in core reading instruction. • Interventions are matched to students’ specific needs. • Interventions are implemented on a consistent basis at a level that is specified by research or program. • Interventions provided at Tier 3 are research-based and implemented by staff who are knowledgeable about the student’s needs and trained in the needed area of instruction. • Students in Tier 3 will be progress monitored once a week. • Intervention provider will communicate with the classroom teacher regarding student progress. • Administration monitoring fidelity of assessments Tier 3 data will be tracked and analyzed and the results will be shared with classroom teachers to help determine if subsequent intervention is necessary. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. At the beginning of the school year, we analyze the results received from the Spring NYSESLAT to see which modalities the students need to work on. Throughout the year, we keep track of students reading and writing growth through summative and formative assessments collected on students by their classroom and ENL teachers. We analyze the modalities using their results from their TC running records and writing baseline pieces in order to ensure our plan for instruction is appropriate for the students and their language needs. Of the 75 students who took the NYSESLAT in the of spring 2017 , 45% remained at same proficiency level as the previous year 40% advanced 1 proficiency level 10% advanced 2 proficiency levels 01% advanced 3 proficiency levels 0% advanced 4 proficiency levels 02% advanced to commanding 02% regressed 1 proficiency level 2018-19 SCEP-FL 66  7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Common planning times Grade meetings Monday 80 minute Professional Development Time Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Instruction for the ELL's is delivered in the following ways: 1. Integrated ENL Instruction Our Principal ensures that students requiring ENL services are clustered in particular classes, and allows ENL teacher(s) to organize schedules to integrate into these classes and collaborate with the classroom teachers. This occurs in each grade (Grade K - Grade 5); and in a range of heterogeneous settings (General Education, Special Education, and Integrated Team Teaching (ICT). Integrated Units: Entering students receive - 180 minutes of ENL/ELA instruction Four 45 minute periods a week inside of their classroom Emerging students receive - 180 minutes of ENL/ELA instruction Four 45 minute periods a week inside of their classroom Transitioning students receive - 90 minutes of ENL/ELA instruction Two 45 minute periods a week inside of their classroom Expanding students receive - 180 minutes of ENL/ELA or Content Area instruction Four 45 minutes periods a week inside of their classroom Integrated ENL instruction builds English language skills through content area instruction. It is delivered either by a dually certified teacher (ENL and a content area) or co-teaching by the certified ENL teacher and a certified content area teacher (i.e., English language arts, math, science, or social studies). Both methods of integrated ENL instruction include content area subject matter and English language development using ENL strategies. All (Commanding) former ELLs up to 2 years after exiting ENL status receive a minimum of 90 minutes per week of integrated ENL inside of their classroom. 2. Stand-Alone ENL ENL Stand-Alone is used in conjunction with the integrated ENL in order to give children support and differentiation according to their language needs. For example, an ENL teacher pushes into a first grade class and co-teaches with the classroom teacher to serve children on all proficiency levels. The ENL teacher additionally pulls out the children at Entering, Emerging, and Transitional Proficiency Levels in order to give the needed additional units of ENL instruction in a smaller group setting. Stand-alone units: Entering students receive - 180 minutes of stand-alone instruction 2018-19 SCEP-FL 67  Four 45 minute periods a week with the ENL teacher Emerging students receive - 180 minutes of stand-alone instruction Four 45 minute periods a week with the ENL teacher Transitioning students receive - 90 minutes of stand-alone instruction- Two 45 minute periods a week with the ENL teacher Stand-alone ENL instruction develops English language skills so that students can succeed in core content courses. It is delivered by the certified ENL teacher. Literacy is integrated throughout all of our ENL program. The school-wide core curriculum in Literacy follows the Teachers College Reading Writing Program (TCRWP) units of study and assessment system. All teachers attend professional development around the TCRWP program. The ENL teacher(s) articulates with classroom teachers of ENL students in regard to the Literacy curriculum units bring covered. The ENL teacher(s) supplements Literacy instruction for ELLs using appropriate strategies, and targeted materials for ELL Literacy development (including Avenues, On the Way to English, and Treasure Chest). As explained above, there is a variety of program models. • The Heterogeneous model is the predominant model used in ENL instruction. This model is used in all Integrated class settings, where ENL students are clustered. • A Homogeneous model is used occasionally in RTI intervention, when the ENL teacher pulls-out students with similar language learning needs in order to provide them with targeted supplemental support. b. TBE program. If applicable. Not Applicable at this time at P.S. 23. c. DL program. If applicable. Not Applicable at this time at P.S. 23. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? All of the ENL students are placed by grade/class on a spreadsheet. Added to this data is the Proficiency Level of the student in the NYSITELL and the NYSESLAT. Once this data is organized, a schedule for the providing of services is developed. The Principal and the ENL teachers meet to make sure that all of the needed services are available and are being satisfied for each ENL student. -Students at Entering level receive a total of 360 minutes of ENL (180 minutes standalone ENL & 180 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA) -Students at Emerging level receive a total of 360 minutes of ENL (180 minutes standalone ENL & 180 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA) -Students at Transitioning level receive a total of 180 minutes of ENL (90 minutes integrated and 90 minutes stand-alone or 180 minutes integrated ENL) -Students at Expanding level receive a total of 180 minutes of ENL (180 minutes integrated ENL) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 68  -Students at Commanding level receive a total of 90 minutes of ENL (90 minutes of integrated ENL) for 2 years. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. All integrated and stand-alone ENL instruction is provided in English. During integrated periods, the ENL teacher provides vocabulary support for Math, Literacy, Science, and Social Studies instruction ensuring that content is comprehensible for all ENL students. Literacy is integrated throughout all content and our ENL program, making sure that we foster language development and that supports are available for students that may need them, such as focused small-group work. The school-wide core curriculum in Literacy follows the Teachers College Reading Writing Program (TCRWP) units of study and assessment system. All teachers attend professional development around the TCRWP program. The ENL teacher(s) articulates with classroom teachers of ENL students in regards to the Literacy curriculum covered. The ENL teacher(s) supplements Literacy instruction for ELLs using appropriate strategies, and targeted materials for ELL Literacy development (including Avenues, On the Way to English, and Treasure Chest.) during integrated, as well as during stand alone times. The students are involved in interactive enrichment activities that extend learning and practices that help them to explore new concepts and ideas. Technology and hands-on opportunities to develop oral language are also provided. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? By looking at the data obtained from the NYSITELL or the NYSESLAT from the previous school year (if the student is not a new admit into the school), the ENL teacher(s) make sure that the student is appropriately evaluated in their home language throughout the school year. In addition, the ENL teacher makes sure that newcomer ELLs, that are Spanish dominant, are evaluated using Running Records in Spanish throughout the year, as well as making sure that when ELL students are eligible to take state exams, the state exams are ordered in the native language (Math, Science). 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. SIFE - MLS ( State) We focus on helping SIFE students adjust to being in school on a consistent basis. We try to provide a welcoming environment where they feel safe and understood. We are sensitive to their individual learning styles and academic needs, but also to their cultural and family needs which may differ from the school culture. During Stand-Alone instruction SIFE students receive focused activities incorporating lots of visual, real objects, and technology. b. Newcomers that are Spanish Dominant (materials are used in the native language - Spanish for four periods a week ) We use the "Estrellita" Word Study Program with materials that help with letter-sound recognition, reading of syllables, words and sentences with each vowel. Our plan for newcomers centers on easing children’s adjustment to our school, and fostering a welcoming environment. Classroom instruction, as always, must be sensitive to how the differences between a student’s home culture and their new culture may impact both their learning style and general behavior/interaction. In addition, sensitivity must be paid to particular issues that may arise in the families of newcomers, such as immigration, home ownership, and English language learning at the parent level. With newcomers in the beginning stages of 2018-19 SCEP-FL 69  language acquisition, teachers make language comprehensible by modifying their speech (e.g., slower rate, simpler grammatical structures, restricted length of communication) and making use of extra linguistic cues (i.e., gestures, actions, and pictures) to convey meaning. Reading activities provide opportunities for further language input. Predictable books are particularly useful because of their highly repetitive language and simplified text. Chants and songs also offer students the opportunity to gain familiarity with content vocabulary and language patterns. Teachers scaffold the language of the text through engagements such as Read-Alouds and Shared Reading. Foundations of Advanced Word Study program with materials that helps move students from letter- sound correspondence and basic blends into discovering how spelling patterns, affixes, accents, and derivations give clues to word meaning. Materials to support English Language Learning families of newcomers are supported through weekly morning parent workshops where parents are given information about topics that will help them with parent life-skills. Additionally, they have computer access to use the Ellis Language Learning Computer Program and other computer programs. Another means of support for parents include parent orientation and parent ESL courses. c. Developing Academic Intervention Services from the SETSS teacher in Reading and in Writing. Academic Intervention Services from AIS teachers of Reading at least twice a week. Students receive support in English language development, through Literacy and Mathematics instruction taught with ESL methodology, two times a week in our Title III After-School Program. Provide the opportunity for teachers of ELLs to attend OELL Professional Development in order to improve their teacher practice. All parents of these ELLs are invited to participate in family ESL workshops, which support parents working with their children around homework, and help the parents develop their own English proficiency. d. Long Term - Students will receive Academic Invention services ( AIS) support in all four modalitites. in order to achieve language proficiency growth throughout the content areas. e. Former ELLs Commanding students receive 90 minutes of integrated support on a weekly basis to ensure that they continue to maintain and show growth in their academic and language development.an IEP team. Testing accommodations for all Ells are placed within the least restricted environment when determined by an IEP when needed. Also all ELLs have unlimited time to complete their standardize test. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? The instructional strategies and grade level materials that teachers use that ensure that content area materials are comprehensible to our ELLs-SWDs are the following: • Different technology media (iPads, Computers, Smartboard, Tablets, Laptops) • Visual Scaffolding to support ENL Reading • Oral scaffolding (e.g., clarity, pace, pausing) • Think-Pair-Share • Graphic Organizers • Brainstorming ideas 2018-19 SCEP-FL 70  • Repetitive language story books • Predictable books. In order to ensure the fidelity of these practices the following reviews are implemented: • The use of actionable feedback from formal and informal observations • Time line for monitoring progress built in to implementation process • Informal/formal observations (Administration) • Grade team discussions of best practices • Classroom teacher support (Literacy Coach/ School Math Coach) The new content area core curriculum (Literacy, Math, Social Studies and Science) provides many suggestions for scaffolding instruction for the ELL population. In addition, the ENL teacher supports classroom teachers in selecting the language objectives of the lesson according to the student's language proficiency level. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? 27.7% of the students in our school are students with disabilities, of which 4% are ENL students. Students are placed within the least restrictive environment when determined by an IEP team. Flexible scheduling is used when programming for students with IEP's for the necessary ENL service in order for them to attain English proficiency and still achieve their IEP goals. The ENL teacher integrates both the SWD's and the general education students when supporting them within the appropriate proficiency language levels. Teachers receive professional development in support of strategies and skills that they can use with the ENL-SWD students in their class. Oral language development and academic vocabulary development is a focus using graphic organizers and visual aids to increase comprehension. We also use the core curriculum in Math, Social Studies and Science to develop their academic learning, while scaffolding their instruction. A sample of the strategies incorporated in the classrooms are: Cooperative Learning, Language Experience Approach, Total Physical Response (TPR), Literature Circles, Turn & Talk, Shared Reading, Songs & Chants, Reading and Writing Workshops. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. The following are the Academic Intervention Services (AIS) that are available at P.S. 23: • Title III Afterschool in Literacy & Math focusing on building comprehension through targeting oral language and academic vocabulary in English. (Students of all proficiency levels in Grades 1-5 are invited to this program.) The students are also engaged in Social Studies and Science, Reading and Writing tasks, so that students will learn how to comprehend all types of text and be able to communicate their ideas in Writing, resulting in an increase in their Language Proficiency Levels. Service is rendered in English and to a few targeted students in Spanish. • Afterschool in Literacy & Math for the Proficient & Advanced ELL students focusing on Literacy and Math skills and strategies in preparation for the State Exams in English. Service is rendered in English . • A small group of targeted newcomers work with the Bilingual Reading Teacher in native language (Spanish) during 3 periods of AIS in the early morning in order to increase their native language fluency helping with the transference into English. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? 1. After-School Supplemental Services •Instructional Test Prep for ELLs in Grades 3,4,5 •The use of Getting Ready for the NYSESLAT - NEW FORMAT It has broad-based content themes and a comprehensive instructional guide. Major changes in the new books: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 71  Fully aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards and the Bilingual Common Core Progressions. Includes all five Performance Development Levels: Entering, Emerging, Transitioning, Expanding, and Commanding. Broad-based themes that integrate, Listening. Reading, and Writing. Separate grade-level instructional books to provide maximum practice. Black and white format to reflect the look of the NYSESLAT. 2. All ELL students in our Title III after-school program in Literacy, will also receive Content Area (Social Studies and Science) practice by a licensed ENL teacher and a bilingual licensed teacher. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? None. We will be providing our students with all of the services previously received. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELL’s are fully incorporated into our broader school community, and receive equal access along with supplemental support including Test Prep After School sessions. They participate in all school programs and activities (arts, labs, dance, gym, assemblies, trips, lunch, etc.). They also have complete access to all materials and resources in the school, as well as materials that are bought specifically for them (such as the practice books for the NYSESLAT). Additionally, we have a Title III After-School program specifically tailored to the needs of our ELL’s. The after-school Literacy program is led by the ENL teacher and includes other trained teachers in ENL strategies and skills . We also use our Title III parent ESL program to support student achievement. During this time, the ENL teacher(s) helps the parents on how to work with their children in homework, in addition to their own English language development through technology and other educational means. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. We utilize a comprehensive range of materials to support our ELLs’ language development, in English, as well as their Home Native Language (as needed for our newcomers). Our primary programs include: • Avenues (Hampton-Brown): Language-rich resources, focusing on basic and academic vocabulary development. grade-level content with connections to science and social studies. Standards-based with specialized strategies. Data-driven instruction with multi-level assessment. • Empire State NYSESLAT (Continental Press): Clear and concise skill reinforcement to support curriculum goals, promote success on the NYSESLAT, and help students overcome daily language barriers. Comprehensive teacher manuals to support targeted instruction in student books, in addition to clear audio CDs. • Getting Ready for the NYSESLAT (Attanasio & Attanasio): Through this program, teachers are able to identify and put into practice the best strategies in standards-based instruction; identify the skills that are needed to succeed for accountability purposes; use ongoing assessment activities to measure progress in attaining English language proficiency; transition students from the NYSESLAT to the ELA test; familiarize students with the structure of the NYSESLAT and the ELA. • On Our Way to English (Rigby): Designed to meet the differing rates at which English language learners develop language and literacy skills. Bridges language, literacy, and content to build grade-level achievement and maximum yearly progress. Enables assessment in language and literacy as separate developmental processes, in order to target and differentiate instruction based on individual needs; monitoring and reporting student progress; using a unique leveling system to address both language and reading characteristics; using content-based learning to develop academic language. • PM Readers (Rigby): Low ratio of 1:20 new word introduction. Steady development of sentence structure. Meaningful stories with a clear climax and resolution. Repetition and review of high-frequency words meet the learning and teaching needs of every classroom. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 72  • Sails Literacy Series (Rigby): Resource for Guided Reading and Writing, Reciprocal Reading and Independent Reading. Engaging visuals and subjects will motivate students to read for pleasure and for information. The series develops analytical thinking skills; decoding and comprehension skills; understanding of fiction and non-fiction; and understanding of purpose, structure and genre. • Learning A-Z Software Program - Moves ELL’s toward English fluency using lessons designed to move learners immediately from an observer to a full participant. Closely follows the natural pattern of language acquisition via research-based instructional methodology. Features include comprehensive reports that address a wide range of proficiency levels and mastered activities. throughout the content areas. For newcomers (materials used in the native language - Spanish): • "Estrellita" word study program with materials that help with letter-sound recognition, reading of syllables, words and sentences with each vowel. • Advanced Word Study in Spanish: Palabras a Su Paso Word Study program with materials that help discover spelling patterns, affixes, accents and derivations gives clues to word meaning. • Guided Reading/Shared Reading Books from different companies - Rigby, Modern Curriculum Press, Dominie Press, Celebration Press. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Workshops for vocabulary, fluency, comprehension, phonemic awareness, phonics, and writing instruction for teachers are offered on-site by the ENL teacher in order to give the classroom teachers strategies and skills in delivering home language support. Support is given in how to: • Build students’ academic language and vocabulary • Develop oral language • Implement English literacy and curricula • Get advice on the selection of instructional materials • Learn to identify and place students • Develop intervention plans Presently, P.S. 23 does not have a Dual Language or a Transitional Bilingual Program. Our ELL students are all served in an English as New Language (ENL) Program. The supports listed above are offered to the students during the integrated units in the classrooms, as well as in the stand-alone units. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. ELL's are grouped with their grade-appropriate peers, and fully participate in grade-level instruction. Our students receive their mandated minutes of integrated and stand-alone instructional time as designated by their proficiency levels according to a set schedule, made available to all teachers and resource providers (Speech,SETSS, OT, PT, etc.). 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Our school does not share a building. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Presently, there are no activities for newly enrolled ELL's before the beginning of the school. Parents who come to our school and are interested in learning about the school and its programs, are given the opportunity to meet with the Bilingual Parent Coordinator and are given a tour of the school, as well as a synopsis of the school. When newcomers enroll throughout the school year, we focus on easing children’s adjustment to our school, and fostering a 2018-19 SCEP-FL 73  welcoming environment. The Bilingual Special Education Specialty Teacher provides Academic Intervention Services to Spanish speakers. She provides students that are newcomers with basic native language skills and strategies in order to support them in their transition into English. This service is given to them three times a week. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Our school is a Pre-kindergarten to Fifth Grade school. At the present time, we offer a Language Acquisition period twice a week to all students in grades Pre-Kindergarten through 2nd Grade by a Specialty Teacher who has a Bilingual Special Education License. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? This program is not presently available at P.S. 23. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Professional development for teachers of ELL's has always been a primary focus of our program (building upon years past). Teachers continue to be supported in a variety of ways in order to ensure their knowledge of standards-based Common Core Curriculum. Professional development sessions are driven by our school goal of building content knowledge and comprehension through oral language development and academic vocabulary. • Fundamental teacher training is designed around informing our teachers of ELL/ENL staff of pertinent ELL policy (including the allocation of English and Native Language throughout instruction drawing on the LAP Principles of a Coherent LAP and High Quality Teachers), as well as key instructional materials available within the school. These workshops allow teachers to be informed and “on the same page,” and thus most effectively plan together. • Professional development sessions include work in curriculum modification in order to use visual supports and graphic organizers to allow for comprehensible input for our ELL’s, in order to support their development of oral language and academic vocabulary (which research has proven to be the “gateway” to comprehension, particularly for language learners) in Literacy and in all Content Areas. • Our work encompasses a focus on assessment-driven/data-informed instruction. We look closely at results from students' NYSESLAT performance in order to guide our instruction and analyze the results in terms of the language modalities (Speaking, Listening, Reading, and Writing) in order to plan for guided small group instruction. • Additionally, we engage in professional protocols to decompose formative assessments and student work, including our TCRWP assessment, and oral language assessment. • Enrichment materials/activities are made with the teachers in order to support their work in instruction with the ELLs. • Regular meetings such as common planning and grade meetings allow teacher teams to engage in collaborative planning for 2018-19 SCEP-FL 74  instruction particularly for the ELLs in their classrooms. • In order to remain current with ELL practice and research, the ENL teacher and teachers of ELL's attend regular outside professional development. Professional development activities include Compliance and Instruction workshops offered at the District and Content-Based workshops given through the New York City Department of Education (DELLS). These will be listed as the new school year evolves. • The New York City Department of Education: New & Opportunities for Educators of ELLs (Department of ELLs, & Student Support) provides external workshops in which teachers attend to master and acknowledge skills in Common Core Learning Standards. Internal workshops also include work engaging teachers with consultants both in Literacy and Math, inclusive of the Common Core Learning Standards . 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. ENL Teachers meet the required 50% of ELL-specific professional development by attending monthly professional development provided by the District, as well as professional development opportunities presented by NYS-RBERN and other professional development announced by the Department of English Language Learners. The professional development will be embedded into our internal and external workshops in which it will enhance the mandated professional development for all teachers who work with English Language Learners. Our school ensures that classroom teachers meet the required 15% of ELL-specific professional development as per CR Part 154.2 by dedicating time from our weekly 80 minute professional development time throughout the school year to ENL PD. On-site PD is given by the ENL teachers or from a district representative. ENL teachers turn-key information they have received at external professional development. Agendas and attendance sheets are kept for on-site training given. Agendas and Certificates from external workshops are kept on file. Individual teachers keep track of their individual hours. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? During the school year, the ENL teachers are available to meet individually with parents on Tuesday afternoons during the designated Parent-Engagement Time (or at other times during the school day to ensure parent needs are accommodated) to discuss their child's language development needs in all modalities and in Content Areas. Meetings can be requested by the parent, classroom teacher and the ENL teacher, when needed. Parent meetings are conducted in the language preferred by the parent. Over-the-phone interpretation services are available through the Bronx Field Support Center Over-the-Phone Interpreter Services and will be used so that parents can receive language assistance and have their questions answered in their preferred languages (1-800-231-0288). Access to Language Line interpretation services in over 200 languages 24 hours a day 7 days a week are available. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. ELL's in particular are in great need of a Home-School Connection to ensure academic success. The families of these students often feel alienated from the English-dominant environment of the new culture that they find themselves in and therefore, 2018-19 SCEP-FL 75  assimilation is difficult. Our parent involvement is designed to be varied and address the range of needs of our families. • Parent workshops are conducted on an ongoing basis. Workshop times vary in the mornings, and afternoons and include childcare. Topics may include: curriculum, technology, asthma, sexual abuse, domestic violence, foster care, parenting, nutrition, conflict resolution, immigration and fire safety as a basic program structure, as well as, parent requested topics. • Technology for Parents is offered through our Title III grant, and occurs weekly. • Our Guidance Counselor, Health Coordinator, and Parent Coordinator, as well as, our Bilingual Social Worker and Bilingual Psychologist work to identify speakers and/or support CBO personnel who can deliver workshops to parent groups based on their expressed needs and interests. • Through our ENL course for families of ELL's, we help them develop English language proficiency in everyday life skills. The ENL teacher guides the parents' practice in English language development, as well as in other issues that may arise for new immigrants. • Field trips are part of our parent program. Trips are scheduled where both parents and children can be taken to sites in New York City. • Our parents learn how to become more involved in their children's education through workshops in English Language Arts and Mathematics. Parent workshops are also provided that teach strategies for academically supporting their children at home. • Cookshop for Parents has also been an asset to our parents of ELLs. Learning to make healthy recipes and writing up the recipes has helped with oral and written language. The program is run by the ENL teachers and Parent Coordinator. • Bingo for Books, once a month, has provided the households with more books for children libraries. • The School Pantry was opened during the 2015-2016 school year. We saw great use of this Pantry this past school year (2017-2018) and hope to have even more families join the Pantry for nutrition purposes this upcoming school year. Many of our ELL families are unable to have SNAP (Food Stamps) and the Pantry provides the nutrition necessary for student learning. Translation is available at all times in Spanish. If we need help with any language other than Spanish, we reach out to the Bronx Field Support Center Over-the-Phone Interpreter Services where there is Access to Language Line interpretation services in over 200 languages 24 hours a day 7 days a week and use an interpreter from the Unit for the parents. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 76 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Shirley Torres, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 77  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: New Children's School School DBN: 10x023 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Shirley Torres Title Principal Susan Nelson/ Carole Cooke Assistant Principal Yvonne Flores Parent Coordinator Jennifer Irurueta ENL/Bilingual Teacher Yennie Guzman Parent Mildred Gonzalez-ENL Teacher/Subject Area N/A Teacher/Subject Area Katherine McCarthy Elise Lucas Coach Coach Margaret Halvey School Counselor N/A N/A Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member N/A Maria Almanzar Other Bil. Sch. Psych. N/A Bil. Speech Related Services Other N/A Other 6/28/18 Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 6/29/18 6/29/18 6/29/18 6/29/18 6/29/18 6/29/18 N/A 6/29/18 6/29/18 6/29/18 N/A N/A 6/29/18 Maria Aponte 1/1/01 2018-19 SCEP-FL 78  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 10X023 School Name: P.S.23 The New Children's School Superintendent: Maribel Hulla The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Yvonne Flores Jennifer Irurueta Parent Coordinator ENL Teacher/Coordinator No No Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Our school uses Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS) and the student emergency contact cards to collect the data necessary for preferred language of our parents. We interview the parents and incoming children using the HLIS Individual Interview sample questions and additional interview questions to assess the language preferences of our parent community for both written and oral communication. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 79  According to the findings from our school report card, Quality School Snapshot, as well as the HLIS's and parent and child interviews done at registration, we find that P.S. 23 needs translation services/oral interpretation in: French, Arabic and Spanish. As our school has a large number of bilingual (Spanish) staff, the needs of parents in this language have been and will continue to be met. We have also been fortunate to have an Occupational Therapist on staff who is fluent in Arabic. We have also been able to engage parent volunteers or even older siblings to serve as oral interpreters in order to help our parents that speak other languages not spoken by our staff. Our school also has posters throughout the school informing parents of the different languages that the Department of Education can provide translation for. We continue to refer to the Translation and Interpretation Unit to ensure that our ENL parents are provided the opportunity to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education. In addition, the Bronx Field Support Center provides over the phone interpreter services that have access to language line interpretation services in over 200 languages, 24 hours a day 7 days a week. We will continue to download letters that have been translated for parents by the Department of Education of New York City in order to be able to provide information to our parents in the needed languages. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral French Fulani Hausa Mandinka aka Mandingo Moldavian English Spanish American Sign Language Arabic Twi 3 3 N/A 1 N/A 314 168 N/A 1 N/A 0.61 0.61 N/A 0.2 N/A 64.08 34.29 N/A 0.2 N/A 3 3 N/A 1 N/A 311 171 N/A 1 N/A 0.61 0.61 N/A 0.2 N/A 63.47 34.9 N/A 0.2 N/A 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 80  Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families September School Welcome Letter Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. All Spanish translation is done in-house by bilingual staff members. Final edits are completed by the Principal. For All other languages The school will use the Bronx Field Support Center, Over The Phone Interpreter Services to help us orally translate information on documents to parents. All Spanish translation is done in-house by bilingual staff members. Final edits are completed by the Principal. Student Emergency Contact Forms At Registration and Parent Teacher Conference Times Flyers for school events such as: Literacy Nights, Parent Engagement Workshops, Holiday Shows, Parent/Teacher Conferences, Spirit Days, PBIS Assemblies As needed can vary throughout the year For All other languages the school will use the Bronx Field Support Center, Over The Phone Interpreter Services to help us orally translate information from documents to parents. All Spanish translation is done in-house by bilingual staff members. Final edits are completed by the Principal. For All other languages the school will use the Bronx Field Support 2018-19 SCEP-FL 81  Monthly Calendars from the Center, Over The Phone Interpreter Services to help us translate information on documents for parents. All Spanish translation is done in-house by bilingual staff members. Final edits are completed by the Principal. Parent Coordinator/ Monthly Principal For All other languages the school will call the Bronx Field Support Center, Over The Phone Interpreter Services to help us translate information on documents to parents All Spanish translation is done in-house by bilingual staff members. Final edits are completed by the Principal. Monthly News Letters from Specialty Teachers Monthly For All other languages the school will call the Bronx Field Support Center, Over The Phone Interpreter Services to help us translate information on documents to parents. All Spanish translation is done in-house by bilingual staff members. Final edits are completed by the Principal. For All other languages the school will call the Bronx Field Support Center, Over The Phone Interpreter Services to help us translate information on documents to parents. All Spanish translation is done in-house by bilingual staff members. After School Applications At the start of the After School Programs October/November Parent/Teacher Conference Appointment Letters November 2018-19 SCEP-FL 82  March May Final edits are completed by the Principal. For All other languages the school will call the Bronx Field Support Center, Over The Phone Interpreter Services to help us translate information on documents to parents. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to Curriculum Night September provide interpretation service(s)? In-house staff will provide translation in Spanish and Arabic. We will engage parent/family volunteers or adult siblings over the age of 18 to serve as oral interpreters in order to help our parents that speak other languages not spoken by our staff. As needed, we will contact the Bronx Field Support Center, over the phone interpreter services, in order to be able to orally communicate with our parents in the needed languages. In-house staff will provide translation in Spanish and Arabic. November Parent/Teacher Conferences March May We will engage parent/family volunteers or adult siblings over the age of 18 to serve as oral interpreters in order to help our parents that speak other languages not spoken by our staff. As needed, we will contact the Bronx Field Support Center, over the phone interpreter services, in 2018-19 SCEP-FL 83  Parent Engagement Workshops Tuesday Afternoons Classroom Celebrations Varies throughout the year Holiday Shows Varies throughout the year order to be able to orally communicate with our parents in the needed languages. In-house staff will provide translation in Spanish and Arabic. We will engage parent/family volunteers or adult siblings over the age of 18 to serve as oral interpreters in order to help our parents that speak other languages not spoken by our staff. As needed, we will contact the Bronx Field Support Center, over the phone interpreter services, in order to be able to orally communicate with our parents in the needed languages. In-house staff will provide translation in Spanish and Arabic. We will engage parent/family volunteers or adult siblings over the age of 18 to serve as oral interpreters in order to help our parents that speak other languages not spoken by our staff. As needed, we will contact the Bronx Field Support Center, over the phone interpreter services, in order to be able to orally communicate with our parents in the needed languages. In-house staff will provide translation in Spanish and Arabic. We will engage parent/family volunteers or adult siblings over the age of 18 to serve as oral interpreters in order to help our parents that speak other languages not spoken by our staff. As needed, we will contact the Bronx Field Support Center, over the phone interpreter services, in order to be able to orally 2018-19 SCEP-FL 84  Assemblies Varies throughout the year communicate with our parents in the needed languages. In-house staff will provide translation in Spanish and Arabic. We will engage parent/family volunteers or adult siblings over the age of 18 to serve as oral interpreters in order to help our parents that speak other languages not spoken by our staff. As needed, we will contact the Bronx Field Support Center, over the phone interpreter services, in order to be able to orally communicate with our parents in the needed languages. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. The School Safety Agent, Building Response Team ( BRT), First Responders, Teachers will call the Bronx Field Support Center, Over The Phone Interpreter Services if needed. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. At the beginning of the school year, all teachers are informed of all the Chancellor's Regulations, Welcome Poster, Parent's Bill of Rights, Parents Guide to Language Access and the Bronx Field Support Center, Over the Phone Interpreter Services (Every teacher receives a flier listing the information for Over-the-Phone Interpretation Services). P.S. 23 will continue to display throughout different locations in the school, especially in the foyer of the school and in the Main Office, translated signs, language poster advising the parents of the availability of interpretation services. The School Safety Agent will also be provided with the Department of Education Bronx Field Support Center, Over the Phone Interpreter Services flier stating the telephone number in the event there is difficulty communicating with a parent. "I'll Speak" cards will also be at the Safety Agents desk in the foyer. Translated copies of all documents will be provided and any other needed services. A discussion at the first School Leadership Team meeting with the executive board members will also take place. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 85  Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) P.S. 23 will continue to print and display throughout different locations in the school, especially in the foyer of the school and in the Main Office, translated signs, "I'll Speak" cards, language poster advising the parents of the availability of the Bronx Field Support Center Over-the-Phone Interpreter services. Translated copies of the Bill of Rights and Responsibilities document in Spanish and any other needed language that states the rights in regard to translation and interpretation services will be back-packed and sent home. A discussion at the first School Leadership Team meeting with executive parent board members will also take place. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Our school will use parent surveys after parent workshops to gather feedback from ENL parents on the language services they receive and are still needed. In-house staff will provide translation in Spanish and Arabic. We will engage parent/family volunteers or adult siblings over the age of 18 to serve as oral interpreters in order to help our parents that speak other languages not spoken by our staff to answer the parent surveys. As needed, we will contact the Bronx Field Support Center, Over-the-Phone interpreter services, in order to be able to orally communicate with our parents in the needed languages. We have given surveys to our parents in previous years after parent engagement workshops and wish to continue this practice. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 86 
