 09X055 School Name: P.S. 055 BENJAMIN FRANKLIN Principal: LUIS TORRES 2018-19 SCEP-P 1  School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Section 4: SCEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Section 7: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 8: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 9: Title I Program Information Section 10: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 SCEP-P 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information C.S. 55, The Benjamin Franklin School. 09X055 320900010055 Elementary School Number (DBN): 450 St. Paul’s Place; Bronx, NY 10456 (718) 681-6227 (718) 681-6247 Phone Number: Luis E. Torres Fax: Ltorres2@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Luis E. Torres Deborah Morgan Jeffrey Haywood John Pierce Amy Turner N/A N/A Elizabeth Cedeno District Information Geographical District: 09 Leticia Rodriguez-Rosario Superintendent: 1245 Washington Avenue; Bronx, NY 10456 Superintendent’s Office Address: LRosario2@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: (718) 579-7143 Phone Number: N/A Fax: FSC: Bronx Field Support Center (FSC) Executive Director: Jose Ruiz 2018-19 SCEP-P 3  Executive Director’s Office Address: 1 Fordham Plaza, Bronx, NY 10458 & 1230 Zerega Avenue, Bronx, NY 10462 jruiz2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: (718) 741- 8895 Phone Number: (718) 828-7776 Fax: 2018-19 SCEP-P 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the SCEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Luis Torres Deborah Morgan Jeffrey Haywood Shirley Smalls Equannie Lee N/A N/A Elizabeth Cedeno Corinne Woods Ali Wood *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Parent Parent 2018-19 SCEP-P 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Denise Concepcion QuarshieComfort John Pierce Teacher Teacher Paraprofessional District Leader Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 SCEP-P 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) is a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. The process of developing and implementing the SCEP is aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding SCEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and SCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 SCEP-P 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: 2018-19 SCEP-P 8  Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the SCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the SCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for SCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you 2018-19 SCEP-P 9  monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 5: Build consensus around activities, strategies and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 6: Step 6: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 7: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 SCEP-P 10  1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: SCEP Overview Our mission and vision statement are aligned in order to ensure academic success for ALL students. Mission Statement: At C.S. 55 we dedicate ourselves to providing a safe, nurturing environment where ALL students are challenged through differentiated instruction that is informed by formative and summative assessments. As well as personally motivated by our core values, which are: respectful, organized, always safe and responsible. Vision Statement: Our vision fosters responsible and productive citizens who possess critical thinking and academic skills, which are developed through data driven instruction delivered by passionate and motivated educators in a safe and nurturing environment and supported by families for the betterment of the community. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. WHOLE CHILD APPROACH The SCAN of NY After-School Program serves students from CS 55 and the surrounding community all year long. Through homework help, structured lessons, and opportunities to teach social, life, and character-building skills, they strive for academic and personal enrichment. Their goal is to help our students focus more, become well-rounded, and perform better. Their motto is: "Let's do more... Let's do different... Let's do better!" The Institute for Understanding Behavior provides all school staff with the skills, knowledge, and confidence they need to safely and effectively anticipate behavior challenges before they escalate, creating a more stable and positive school environment. The Institute achieves this through professional development for all staff, the assessment of a school's unique needs, and on-site support from a behavior specialist. At the school level, we are adept at connecting with existing partners/resources while working to maximize the effect of their work. The Institute also works to develop or enhance existing school systems that identify and support individual students experiencing difficulty improving the general school climate and culture. The UFT Teacher Center is a comprehensive professional development program that promotes educator excellence and academic achievement for all students. It focuses on assisting teachers in developing and implementing effective practices that build and sustains learning communities within schools. Montefiore’s School Health Program (MSHP) provides comprehensive primary healthcare to more than 27,000 elementary, middle and high school students throughout the Bronx, making it the largest and most comprehensive school-based health program in the country, with locations in 65 public schools at 21 locations throughout the Bronx. MSHP’s four clinical divisions, medical, mental health, dental, and community health, work in collaboration to provide a wide range of comprehensive healthcare services. The interdisciplinary priority service areas include healthy lifestyle, asthma care, reproductive health, emotional health, and oral health. National Health and Wellness Center 2018-19 SCEP-P 11  We believe that healthy students are at the heart of healthy schools, and healthy schools are at the heart of healthy communities. By integrating plant-based teaching with core school curriculum, we grow healthy food, healthy students, and healthy academic performance. Our Health and Wellness Center is a place of inquiry and wonder, inspiration and aspiration, a place full of tactile and experiential learning opportunities for students and teachers. The center includes: an Indoor Teaching Farm, a Teaching Kitchen, a Media and Resource Center, and an Indoor Community Farm. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. NA 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Areas of Significant Progress: CS 55 made significant progress in the area of Rigorous Instruction which is evident by the dramatic decrease of Level 1s in both ELA and Math as measured by the results of the NYS ELA & math exam. Additionally, there were numerous intentional curriculum changes, such as the development and implementation of the Achievement Block for ELA and the 5 Mathematical Practices for Math. As well as strategically placing specific teachers on specific grades to positively impact the learning of our scholars. Our key areas of focus for this school year is to continue to tweak and improve the Achievement Block in ELA, as well as, align our curriculum to include an Achievement Block for Math that integrates elements of the 5 Mathematical Practices along with test taking strategies. We are also making a well developed plan for our Level 1 students that addresses their specific needs and allows them to have access to the curriculum at their entry point. 2018-19 SCEP-P 12  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 09X055 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 642 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language YES Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 33 33 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 54 53 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 97.0% % Attendance Rate 96.3% % Reduced Lunch 12.1% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.0% 48.6% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 1.1% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 13.09 0% 17% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 32.6% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 74% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No No Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District Yes Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO N/A NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 39 37 91.0% 0.9% 19.2% 50.3% 0.0% 0.0% 6 7% 7.3 32.1% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No NO N/A N/A NO NO NO N/A N/A NO NO NO N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 SCEP-P 13  2018-19 SCEP-P 14  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed X X X X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our school's strengths are the noticeable gains we made on our 2017-2018 NYS ELA and Math exams which is evident by the increased proficiency shown in the data. The data for ELA is as follows: The number of Level 1s was reduced by 28.1%. The number of Level 3s & 4s was increased by 17.9%. The data for Math is as follows: The number of Level 1s was reduced by 20.4%. The number of Level 3s & 4s was increased by 13.4%. Our goal for the 2018-2019 school year is to continue to reduce the number of Level 1s. This will be done by creating a data driven plan that focuses on small group targeted instructions provided by members of the CS 55 staff in order to close the achievement gap among these students. We will continue to enrich the proficient students through the use of 2018-19 SCEP-P 15  small group targeted instruction that continues ot lift the level of these students as well as opportunities for projected based learning to stimulate their engagement. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, students in grades 3 to 5 with a proficiency of Level 1 will be decreased from 31.2% to 25% as measured by the results of the NYS ELA examination. 2018-19 SCEP-P 16  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Parent Orientation/ Open School Night to include Parents Information on Academic Expectations   Review of the School Quality Snapshot  Periodical Student Progress Reports  Dissemination of NYS Data Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Aug. 2018 – June 2019 Community School Director, Assistant Principals, Parent Coordinator Professional Learning on evaluation documentation including, but not limited to, All faculty and staff Aug. 2018 – June 2019 June Instructional Goals School Quality Guide School Quality Snapshot IIT Review Feedback      NYS ELA & Math Data Professional learning on how to create and implement project-based activities.  Develop the Social Studies curriculum to focus on project based activities that engage the students and leave a lasting memory using visual techniques All instructional staff (teachers, coaches, and educational assistants) Professional Learning on how to increase rigor during lesson planning using Classroom Teachers Sept. 2018 – June 2019  Text-Dependent Questioning  Depth of Knowledge Wheel Inquiry Documentation Protocol  Formative Assessment  Small Group Instruction   Data Driven Instruction Sept 2018 - June 2019 - Instructional Coaches Staff Developers: Instructional Coach, Literacy Coach, Math Coach, Grade Leaders - Borough Field Support Personnel Staff Developers: Instructional Coach, Literacy Coach, Math Coach, Grade Leaders In professional learning communities, and with support from resource personnel (e.g. IEP Teacher, District Liaisons, Educational Consultants, Staff Developers, Coaches) teachers on the same grade-level will collaborate to modify the curricula using school data 2018-19 SCEP-P 17 Sept. 2018 – June 2019 Classroom Teachers Assistant Principals  to inform the adjustments necessary to meet needs of ELLs, SWDs, the highest-, and lowest-achievement Support services (AIS ) will be provided for the lowest- achieving in need of additional assistance. Support will be provided by designated academic intervention teachers, IEP/ICT teachers, and instructional coaches. Students, Classroom Teachers Sept. 2018 – June 2019 Assistant Principals, Coaches, Reading Rescue Tutors, Out of Classroom Support Personnel Teachers will discuss project-based assessments at the beginning and end of each unit.  Develop standard-based rubrics  Develop a child-friendly task/ checklist   Data will be retrieved and distributed from SchoolNet to Formative assessments/ Check-ins and Checkpoints assess trends and patterns and plan accordingly Inter-visitations  Teachers will have numerous opportunities to visit PCT classrooms throughout the school year. Sept 2018 - June 2019 - Instructional Coaches Classroom teachers and Educational Assistants Classroom Teachers and Educational Assistants Sept 2018 - June 2019 - Instructional Coaches - Classroom Teachers - PCT Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight.  Provide monthly opportunities for Parents to meet with their child's teacher to engage in a pre-planned workshop featuring various aspects of curriculum and expectations for success.  Continue to develop a strong relationship between the Parent Coordinator and parents in order to establish an environment of trust and comfort for the parents within our school.  Alert parents of opportunities provided by the DOE to support parental needs. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Schedule adjustments for classroom teachers to adequately plan together and individually Supplemental resources for Core Ready curriculum for grades K-5 Supplemental resources for GoMath! curriculum for grades K-5     Resource materials for unit and lesson planning and unit planning during PLC’s  Professional development in the areas of : o Smart technology training o Differentiating lessons based on data o Guided Reading o Shared Reading o Fundations Training 2018-19 SCEP-P 18  o Whole Brain Teaching o PDs for CTLE credits o Generating Ideas to create excited Writers o Effective Questioning o Centers o SchoolNet o Writing Workshop o Closing the reading gaps   Literature that identifies and assists in the implementation of best practices in instruction and planning Library and other materials to support Guided Reading as small group instruction practice Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Mid-Point Benchmarks School-wide F & P Assessments in January   Grades 3-5 ELA & Math Simulations in December & February  Unit Benchmarks Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress is the scanning of bubble sheets into SchoolNet which allows for immediate data. Once the data is available, the Instructional Coaches print the data for each class and provide it to the staff. This data is then used during Inquiry and plan in order to purposefully design instruction that addresses the needs of the students within each class. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 19  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. X X X X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? C.S. 55 determined that students’ social and emotional needs must be supported before they are able to learn, resulting in a multi-service system to teach the whole child. Therefore, the first and basic level that C.S. 55 addresses is our children’s physical and psychological needs. C.S. 55 has partnered with and houses a fully operational Montefiore clinic within its school building. The current on-site medical clinic includes a full time Medical Doctor, Nurse, Psychologist, s other services such as vision screening and dental services at no cost to the students. Furthermore, the school (will expand the services of the Montefiore clinic by providing the school with one more psychologist and an additional social worker. The second level of support is to ensure that our staff is fully trained to meet the needs of the children if/when challenging behaviors present themselves. Every member of the C.S. 55 staff either has or will receive Therapeutic Crisis Intervention for Schools (TCIS) training. We at C.S. 55 are a TCIS model school supported through Positive and Behavior Intervention System (PBIS). We have several members of the Crisis Team, who are notified immediately when an 2018-19 SCEP-P 20  incident arises. Additionally, there is a staff member specifically assigned to Crisis and works directly with the child and parents to make sure incidents with this child decreases. The third level of support is to ensure that the school culture is a positive and nurturing environment. In order to produce and support this vision we have create clear systems and structures through the frame work and supports of Positive and Behavior Intervention System (PBIS) to produce success for all students including ENL and SWDs. The fourth and finally level of support is to ensure that students are involved and their voice is acknowledged and valued throughout the school building. The school has created student government where representatives from grades k-5 will represent each class in the school. The selected representatives will meet once a month as our schools “Sounding Board” bringing forth their classes' suggestions to improve their school community. Together, administration, teachers and students have co-created a safe and supportive environment that is conducive to student and adult learning. Providing all of the above is the just the beginning to what we at C.S. 55 be is necessary to teach the whole child. 1. Based on the IIT Review given November 2015, we received Stage 1 on all of the SOPs within this Framework. However, the feedback from the Quality Review given March 2017, states that our school is well developed in Indicator 3.4 - High Expectations and Well Developed in Indicator 1.4 - Positive Learning Environment. 2. Our priority need is to develop ways for our students to display their learning and thinking based on differentiated curricula that is aligned to the state standards. Based on the Quality Review rubric, our school needs to be more strategic in using our resources to move the sub-populations (SWDs, ELLs, the lowest-, and highest-achieving). This would include how information regarding student achievement is disseminated. Students need greater opportunities to deepen their understanding through interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other areas of enrichment. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools –Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the amount of incidents will decrease from 108 in 2018 to 75 by June 2019 through the school wide implementation of PBIS as measured by incidents reported in the OORS system. 2018-19 SCEP-P 21  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Continue to make our PBIS vision clear for all CS 55 staff members and address any misconceptions or confusion regarding our vision. Whole School Sept 2018 PBIS Team  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Established a Core Team  This Core Team consists of Administration, Guidance Counselor (MR. K), and coaches (Weiser & Cassidy).  We meet monthly with grade leaders to disseminate valuable information about the PBIS initiatives. Heighten the staffs awareness of the ladder of referral and make sure that a clear understanding of appropriate, reportable incidents in understood. Reinstate morning announcements which include our PBIS mission statemtnet to restore our scholars' pride in our learning community. School Wide Behavioral Expectations & ROAR Matrix will be laminated and provided to each grade leader to distribute during the first month's PBIS meeting. Faculty & Staff Distribute Tiger Tickets to staff and appoint a "Ticket Master" so that staff is aware of how to obtain additional tickets once their supplies are gone. make an expectation that each staff member is wearing a lanyard with tickets, so that they are able to reward appropriate behavior immediately. PBIS Store- Last Friday of every month. Faculty & Staff Students Students Faculty & Staff Students June 2018 PBIS Team Staff Core Team Whole School Sept 2018 PBIS Team Staff Core Team Staff Core Team Whole School Sept 2018 PBIS Team Staff Core Team Sept 2018 PBIS Team Staff Core Team Sept 2018 PBIS Team Oct. 2018- June 2019 Staff Core Team PBIS Team Staff Core Team 2018-19 SCEP-P 22  PBIS – Whole Class Rewards Every Friday, 8th Period Students Nov. 2018 - June 2019 PBIS Team Tier 2 interventions Check- Ins/Outs Students Sept 2018 - June 2019 Tier 3 interventions BIP Plans Students Sept 20178- June 2019 Staff Core Team PBIS Team Staff Core Team PBIS Team Staff Core Team Staff will report incidents via OORS report. Implementation of student intervention(s) Monthly review of OORS Data to examine the nature and frequency of student social and emotional development interventions. Professional Learning on the following:  PBIS  TCIS . 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Faculty & Staff Sept 2018- Administration June 2019 Guidance Counselors Guidance Counselors Sept 2018- June 2019 RTI committee Oct. 2018- June 2019 Assistants Principals Administration - Faculty and Staff Sept 2018- June 2019 Administration Borough Field Support Team . . . How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight.  Core team for PBIS, along with all administration, will communicate behavioral expectations to families between Aug and Sept 2018 during a scheduled Back to School Informational.  Teachers will communicate Behavioral Expectations during the Back to School night in September, as well as addressing any persistent issues during Parent Engagement Time. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.   Funding - Monies have been put aside in the budge each month to fund our PBIS Weekly Store. Space for celebrations and some funds have been put aside for the weekly class celebrations according to the choice on the rubric. 2018-19 SCEP-P 23   Scheduling has been adjusted to promote PBIS assemblies and Staff Professional Learning Communities (PLC) where time is put aside to educate staff members on PBIS whole school implementation of systems for our school building.  A new PA President has been elected and has volunteered to support PBIS initiatives.  Cluster teachers have volunteered to assist with helping to facility the weekly class rewards celebrations!! Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal.  At the time of the mid-point benchmark review, students should have shown measurable progress in terms of displaying positive behavior (2.5% or greater decrease in incident reports) towards the end-of-year goal. This will be evident in the number of OORS incidents reported by January/February. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress.  Data on safety/suspensions/incidents/attendance will be reviewed and addressed by the PBIS Team every few weeks. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 24  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. SOP(s) Addressed X X X 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. X 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. Based on the IIT Review given November 2015, we received Stage 1 on all of the SOPs within this Framework. However, the feedback from the Quality Review given March 2017, states that our school is proficient in Indicators 2.2 - Assessment and 4.2 - Teacher Teams and Leadership Development. 2. Our priority need is to address the collaboration between instructional staff. Our recommended area of focus was 4.2 - Teacher Teams. Based on the Quality Review rubric, our school needs a greater emphasis on inquiry with evidence of coherence across teacher teams. Inquiry needs to be implemented in a systematic way to strengthen teacher practice and increase student achievement for all learners. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 SCEP-P 25  By June 2019, 10% of teachers will advance at least one level within the Component 3d: Assessment in Instruction, through the use of targeted feedback & peer inter-visitations as measured by observations using the Danielson Framework for Teaching. 2018-19 SCEP-P 26  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Professional Learning Teachers Sept 2017 - June 2018  Administration  Instructional Coaches  Lesson plan components structured around balanced literacy for reading and writing  PCT Support  Horizontal and vertical alignment  How to Use an Inquiry Process to modify/ differentiate the curriculum Student Engagement Small Group Instruction Formative Assessment     Project-Based Assessment Teachers will collaborate on grade-level teams to develop project-based assessments in ELA and math for each grade Classroom Teachers Sept 2017 - June 2018 Administration  Develop standard-based rubrics  Develop a child-friendly task/ checklist   Use of SchoolNet Data Formative assessments/ Check-ins and Checkpoints Inter-visitations Teachers on grade-level teams will work with the instructional team and RTI team to develop ways to support the targeted populations (SWDs, ELLS, the highest- and lowest-achieving). Instructional Team Instructional Coaches Teachers Oct 2017 - June 2018 Administrators & Instructional Coaches Paraprofessionals Teachers Oct 2017 - June 2018 Administration Paraprofessionals RtI Team 2018-19 SCEP-P 27 Instructional Team Instructional Coaches School Counselors Community Workers  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. - We have a school app (School Connects) to improve school to parent communication. - Tuesdays during parent engagement time we will provide workshops for the parents. - We will arrange for various opportunities for parents and teachers to work together. Parents as Partners will be an initiative to increase parent engagement. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Schedule adjustments to accommodate inter-visitations, PCT, and team meetings.   Data to determine the professional development needs and adjust the curricula.  The Professional Learning Plan must include the suggested workshops in order to assist the school in meeting the goal.  Protocols are needed for collaboration and for looking at student work.  Partner school for inter-visitations outside of the school.   Clear and consistent communication of expectations for professional learning time and common planning.  Professional learning on how to adapt curricula for ELLs and SWDs. Lab-site for inter-visitations within the school. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. The staff completed a survey at the beginning of the year asking them what PDs they would find beneficial and areas that they considered themselves experts in to generate a larger capacity for PDs. A mid-level survey will be administered to staff again asking if they have received PDs that they requested and what additional PDs would interest them. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Exit Tickets & Feedback forms will be given at the conclusion of every professional workshop in order to acquire more data regarding the teachers' level of satisfaction with the PD. This will allow administration to adjust the future PDs to ensure a positive impact among staff. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 28  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). X X X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According the SED Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review conducted November 17-18, 2015, the school leader has increased school resources since becoming a community school. Part of the resources included additional personnel, new programs, and a partnership with a community-based organization. However, staff indicated that the school leaders have not provided consistent, targeted feedback or ensured that general education teachers differentiated planning and activities in order to meet the needs of ELLs and SWDs. The feedback provided from this visit also mentioned a need for faculty to analyze academic and social/emotional data for the school on a whole and for identified subgroups of students. This should then determine the focus of observations. After analyzing the data, the administration noticed that teachers needed more support in assessing students for understanding. Teachers also needed support in analyzing data in order to plan instruction. The team decided to focus on supporting teachers in collecting and analyzing data through inquiry work. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the 2018-19 SCEP-P 29  identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART– Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teachers will have the opportunity to influence the academic decisions that impact the learning of our students, which will result in an increase of 10% of teacher influence as measured on the 2018-19 NYC School Survey. 2018-19 SCEP-P 30  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff)  Evidence-based instructional  programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Administration will review data from the state exam, last year's benchmark assessments, and observations in order to determine the instructional focus for the 2018-19 school year. Administration will share the instructional focus for the upcoming school year with faculty & staff. Administration August , 2018 - School Leader Sept 2018 Faculty & Staff Sept 2018 Administration Administration will conduct formal and Informal observations. Instructional Staff Oct 2018 - June 2019 Administration Teacher will receive an individual support plan based on their needs which will be reviewed every 5-6 weeks. Instructional Staff Oct 2018 - June 2019 Administration Monitor the implementation of Core Ready and GO Math! Instructional Staff Daily from Sept 18- June 2019 . Provide ongoing professional developments to expand teachers' knowledge base. Instructional Staff Sept 2018- June 2019 Monitor the implementation of i-Ready in literacy and mathematics. Instructional Staff Sept 2018 - June 2019 Monitor the effectiveness of instruction by triangulating i-Ready, Fountas & Pinnell assessments, and grade-level assessments Instructional Staff At the end of each benchmark period starting Oct 2018 Instructional Coaches Administration Instructional Coaches Administration Generation Ready Literacy coaches Administration Administration Instructional coaches 2018-19 SCEP-P 31  Conduct a walk-through daily which will provide information on student learning and the needs of specific teachers. Instructional Staff Daily from Sept 2018- June 2019 Administration The Instructional Team will meet weekly with the Administrative Team to share information with their colleagues about instruction, student expectations,and classroom issues. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Instructional Team Every Week from Sept 2018- June 2019 Administration How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. - Tuesdays during parent engagement time we will provide workshops for the parents highlighting the curriculum and providing information that can support them at home. . - We will arrange for various opportunities for parents and teachers to work together. Parents as Partners will be an initiative to increase parent engagement. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Protocols for observations  Assessment Data  Professional Development (Generation Ready, Core Ready Support, I-Ready support) Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, administration will make strategic decisions in programming, capital, and human resources in order to build teacher capacity to use assessment data through inquiry work as evidenced by 50% of the teachers receiving an improved score based on the HEDI rating. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2018-19 SCEP-P 32   Teacher observations   NYS Exams SchoolNet Data Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 33  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. X X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. Based on the IIT Review given November 2015, we received Stage 1 on all of the SOPs within this Framework. However, the feedback from the Quality Review given March 2017, states that our school is proficient in Indicator 3.4 - High Expectations. The feedback from the review states, "School leaders consistently convey high expectations to staff through ongoing feedback and professional learning aligned to the Danielson Framework for Teaching. Teacher teams establish a culture for learning that communicates high expectations for all students." The impact shows evidence of clear communication between school leadership and the teachers. Fifty-nine parents completed the NYC DOE School Survey during the 2016-17 school year compared to 46% the year prior. This year, we received 91% positive responses for the category Outreach to Parents. Eighty-one percent of the parents responded positively for the category Parent Involvement in School. 2. Our priority need is to develop better communication between the families and educators within the school. The 2016-17 NYC DOE School Survey stated 76% of parents/guardians agreed or strongly agreed that they are invited to visit classrooms to observe instruction. Fifty-six percent of parents/guardians responded that, since the beginning of the school year, they have been asked or had the opportunity to volunteer time to support their school (for example, spent time helping in classrooms, helped with school-wide events, etc.) sometimes or often. The feedback from the 2016-17 Quality Review did not state anything about the level of communication between the school and the families it services. Based on the Quality Review rubric, our school needs to ensure that the entire staff is trained in establishing different forms of accountability and high expectations for students 2018-19 SCEP-P 34  and their families. As a result, staff will partner with families to support student progress towards those expectations. Students will then own their own educational experience so that they are prepared for the next level. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the number of families that feel opportunities are extended to them to volunteer time to support the school will increase from 57% to 65% by increasing outreach and opportunities to volunteer time to parents as measured by the NYC School Survey. 2018-19 SCEP-P 35  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) School will provide training to all members of the staff in the following areas: All staff members Sept 2018-  School administration June 2019  Parent  Different forms of accountability for student learning  How do develop high expectations for students and their families  How to communicate high expectations to families,. Establish a phone tree in which members of the PA can call various parents to inform them of different events. All parents Sept 2018 - June 2019 Coordinator  Community-Based Organization School staff   Parent Coordinator  Parent Association Continuously update the calendar of academic, social, and self-improvement activities in conjunction with the Parent Coordinator and the CBO. All parents Sept 2018 -  Parent Survey parents to find out parents' needs, interests, level of commitment, and preferred mode of contact. All parents Inform all key stakeholders of SchoolCNXT. All staff members All parents June 2019 First/ Second weekend of school (to coincide with Back to School fair). First/ Second week of Sept 2018 Coordinator  Parent Association  Community-Based Organization  School administration  Parent Association  School personnel who can support staff and parents in navigating the app. 2018-19 SCEP-P 36  Hold a recruitment campaign to increase parent engagement during the PA meetings. All parents Sept 2018 -  Parent June 2019  Parent Coordinator Conduct monthly workshops to address parents' needs. All parents Sept 2018 -  June 2019 Association School personnel for academic concerns  Professionals (after PA meetings) who can address all other concerns Celebrate parents by holding a parent awards ceremony. All parents June 2019  Parent Coordinator  Parent Association 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. SCAN-NY Learning Leaders program    District 9's Families Fostering Success Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. School Budget Space for all events, activities, workshop offerings, etc.   Community School Budget  Title I Funds   PD plan for staff  Parent/family learning opportunities plan and schedule  Parent Outreach time on Tuesdays  Community School staff  Parent Coordinator  Parent Association   Support from the Learning Leaders program Support from District 9's Families Fostering Success Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA P/F Set-aside 21st Century C4E 2018-19 SCEP-P 37  X Title I 1003(a) X Title III PTA Funded SIG Grant School Achievement Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will be stronger communication between the school community and families which would include training, different forms of accountability, and high expectations as measured by a 5% increase of positive responses an internal parent survey. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Parent surveys will be used as the instrument of measure in order to assess progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 38  Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Program Description Directions: Expanded Learning Time activities are directly aligned to the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, Rigorous Instruction, Supportive Environment, and Strong Family and Community Ties. ELT provides enriching educational experiences that happen outside of the traditional school day and blend skill acquisition, relationship-building and fun to foster academic and social-emotional growth. Summer learning, afterschool programming, and extended-day ELT models, when well-implemented, play a critical role in supporting students in all grades and ensuring that they graduate from high school, college and career ready. SED requires that Priority schools offer a minimum of 200 additional student contact hours as Expanded Learning Time in addition to the current mandated length of 900 hours of instruction per year (25 hours per week) in grades K-6 and 990 hours of instruction per year (27.5 hours per week) in grades 7-12. Effective ELT models will blend school staff with community partners, and will provide a balanced curriculum that can include ELA, Math, STEM, arts, physical activity, and leadership development. Complete the sections on this page to demonstrate how the school will meet these requirements. Part 1 – ELT Program Goal(s) Describe the summative goal(s) of the ELT program for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. By June 2019, at least 50% of the students, including ELLs and SWDs, will engage in extra-curricular activities to address critical thinking and problem-solving skills as measured by a 5% increase on the end-of-year assessment in ELA and mathematics for K-5. Part 2 – ELT Program Type Is the ELT program voluntary or compulsory? X Voluntary Compulsory If the ELT program is voluntary, indicate how you will actively encourage the participation of all students, with the goal of serving at least 50% of students. The ELT program will be advertised to parents and students via the school calendar and on SchoolCnxt. It will also be advertised via fliers that will be distributed for home delivery and created into posters to be posted around high traffic areas inside and outside the school building. Teachers will be informed about the educational opportunities being offered and will have the chance to nominate students if they have not already agreed to participate within an activity. Part 3 – ELT Program Description The ELT program will be offered to all students eligible for Academic Intervention Services (AIS), with the goal of serving a minimum of fifty percent of AIS-eligible students. Describe how the school will meet the following SED requirements for an ELT program in a Priority School:  Integrate academics, enrichment, and skill development through hands-on experiences that make learning relevant and engaging.  Offer a range of activities that capture student interest and strengthen student engagement in learning so as to promote higher attendance, reduce risk for retention or drop out, and increase the likelihood of graduation.  Actively address the unique learning needs and interests of all types of students, especially those who may benefit from approaches and experiences not offered in the traditional classroom setting.  Contain components designed to improve student academic, social, and emotional outcomes, including opportunities for enrichment programs such as in music and art.  Ensure instruction in any core academic subject offered in the program will be delivered under the supervision of a teacher who is NYS certified in that particular content area.  Engage in outreach activities made to families. The ELT Program will include activities taking place during the school day, before and after school, and on weekends. 2018-19 SCEP-P 39  During the school day, a lunchtime enrichment component will be implemented. These day school offerings will include art, dance, chess and other board games, sports and fitness. These offerings will be conducted by the Community School Activity Specialists, with support from the School Aides. The after school components will include:  Activities, clubs and teams conducted by school staff and administration, Community School Activity Specialists, and Community Based Organizations. These offerings will include arts and crafts, dance, basketball, soccer, a step team, robotics, graphic design, book clubs, creative writing, a student newsletter, student government, chorus and the school band. o Culminating events will be organized, preparation for which will be a goal of all visual and performing arts activities.  The DYCD-funded, COMPASS program, directed by a Community Based Organization. This program will offer homework help, enrichment lessons in literacy, math and science, sports and fitness clubs, step team, and community and character building circles. Part 4 – ELT Program Implementation and Oversight Part 4a. Who will implement the ELT program? Who will oversee the program? 1. Indicate the key personnel that will be responsible for implementing and overseeing the ELT program, including school-based staff and any high-quality community partners that will be involved. If applicable, describe the scope of involvement of all community partners and how the joint ELT program is structured. 2. 3. Explain how you will evaluate the program to assess impact on student achievement. The Administration and the Community Schools Director are responsible for the implementation and oversight of the ELT program. Instructional staff and activity specialists will be used to coordinate individual activities. Our CBO, SCAN-NY, is responsible for implementing the activities. SCAN-NY Community School Programming will be responsible for activities conducted during lunch. SCAN-NY's COMPASS program will engage some of the students after-school. The rest of the population will receive instruction from the instr4uctional staff after normal school hours. Most of the activities within the ELT program are project-based. In addition to examining the academic and socio-emotional data, the effectiveness and quality of the project will be based on a rubric created by the person conducting the activity and based on evaluation forms completed by members of the school community. Part 4b. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. September 2017    Inform faculty and staff of the new ELT requirement. Provide an opportunity for members to volunteer to work during this time. Inform students and families of the new ELT offering. Provide an opportunity for students to register for the activities. Implement the lunch-time enrichment component of the program no later than the third week of school (the week of September 19th). October 2018 - February 2019  Implement the after-school and weekend components of the program no later than the third full week of school (the week of October 17th). 2018-19 SCEP-P 40   Execute the program, providing frequent support and feedback from the Administration, Community School Director, and her team.  Community-Based Organizations will report directly to the Principal and the Community School Director on a monthly basis during the Partnership Meetings.  Administration & Community School Director will provide an update on a monthly basis during the SLT Meetings. February 2019  Determine if the ELT program has meet its mid-point benchmark goal.   If the program has met the goal, continue to strength the program that already exists. If the program has not met the goal, revise the goal and/or the program in order to meet the end of year goal. March 2019 - June 2019  Execute the program, providing frequent support and feedback from the Administration, Community School Director, and her team.  Community-Based Organizations will report directly to the Principal and the Community School Director on a monthly basis during the Partnership Meetings.  Administration & Community School Director will provide an update on a monthly basis during the SLT Meetings. June 2019  Determine if the ELT program has meet its end of the year goal.   If the program has met the goal, continue to strength the program that already exists for next year. If the program has not met the goal, revise the goal and/or the program in order to develop a new goal for next year. Part 5 – ELT Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the ELT program. SCAN-NY after-school staffing and budget   Community School staffing and budget    Professional learning on how to integrate subject matter and best practices in instruction Scheduling of activities and reserving spaces for activities (e.g. gyms, computer labs, classrooms) Supplies to execute the activities Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support the ELT Program. Note: If the program is funded by 21st Century Community Center Learning Funds, it must be offered in conjunction with a high quality, high capacity community partner. 21st Century Title I 1003(a) Tax Levy Title III Title I SWP PTA Funded Title I TA SIG Grant P/F Set-aside C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 6 – ELT Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 2018-19 SCEP-P 41  By the mid-point benchmark review, at least 50% of students, including ELLs and SWDs, will engage in extra-curricular activities to address critical thinking and problem-solving skills as measured by a 2.5% increase on the middle-of-year assessment for grades K-5. Part 6b. Indicate the instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Middle-of-Year Assessment in ELA and Mathematics Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 42  Section 7: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) students scoring below the median scaled score of a level 2 andlevel 3whose proficiency rating rounds up to a 3.0 Studentsscoring below the median scaled score of a level 2 and level 3 whose proficiency rating rounds up to a 3.0 4th grade students who achieve level 1 on classroom assessments by the end of each marking period Students who achieve level 1 on classroom assessments by the end of each marking period Chronic Absences; Achieving level 1 on classroom assessments/ state exam Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) i-Ready i-Ready One-to-one tutoring via computer program During the school day and after One-to-one tutoring via computer program During the school day and after Hands-on activities in the Biodiversity Lab Small group instruction During the school day and after Close readings and interactive writings Small group instruction During the school day and after During the school day Those with chronic absences receive an attendance mentor; All other cases are brought to the attention of the Response to Intervention Team Small group and one-to-one activities; Conferencing with the classroom teacher in order to plan next steps for the student 2018-19 SCEP-P 43  Section 8: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 15 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Students who are members of the STH population receive free uniforms and school supplies. The STH population also receives counseling once they are flagged in ATS. They are monitored closely to see if they need academic tutoring. If a need is detected, STH receive priority in receiving services. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). Not applicable. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 SCEP-P 44  Not applicable. 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. Not applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 45  Section 9: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). This year, the professional learning plan consists of cyclical workshops targeting horizontal (grade-level) and vertical (K-2, 3-5, dual language, educational assistants, and special education) teams. Data from instructional rounds, school-wide assessments, teacher observations, and teacher surveys will determine the professional learning offered. The UFT Teacher Center Instructional coach will meet with the conduct workshops with some opportunities for CTLE credit for the teachers and paraprofessionals. The Professional Development Team will also create a document explaining the expectations of high quality professional development. Some of the expectations will include a learner's packet and opportunities to practice the skill(s) acquired during the session. The expectations will be shared with the presenters who enter the building. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A 2018-19 SCEP-P 46  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). In May, various community-based organizations (CBOs) and child care companies schedule group tours to observe the kindergarten program. Pre-kindergarten students and teachers also have a question and answer session to clarify any concerns. Parents are also invited to come and meet the Kindergarten teachers during individual tours of the school. At the end of the school year, Kindergarten teachers provide an orientation for new parents where they explain the curricula and the expectations for the grade. There is also another parent orientation provided in August. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. The MoSL Team was developed as a collaborative effort between the principal and the UFT Teacher Representative. The UFT Teacher Representative choose3 teachers and the principal selected 2 assistant principals and 2 teachers. The team followed NYC’s suggestion to use the NYC Performance Tasks for the MoSL. Each member facilitated professional learning workshops on how to administer, norm, and score the assessment. After students completed the exam, teachers met on grade level teams in order to norm the assessments. They marked the MoSL independently. Once the assessment data was visible on Schoolnet, the data specialist conducted a workshop on how to access the data from the MoSL, including how the class performed compared to the network and the city. Teachers were also able to view the students’ performance for each strand. With assistance from the data specialist, teachers will interpret the data and develop next steps accordingly. This includes adjusting the pacing, lessons, and assignments based on the needs demonstrated. Grade-level meetings allow educators on the same grade to discuss how and when they will measure student learning. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (SCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) 2018-19 SCEP-P 47  Title I Part A (Basic) Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Local $610,288 $16,979 $100,782 $142,608 0 $12,366 $4,292,379 X X X X X X 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E 5A 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E 5A, 5C, 5E .5A, 5B,5C, 5D, 5E 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/SCEP. 2018-19 SCEP-P 48   Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 SCEP-P 49  Section 10: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. CS 55X, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. C.S.055X: The Benjamin Franklin School will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 SCEP-P 50  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, School Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 2018-19 SCEP-P 51  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) CS 55X, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 2018-19 SCEP-P 52  improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 2018-19 SCEP-P 53  ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; 2018-19 SCEP-P 54  II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; 2018-19 SCEP-P 55  ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 SCEP-P 56  Addendum: Community School Partnerships Directions: The Community School (CS) strategy is directly aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. Community Schools bring schools and community partners together and integrate academics, health, youth development, and family engagement to provide students with the tools and opportunities they need to succeed. The Core Services in Community Schools are Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness. Part 1 – Community School Partnerships Goal(s) How is the CS strategy integrated into academic instruction at your school, and what impact has it had on student academic outcomes? The CS Director who is funded through the Community School partnership works with Assistant Principals to identify students at-risk students and organizes additional support for them during the after school program. Indicate the summative goal(s) of the Community School for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. 1. Increase attendance by 3% (from 92% - 95%) 1. Continue utilizing the Success Mentor Model 2. Send progress report/data home every month to the guardian of each chronically absent student Implement a consistent reward system for timeliness and presence in addition to the End of Year 3. Attendance Celebration 2. Increase family engagement and involvement by 50% 1. Create at least 1 event per month specifically catered to involving parents and families with CS 55 3. Ensure that families are knowledgeable about mental health counseling (Astor Services) Astor Services Orientation - September & February Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Community School Annual Goal(s): How will achieving your Community School Goal(s)--in Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness--support your academic goals for students? By providing consistent support through phone calls, progress report data, and reward systems, families will better understand the necessity of their child’s presence in school every day. Higher attendance leads to more days of learning, which in turn will develop into better state exam scores and higher confidence levels in our students of their own academic achievements and successes. Part 2 – Community School Partnerships Core Services Action Plan Part 2a. Identify the Community-based Organization (CBO) partnerships that you will develop in ELT, Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness, their target student population(s), and scope of the services provided. As well as supporting schools’ supportive environment and attendance work, CBOs should be helping to support your school’s instructional focus. CBO Partnership Astor Services Target Population Scope of Service SY18-19 SMART Goal 12 students- 6 from grades K-2, and 6 from grades 3-5 Mental health and counseling support Astor Services will provide 1:1 counseling services for at least 12 students, consisting of a minimum of 2-3 days present in CS 55 each week. 2018-19 SCEP-P 57  Community School Student Population Asphalt Green Student Population Physical activity and recess support. Montefiore SCAN NY Community and School Population Medical, dental, and mental health support. Student Population Afterschool program and homework help. In September of 2018, success mentors will implement a daily check-in system with identified students and create a reward opportunity for weekly goals met. By June of 2019, 85% of chronically absent students will reach 88% or greater of total days present. Asphalt Green will be present at CS 55 at least once a week with a lead coach and instruct organized play with at least 3 classes. At least 1 SCAN Counselor and Lunch Aide will participate in every offered Professional Development workshop hosted by Asphalt Green. By October 2018, at least 95% of CS 55 should be registered to receive services. Enroll 150 students into SCAN Program by October 2018. Maintain partnership with Renaissance and POPS for Music Wonder Wednesday Program. Part 3 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 3a. Indicate resources your Community Partnership will leverage to achieve your summative SMART goal(s) and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Part 3b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 2018-19 SCEP-P 58  Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 3c. Describe how the school will partner with the Lead CBO to do the following: 1. Community Schools are expected to partner with a community-based partner organization (CBO) and together with members of the School Leadership Team, hire a Community School Director. The Director will lead implementation of the asset and needs assessment process, and other critically important coordinating activities. Indicate how you will leverage this aspect of the work. Community Schools are expected to personalize the needs of all students, through strategic programming and services, as determined by the asset and needs assessment, and must also offer Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and mental health programming. In completing this section, ensure that you think about how: (1) the right services are provided to the right students and families at the right time; and (2) how you will seamlessly coordinate services with instructional programming happening throughout and outside of the school day. Indicate how you will implement this work, and describe other programming you anticipate to be in place to strengthen this initiative. Community Schools are expected to emerge as Partnership Schools, which are places where parents and families feel welcome, actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. Monthly meetings and Community School Forums engaging families and community stakeholders will be a critical part of this family engagement strategy. Describe how you will implement this aspect of the work. Community School Principals are expected to meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. Data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter - and training will be available for schools to use. Indicate how you will implement this aspect of the work.  The CSD is hired for the 2018-2019 school year and will maintain bi-weekly meetings with the CBO (SCAN) to ensure all aspects of the Community School Initiative are met, achieved, and succeeding.  CS 55 will continue to utilize the New Vision data sorter to track and report progress of services implemented.  The leadership team, administration, and the CSD will continue to meet on a weekly basis to plan and improve parent engagement activities throughout the academic year. The CSD will work closely with the Parent Coordinator to reach out more frequently to parents and guardians for feedback and participation.  The principal, assistant principals, CSD, and leadership team will continue to meet on a weekly basis. Weekly attendance meetings will continue to occur with both the CSD and principal present at every meeting. Attendance data will be printed and available to every success mentor at the start of each meeting. 2. 3. 4. Part 4 – Community School Partnerships Oversight Part 4a. Key Staff and Partners 1. Name and describe the scope of involvement of all community partners working in the school (include partners supporting ELT, counseling, enrichment, etc.) 2. Name the members of your Community School Team and how meetings will be organized and structured to engage all stakeholders and be focused on results. 3. Explain data strategies including the use of the data sorter, and steps that the school will take to ensure that the appropriate interventions are provided to the right students  Principal   Assistant Principals Leadership Team 2018-19 SCEP-P 59   Parent Coordinator   Math Coach   Community School Director  School Counselors Literacy Coach SCAN  Schedule Adjustments o Teachers o Paraprofessionals o Lunch Aides  Asphalt Green  Montefiore  Success Mentors Part 4b. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the Community School program. Part 4c. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. Community School services begin July 5, 2018 and end June 30, 2019. Part 4d. Mental Health Work Plan Separate from this S/CEP, schools will complete a Mental Health Work Plan that will become an addendum to this document. 2018-19 SCEP-P 60  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 SCEP-P 61  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: An ENL Program for students will be implemented to meet the needs of our ENL students and Immigrant students. This program will implement Getting Ready for the NYSESLAT. This program includes instructional material that's designed to measure the linguistic demands of ENL students . In addition the program includes instruction for all five progressions Entering, Emerging, Transitioning, and Expanding, and Commanding. In addition, teachers will also utilize iready to support the students, which include generated reports to provide data in reference to the students reading level. We will also use New York ELL material to differientiate lessons. All of the programs will be co-taught and idividually taught in the English language Program by an ESL teacher and an ELA specialist teacher. Ms. Figuerido Certified ESL Teacher , r and Ms. Otero Common Branch Liscense. A targeted group of 30 students will receive supplemental services since these are our bottom 1/3 - ELL population according to the New York State ELA Exam data and NYSESLAT RLAT data report. This group is composed of approximately 35 ELL students from each 2nd3rd, 4th, and 5th grade. Students were strategically selected using the RLAT data and are mostly Transitioning and Expanding. The expectation is that these students will become Commanding in English as assessed by the NYSESLAT Exam through intense, explicit supplemental instruction. Parents will receive consent notices indicating th e purpose of the program and the duration.The English Language Afterschool Program is to commence in October 2018 and continue through May 2019 contingent upon funding. The program will be held afterschool on Thursday's for two hours from 2:30 - 4:30pm and Fridays for 2 hours (2:30-4:30). We will supplement the program with additional funds. During the entire duration of the program, Ms. Simmons the ENL Coordinator will maitain all paperwork for each program which include student attendance, all assessment that are given, and the data generated for the students. Any parent notifications given , will be provided by our Parent Coordinator , Ms. Falu. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: All professional development is provided through Monday Professional Time and the ENL department of the BFSC. This includes weekly workshops targeting ENL support and 2018-19 SCEP-P 62  Part C: Professional Development compliance. Also, professional development specifically for the Dual Language classes. We also receive support and professional development from Fordham University. The topics include the following: -The structures of a dual language classroom -How to address the needs of all students -Differentiation -Using assessments to guide instruction -How to use data effectively All professional development will be conducted by CS 55 staff and Bronx Field Support Center staff. All staff will participate in the professional learning opportunities. Additionally we have the support of Fordham University. Attendance and agendas will be kept on file. Translation services will be provided by school staff who speak the languages represented in the school community. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Based on neighborhood demographics, there are at least 50% of non English speaking parents at CS 55. The majority of the immigrant and ENL parents speak an African Dialect, while the others speak Spanish. With that in mind we have developed a parent ESL program designed to support parents in their English learning endeavors. This program will begin on Thursday January 2019 and continues on every sucessive Thursday and Friday until June 2019. Teachers for the parent ESLprogram will utilize, Practice Exercises in Basic English written by Continential. The activies in this program will address writing skills such as, Capitalization,Sentence structure, letter writing and Singular and plural words. Parents will also engage in reading passages from ReadWorks, which includes reading passages and answering questions. The majority of the passages will focus on NonFiction. Throughout the Program, activities will be differientiated to meet the needs of all parents. Both parent and student classes will be taught in English. The language immersion method will be used to encourage English language proficiency.Parents will be exposed to the English language through oral communication and reading/writing activities that will engage and excite parent’s English language development. The Parent Coordinator will conduct an out-reach to parents fostering the urgency of learning English and parental involvement. Parents will receive monthly newsletters of upcoming workshops and activities in the school. Parents will be included in student assemblies and performances. The Parent Coordinator will conduct an out-reach to parents fostering the urgency of learning English and parental involvement. Parents will receive monthly newsletters of upcoming workshops and activities in the school. Parents will be included in student assemblies and performances. 2018-19 SCEP-P 63 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. NA Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) NA  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA 2018-19 SCEP-P 64  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 9 School Name Community School 55 Borough Bronx School Number 055 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Luis Torres Coach Vanessa Veerasammy ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Solange Figueiredo Teacher/Subject Area Vacancy Teacher/Subject Area Salcedo-1 st grade Related-Service Provider Esther Lezama Superintendent Leticia Rosario Assistant Principal Marilyn Simmons Coach Maria Santiago School Counselor Esther Guzman Parent Jeffrey Haywood Parent Coordinator Maribel Falu Field Support Center Staff Member TBD Other (Name and Title) TBD C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 1 2 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 644 2018-19 SCEP-P 65 Total number of ELLs 77 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 11.96%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Yes NoFreestanding ENL Yes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): English & Spanish Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 2 Spanish 4 0 3 0 2013-14 0 1 1 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 1 1 0 0 5 0 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 2 0 0 2 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Community School 55 uses a variety of assessment tools to monitor student progress and inform instruction. Currently the school uses Fountas & Pinnell (Spanish and English), ELL Periodic Assessment (Grades 3-5), and the Home Language Assessment (HLA) - Spanish Performance Assessment which all assess students' level of literacy understanding. A review of current assessment data in grades K – 2 reveals that students are still struggling with some aspects of phonemic awareness and comprehension. Specifically, in the K-2 grades, students were unable to master syllable clapping, initial and final consonant, blending and segmenting. Also, students struggle with mastering certain aspects of phonics – spelling patterns, decoding and word structure. Grade-level inquiry teams focus on developing instructional practices to target these early literacy skills. The use of such data informs the teacher of the necessary aspects of literacy they need to create an instructional plan for. It is during the Balanced Literacy block, guided reading that the teachers are able to address the needs of the students and focus in on the 2018-19 SCEP-P 66  targeted areas within a small group. While using the Core Ready, teachers focus on overall student needs during their mini-lessons, with follow-up activities and use formative assessments during independent work to check for understanding, as well a summative assessment to assess objectives. The data collected has shown that our ELL studetns need support in the areas of vocabulary, decoding, and comprehension. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? AT PS 55, Ms. Santiago our Universal Literacy Coach supports the classroom teacher with planning lesson for the ENL students and the planning also includes the ENL Teacher. Also, Regina Joseph- Solomon, from the UFT Teacher Center, supports teachers with lesson planning, and small group instruction. Ms. Lezama supports Ms. Salcedo with the implementation of the whole-brain approach. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? All students are assessed using the NYC Performace Tasks for mathematics and Fountas and PInnell for literacy in English and Spanish. Students within our dual-language program, are given the HLA Assessment which assesses student's comprehension of the Spanish language. Students are also assessed with Fountas and Pinnell in English and Spanish. Fountas and Pinnell, assesses the student's reading level, concept of print, sight words, and vocabulary. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Literacy Coach support with small groups, and the ENL teacher uses the data for planning. Also, the classroom teacher utilizes the information. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Based on the number of years of instruction a student has recieved ENL service, and who scores a specific level on performance will determine the differentiated of support. Before providing the support services students are referred to the RTI Team, during this time student data is analyzed to aid in the team making decisions concerning support. After the RtI Team has received the student's work, the team will decide what supports are needed. Each student is given a case manager. The case manager will frequently monitor the student's progress to decide if the interventions are working. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Results from the NYSESLAT exam provide the data for the ENL teacher to group students. NYSESLAT data is shared wtih teachers and our ENL teacher to provide detailed areas of need. The ENL and dual language teachers also receive information from the ELL Data Analysis Tool to get a better understanding of how their students fair in the various modalities. Once the areas of need are identified, small group work is implemented to support students with small group work or individualized work. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? In September when teachers return to school, All teachers are provided with the ENL data and discussions occur that will help structure support for students. Part IV: ELL Programming 2018-19 SCEP-P 67  Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Instruction is delivered through the stand-alone and integrated models. Students are grouped per grade and proficiency levels. They are grouped in a small setting (8-10 students) and are taken to a separate location for instruction. We also use the push-in model, in which we collaborate with the classroom teacher and teach a component of the Balanced Literacy Model, using ELL strategies. The program model we use depends on the proficiency levels. For the entering students, we group them according to grades (homogeneous) and focus in on developing their oral and academic skills. At times, depending on the capacity that the students have demonstrated, we may group them heterogeneously with the other proficiency levels (Emerging, Transitioning, Expanding, and Commanding) from the same grade. This will allow us to not only focus in on the skills they need to acquire, but also support the classroom teacher with the curriculum they are teaching. This promotes collaboration and continuity. In addition the ENL teacher co-teaches with the classroom teacher for two periods a week in another content area other than literacy. b. TBE program. If applicable. Not Applicable c. DL program. If applicable. The Dual Language Program utilizes the 50/50 model. We have 2 DL classes, K-1. The students receive instruction in the alternate language (Spanish) through the content area. This is scaffolded through the use of ELL strategies, such as QTEL (Quality Teaching for ELL), graphic organizers, visuals, etc. Our curriculum Core Ready has ENL strategies embedded as well. Teachers monitor the progress in both English and Spanish using Estrellita and the Spanish Fountas and Pinnell literacy kit. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? In order to ensure that the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided, we prepare our schedules and articulate with our teachers regarding the mandated minutes during the week, according to their proficiency levels. We try to work with the teachers by arranging to pick up the students during literacy, preps, common planning, etc. The cluster teachers are also asked to use visuals, graphic organizers and the use of projects that will enhance learning and develop their oral and content skills. If the ENL teacher has an advanced class, the students are only required to be serviced 4/wk for 45 minutes. The ENL teacher pulls out the entering and emerging students for (8) 45 minute sessions. There is also Integrated ENL where the ENL teacher co-teaches with the classroom teacher in a content area twice a week. The students will then have the allotted structured support in their native language. During the ENL component, the students that may be in the beginning levels (Entering/Emerging) could be asked to write in their native language, if they want. They could be paired with a student that is more proficient to assist them with the writing, or their work could be shared with someone who can translate it for them. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. The content areas are delivered by the classroom teacher and supported by the ENL Teacher. Literacy and ENL are given in English by the classroom teacher. Teachers use graphic organizers, visuals project-based learning, Core Ready Curriculum and the four modalites. 2018-19 SCEP-P 68  4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? To ensure that ELL's are appropriately evaluated in their native language, we use the Spanish Fountas and Pinnell and the Estrellita assessments to evaluate the ELLs. For the English assessments, we use Fountas & Pinnell, running records in English and guided reading. We also use the ELL Periodic assessments. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a) At this time, we so not have any SIFE students. However, if we did we would adjust the needs of SIFE students by selecting materials that will scaffold the text, such as audio and visuals. Teachers use TPR, graphic organizers and peer partners. They use content materials that are familiar and can tap into their prior knowledge. b) Newcomers are given extra visual support through activities and materials. We also use a program called, English Now that consists of verbal commands and the use of TPR to scaffold their language development. c) For ELL's that are receiving service for 4 to 6 years, we use small group intervention in guided reading/writing. The students are placed in flexible grouping that allows them to move up in levels, as they master a new skill. We use the Balanced Literacy Model for Reading and Writing and also use the MyOn reading program to give them extra support in comprehension and test-taking strategies. Fundations a targeted intervention program is also utilized to strengthen students knowledge of letters and sounds. We also collaborate and communicate with special service providers regarding the students' needs, so they could get the extra support needed. d) For long-term ELL's, we use the same methods described above, with extra AIS intervention and refer them to afterschool programs and Saturday Academy. We also use the data from the NYSESLAT to help us develop an action plan suited to the individual needs of the students. This would help us strengthen those areas that they are struggling in. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? We use the CIT (Collaborative Instructional Team) model for ELL-SWDs, also self-contained and SETTS providers, and they communicate with each other so the schedules do not overlap. The school ensures that the ELL-SWDs receive the appropriate program by having a parent/student interview with the IEP Team. Once the team meets with the parents, they discuss whether the student needs speech, hearing, vision and the required services they are mandated to receive. Then the students are placed in the least restrictive environment. Also, in order to provide access to academic content and accelerate English language development for ELL-SWDs, we use the programs, Getting Ready for the NYSESLAT and English Now. The instructional strategies we use are visuals, graphic organizers, balanced literacy, listening centers and technology, such as, overhead projectors, Internet and smart boards. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? The school ensures that the ELL-SWDs receive the appropriate program by having a parent/student interview with the IEP Team. Once the team meets with the parents, they discuss whether the student needs speech, hearing, vision and the required services they are mandated to receive. Then the students are placed in the least restrictive environment. They either are placed in either an English classroom, with pullout ENL services or for the bilingual students Based on the IEP, the school is able to provide the appropriate classroom setting for the student. Also, in order to provide access to academic content and accelerate English language development for ELL-SWDs, we use the programs, Getting Ready for the NYSESLAT and English Now. The instructional strategies we use are visuals, graphic organizers, balanced literacy, listening centers and technology, such as, overhead projectors, Internet and smart boards. 2018-19 SCEP-P 69  8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Our targeted intervention program for ENLs in ELA, math and other content areas are supported during the AIS portion of the day. Throughout the day, the school has AIS clusters, coaches and other pedagogical staff that supports the students that are at risk or Level 1. The school is working together to target those struggling students and give them small group instruction. The teachers work on an individualized group plan that will help move the students forward. Small group intervention in ELA, peer tutoring, visuals and graphic organizers are used to scaffold the students' knowledge in science and social studies. We use various programs for the ELL students that are at different proficiency levels. For example, for the entering and emerging students, we use computer programs, such as Starfall and Tumblebooks. These technology programs use visuals and audio in order to assist the students with both oral and cognitive abilities. The students learn how to pronounce words and use visual cues to help them connect the initial letters that relate to the pictures. The teachers have small group intervention for guided reading during Balanced Literacy. For both the transitioning and expanding students, the teachers group them according to their reading levels and focus on questioning skills, strategies and organizers to help build comprehension. For math, the beginners are also placed according to ability. The use of glossaries, reference books and textbooks are given in the native language. Students are also grouped heterogeneously, in order to build autonomy in the classroom, as there is a leader in the group that will guide and instruct the struggling student in his/her appointed tasks. They also are given manipulatives, charts and visuals to help scaffold their learning. For the transitioning and expanding students, they have a choice as to what language they want to do their mathematics problems, or what language they want to take the test in. Giving them the choice gives them the confidence and allows them to communicate their thinking and learning more effectively. Especially, when they have to write short responses in the mathematics portion of the NYS Mathematics Test. For the other content areas, we use basically the same concept across the proficiency levels. Students also have the option to select the textbooks in either their native language, in English or both. Teachers scaffold the students with lots of visuals, labeling pictures, using primary source documents, technology, videos and provide flexible grouping/peer grouping to assist the students with language and ability. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? At Community School 55, we will hire another ENL Teacher. This will enable each teacher to support when needed form lower grade and upper grade students. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? We are not closing any programs this SY 2018-19. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs have equal access to all school programs: There is an after-school ELL Academy, in which they use practice books from the program "Getting Ready for the NYSESLAT" and also practice test-taking strategies for ELA by using the program. The parent coordinator sends each student a flyer and booklet describing all the programs that the school offers. She sends them the information both, in English and Spanish. Then the parents are asked to fill out an application with the code of the program they have selected for their child. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. The instructional materials used to support ELLs are: leveled libraries in Spanish/English, reader's theatre, listening CDs, the use of technology programs, that includes leveled reading in English and is supported by visuals, such as Starfall.com, Tumblebooks, and Spanish glossaries for math. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? In our Dual Language classroom, the native language support is delivered through the math, science and social studies periods. We use books in both Spanish/English to assist the students with comprehension. Reference books in both languages 2018-19 SCEP-P 70  are also used. These include glossaries that assist the students with challenging vocabulary. We also peer more advanced students with beginners so that they could help them with concepts, language and vocabulary. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Required services support use grade-level materials for student's appropriate ages and grade levels. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? We share the building with Success Academy but they do not share resources. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). We will have plan student orientation to help the students with a smooth transition to our school. Also presenting an overview of the curriculum for students and parents. We will also include a walk through of our school and buddying them with someone who knows and speaks their language. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? None are offered at this time. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? a. We have the self-contained model in our school. The instructional day is divided into 50/50%. b. Each core content subject is taught equally but divided by days. c. Language is separated for instruction in the following way: Monday's and Tuesday's all content is taught in English and Wednesday's and Thursday's all content is taught in Spanish. On Friday's the day is split into both English and Spanish. d. Both languages are taught simultaneously. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Teacher's will receive professional development on Monday afternoons and will have a choice of 3-4 PD sessions to choose from, one of which will be towards teachers of ELLs. In addition, their will a common planning period specific to teacher of ELLs where they will also receive PD. Teacher's will be responsible for attending the available PDs and keeping records of these in order to meet the required total hours in a school year. Some professional development topics will be regarding the new NYS changes in CR Part 154, how to use the targets of measure (TOMs), stratgies that will engage students in learning through various learning styles, techniques to assist students in 2018-19 SCEP-P 71  acquiring language development, lesson planning that incorporates the four modalites, preparaing for the NYSESLAT, and analyzing assessment data. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. As the end of the school year draws near, we prepare staff that work with ELLs to have conversations with the students explaining to students the challenges they may encounter and whom they can reach out to if they encounter an obstacle. In order to meet the professional development requirements, all teachers will have the option of attending a PD pertaining to ELL instruction or other every Monday afternoon. This will ensure that they receive the required approximate 17.5 hours (50%) of professional development throughout the school year. Teachers of ELLs will have mandated PD meetings during ELL common planning time once a week to ensure they are receiving the required 7 hours (15%) of PD hours per school year. The ELL coordinator will keep copies of agendas, sign-in sheets, and copies of materials discussed or used in a binder. Individual teachers will also be responsible for maintaining records of the PDs they attend as well. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? In August 2018 we will host a parent orientation, so that parent will be able to ask questions, and understand the instruction that their child will receive. The school will make 15 minutes appointment with parents during teacher prep times that can cover 3 parents in one period. Also, during parent outreach time as per UFT contact. As teachers prepare to make appointments via phone or in writing, they will take into account the language needs and inform their supervisor of such need. Interpretation and translation arrangements will be made prior to meeting. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Our school offers many opportunities for parents to be involved. •We provide monthly newsletters informing parents of upcoming activities in the school. • Student assemblies and performances; • NYSESLAT information regarding home assistance • Informational meetings for parents of students in Grades 3 – 5 regarding promotional criteria; • Outreach programs run by the school’s Parent Coordinator; • Parental Involvement on the School Leadership Team; • Learning Leader Parent Volunteer Program Also, parents are provided with information regarding the State ELA and Math test. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 SCEP-P 72  2018-19 SCEP-P 73 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Luis Torres, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 SCEP-P 74  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Community School 55 School DBN: 09X055 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Mr. Luis Torres Title Principal MS. Marilyn Simmons Assistant Principal MS. Maribel Falu Parent Coordinator Ms. Solange Figueiredo ENL/Bilingual Teacher Ms. Ebony White Parent Ms. Jhoselyn Salcedo Teacher/Subject Area Vacancy Teacher/Subject Area Ms. Maria Santiago Coach Ms. Vanessa Veerasammy Coach Ms. Esther Guzman School Counselor Ms. Leticia Rosario TBD NA 6/18 6/18 Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 6/18 6/18 6/18 6/18 6/18 6/18 6/18 6/18 6/18 6/18 6/18 6/18 2018-19 SCEP-P 75  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 09x055 School Name: C.E.S. 55 Superintendent: Ms. L. Rosario The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Marilyn Solange George Simmons Figuieredo Martinek Assistant Principal ENL Teacher Assistant Principal Yes Yes No Yes Yes No * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Community School 55 determines the primary language that is spoken at home during our intake process at registration. Parents are given the following information at this time: the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS), which identifies the dominant language that is spoken at home and that is used predominantly with the students, the parent survey that requests what language they would like to receive correspondence, a blue emergency contact card, that includes health and contact information and the Parent/Guardian Student Ethnic Identification Form (PSE). These forms and surveys clearly identify the languages spoken at home and our subsequent translation needs. This information is entered in our ATS to ensure that our parental translation needs are fulfilled and language preference is honored for all written and oral communication. Other data and methodologies that we use to assess the translation and oral interpretation needs are: the Language and Allocation Policy, which contains a breakdown of ELLs by grade, language and program selection, the Place of 2018-19 SCEP-P 76  Birth report (RPOB), this includes our newly-arrived immigrant population and place of origin, parent orientations and PTA meetings. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral English Spanish French Soninke . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Soninke Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Parent Newsletter All Year Parent Letters All Year Parent Handbook September Legal Documents (Registration) September Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. In-house staff will translate and it will be posted on CNXT. The CNXT app will translate the document into Spanish and Soninke. In-house staff will translate and it will be posted on CNXT. We also invited parents to come to the school for support. The handbook is translated into Spanish by school staff. The documents are translated into Spanish by the Department of Education. We also provide on-site support for Spanish and Soninke speakers. 2018-19 SCEP-P 77  2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Parent-Teacher Conferences Four times a year Tuesday Parent Engagement Meetings Every Tuesday IEP Meetings Throughout the year Registration Throughout the year interpretation service(s)? We use the Translation Unit, as well as, in-house staff. We have staff trained to translate both in English and Soninke. When necessary we will use the Translation Unit. We have both a monolingual and bi-lingual psychologist. We also use in-house staff to support. Our ENL teacher and other staff provide support. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. We have various ways to contact parents. Our CNXT app translates to both Spanish and Soninke. Parents will download this app free of charge and be able to access all communication in their language. This provides us with instant access to the parents. We also have all the phone numbers on file, and have staff who are able to translate. Finally, our school messenger program also has the capabilities to contact parents instantly. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. We will provide a professional development focused on meeting the needs of our English Language Learners. This workshop will take place on a Monday and during professional learning community time. All staff will learn about Chancellor' Regulation A-663 and receive a copy of the document. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) 2018-19 SCEP-P 78  We inform parents through written and verbal notification of their translation and interpretation rights at meetings, workshops, and school events. There will also be a guide in the main office that parents can access. The parent coordinator also provides parents with information about translation services, and their is poster outside the main office with information. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? During "Curriculum Night" and "Community School Forums," parents are provided with an initial survey asking them about their needs and services that can be rendered to them as needed. In March, another survey is also sent to parents that includes questions regarding the quality of services provided when needed. We also interview parents when they register in our school, as well as, during parent teacher conferences. 2018-19 SCEP-P 79 
