 12X061 School Name: P.S. 061 FRANCISCO OLLER Principal: MARJORIE CUTLER-SANCHEZ 2018-19 SCEP-FF 1  School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Section 4: SCEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 SCEP-FF 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Francisco Oller School CS 61 12X061 321200010061 Pre-K through 5 School Number (DBN): 1550 Crotona Park East, Bronx, NY 10460 (718) 542-7230 Phone Number: (718) 589-7361 Fax: Marjorie Sanchez MSanchez11@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): Email Address: Marjorie Sanchez Jackie Murphy Reyna Hernandez Wanda Johnson n/a N/A Maria Panora, Director, IA CBO Representative: District Information Geographical District: 12 Jacqueline Rosado Superintendent: 1970 West Farms Road, Bronx, NY 10460 Superintendent’s Office Address: Jrosado3@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: (718) 328-2310 Phone Number: Fax: FSC: Bronx Field Support Center (FSC) Executive Director: Nancy Saffer 2018-19 SCEP-FF 3  Executive Director’s Office Address: 1 FordhamPlaza, Bronx, NY 10458 NSaffer@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: (718) 828-5643 Phone Number: 718-828-6280 Fax: 2018-19 SCEP-FF 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the SCEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) MarjorieSanchez Jackie Murphy Reyna Hernandez n/a n/a n/a n/a Maria Panora KarinaHernandez Adriana Sosa MarinaEchavarria *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent 2018-19 SCEP-FF 5  Name JosefaGallardo Wanda Johnson Marcelline Jackson MarisolRodriguez Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Chairperson/Para Rep Member/ Secretary/Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 SCEP-FF 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) is a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. The process of developing and implementing the SCEP is aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding SCEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and informed by New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and SCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a 2018-19 SCEP-FF 7  comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality 2018-19 SCEP-FF 8  Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the SCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the SCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for SCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 9   Step 4: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 5: Build consensus around activities, strategies and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 6: Implement at least one USDE Turnaround Principle (e.g., redesign the school day, week, or year; modify the instructional program to ensure it is Evidence-based, rigorous, and aligned with State academic content standards; provide time for collaboration on the use of) beginning no later than the 2018-19 school year.  Step 7: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 8: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 10  1. What is your school’s mission statement? Vision: Section 4: SCEP Overview At CS 61, we envision creating a supportive, nurturing environment, where students work towards becoming lifelong learners on their journey toward attaining College and Career Readiness. Mission: To achieve our vision, we support our students in learning how to think critically as readers, writers, and mathematicians, thus inspiring them to become productive members of the learning community as they develop into future leaders. Theory of Action: If the school provides teachers and staff with authentic cyclical learning opportunities focused on enhancing literacy skills and mathematical thinking, students’ intellectual engagement and academic success will increase. If staff members collaborate with families and the CBO to systematically analyze school data, and plan for the needs and goals of all learners, students will be provided support to achieve at higher levels. Instructional Focus: We believe that our students learn best through purposeful, rigorous instruction tailored to their needs and goals. Our Instructional Focus is to improve ELA skills across all grades, following a balanced approach to literacy, thus increasing academic vocabulary, and empowering students to read and write across genres. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Our school supports a diverse student body. Our demographics are: 16.73% of our students are Students with Disabilities 10.2% or our students are English Language Learners 80% of our students are Hispanic 17.5% of our students are African American/Black 4.7% of our students are homeless living in the shelter system 2018-19 SCEP-FF 11  We are a Community School with a strong partnership with our CBO, Children’s Aid. Through our CBO, we are able to provide a comprehensive after-school program for our students that includes academics, socialization and the arts. To assist students with chronic lateness we offer the 'Walking School Bus' initiative, where students who are chronically late are picked up and brought to school on a daily basis. In addition, we have Success Mentors, from our CBO, who work strategically with students and families to improve attendance, to develop greater success for our students. The 2017-2018 NYS Mathematics Standardized Tests results indicated a six percent increase from the 2016-2017 results.and English Language Arts Standardized Tests results indicated a seven percent increase from the 2016-2017 results. This data will be analyzed on a school level, grade level, and individual student level, to determine areas of success and areas for growth. As a school, we will analyze trends in the data to impact overall planning to meet the needs of our students. We have applied and were accepted as a second year Teacher's College Reading and Writing Project school for 2018/19. This work is a research based program, intended to further our development in improving planning and pedagogical skills in literacy across grades. Additionally, we will continue to work with the Bronx Field Support Center to further develop school-wide mathematical skills in The Five Practices. We are launching a new math curriculum for 2018/19, Eureka Math, which is in alignment with Engage NY and the CCLS. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Our ENL population is approximately 35 students and are provided 'free-standing' ENL services by an ENL teacher on a frequency that meets their specific needs. Teachers provide necessary scaffolds to assist students in accessing the rigorous curricula and students are also paired with peers who are able to assist with translation and peer tutoring. Our students who are in transitional housing are provided with school supplies, uniforms, and some participate in the "Walking School Bus" initiative. Students with Disabilities are provided services outlined in their IEPs, such as ICT, SETSS, Speech and Language, Occupational Therapy, and Physical Therapy, as well as counseling services. We have a full time guidance counselor and part time psychologist to work with our students who are in crisis situations, as well as preventive care sessions with groups of students, such as workshops on bullying, and social emotional learning. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Using the most recent survey data from the NYC School Survey for 2017/18, our school saw positive increases in most areas of the survey. We have made significant progress in the areas of trust and effective school leadership. This is the foundation for the work that we do as a school community and the outer circle of the Framework for Great Schools. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 12  Using trust as the crux of all work, we need to focus on the area of Rigorous Instruction. We will continue to focus on the CCLS shifts in literacy and math. We will support our teachers with professional development with our ULit coach , as well as job embedded days with our TC consultants, and support for Eureka Math. 5. Identify at least one USDE Turnaround Principle (e.g., redesign the school day, week, or year; modify the instructional program to ensure it is Evidence-based, rigorous, and aligned with State academic content standards; provide time for collaboration on the use of data) to be implemented in the 2018-19 school year. We have redesigned the school day to add in additional tutoring time for students in grades 3-5. Using our ELA test simulation data we created small leveled groups to meet for one hour before school or one hour after school to work on skills and strategies to raise the reading achievement levels of our students. We used this as a test readiness and skill development strategy, and will resume these groups in the 2018/19 school year. We are using materials from Teacher's College as well Ready Books which are designed to be aligned with the CCLS. We are using tutoring groups for math, as well, and used our simulated math data to form the student groups. Additionally, we are launching an after-school program twice a week for our ENL students with a focus on math, specifically on making sense of math academic vocabulary, problem solving and showing work. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 13  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 12X061 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 292 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 31 31 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 13 11 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 97.0% % Attendance Rate 92.5% % Reduced Lunch 11.0% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 1.0% 78.1% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 0.0% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 1.07 0% 9% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 25.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 73% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No No Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups SWD Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO N/A N/A NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 22 22 92.4% 2.7% 15.4% 19.9% 1.0% 1.0% 4 4% 7.4 20.9% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No Yes YES N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FF 14  2018-19 SCEP-FF 15  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed x X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element?  Indicate the data trends, source and year. In support of 3.2, we are continuing our implementation of the TC curriculum in alignment with the ELA CCLS. Via running records that are conducted formally four times a year, and used for our school MOSL, 99% of our students made gains in their reading levels over the course of the year. Based on this data, teachers formed reading groups throughout the year for guided reading and book clubs. To support this work we are continuing job embedded professional learning with our TC consultants, and coaching with our U-lit coach.  As a school community, we believe that assessment of student learning is an integral part of effective instruction. We gather and analyze data and plan for students, using multiple sources of summative and formative assessment data , including student work, conferencing notes, quizzes and unit tests. We use the data to make curricular adjustments and to set long and short term goals for students. To support work in 3.5, we have a school data collection system (SAMS), where teachers and administrators can review data to analyze for trends, and construct guided instructional groups. We have grown in this area, and teachers have been provided support around checks for understanding via a cycle focused on 3d of the Danielson Framework for Teaching, however it is an area for continuous growth as the analysis of data will continue to impact how we plan for our students. Thus, 3.5 remains a need for our school. Data Sources:  School Quality Review Report 2018-19 SCEP-FF 16   Principal Performance Observation Written Feedback  C.S.61x School Data System (SAMS)  ADVANCE Teacher Evaluation Data  School Proficiency Rates Data ELA/Math 2017-18 Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 30% of students will be proficient on the NYS ELA Examination (from 25% to 30%) which will result in an overall increase in the percentage of students reaching a level 3 or 4 as measured by the 2018-19 NYS ELA data. By June 2019, 26% of students will be proficient on the NYS Math Examination (from 21% to 26%) which will result in an overall increase in the percentage of students reaching a level 3 or 4 as measured by the 2018-19 NYS Math data.. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 17  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change that address one or more of the USDE Turnaround Principle(s) described in the SCEP Overview Section, if applicable. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  To help us achieve this goal we are implementing a new curriculum in math, that we began training for in June of 2018 for implementation in September 2018. Our initial training in Eureka Math was launched on June 7, 2018 to introduce the classroom teachers and out of classroom teachers to this CCLS curriculum. The goal of this implementation is to engage our students in a curriculum that is more rigorous than what we were using previously, that will better prepare them for mathematical conceptual understanding, and help them better understand the academic vocabulary of math. Our intent is that the implementation of this work will help raise the level of understanding for our students and will thus increase their levels of performance when measured on the state exam. In the fourth and fifth grades we are departmentalizing for math and ELA. The intent of this in our upper grades is to have a strong focus on these content areas where teachers' planning, and assessing is devoted to focusing on these key instructional areas. As an additional after school support we will offer a program for ENL students that focuses on math. The intent is to help our ENL students in the upper grades, gain a clearer understanding of mathematical vocabulary, math concepts and how to explain their mathematical thinking. Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) all k-5 students September 2018-June 2019 Principal, AP, classroom teachers 4-5 grade students 9/18-6/19 Principal, AP, classroom teachers ENL students gr 3-5` 10/18-5/19 Principal, ENL teacher K-5th grade will continue with year two of the implementation of Teachers College Reading and Writing Program. Staff will be supported in this work via job embedded visits with the TC consultants, workshops at Colombia University, and support of our Universal Literacy Coach. k-5 students on-going year two launch 9/18-6/19 Principal, AP, U-lit coach, teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. At CS 61 we engage families in several ways. We have several large events for all families, launching the year with our curriculum night in September, our VIP Night, where parents are introduced to the teachers, school policies, and the expectations for the year. We close the year with a final school wide State of the School address from the principal, 2018-19 SCEP-FF 18  and a family feedback forum as required by Community Schools. Additionally, we host several classes for parents, such as a GED classes, ESL classes, cooking classes, and a gardening club. To support instruction, we offered workshops on expectations for Pk and kindergarten; transitions and preparing for middle school; Home School Literacy connection; and a workshop on math in the upper grades. This upcoming year we will continue the work form 2017/18 and offer additional grade specific family workshops on math and literacy to support families in their support of their children at home. These workshops will be hosted throughout the school year. The key personnel for these are the admin team, the parent coordinator, teachers, guidance counselor, and members of our CBO. In addition to the workshops, our staff is available every Tuesday for family engagement time. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. Administrators, coaches, and teachers funded with Tax Levy, Title I SWP, C4E 2. Classroom Technology Resources funded with Tax Levy, Title I SWP 3. One common planning period per teacher per week teachers funded with funded with Tax Levy, Title I SWP, C4E + CBO/CA staff will be self-funded 4. The ENL after-school program will be funded through the Title III budget line. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding X C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 2018-19 Progress Monitoring is a continuous process at CS 61. We will continue utilizing TC running records quarterly to assess students' reading levels. This data will be used to inform instructional reading groups for targeted instruction. In math we will utilize the Eureka Math Assessments for pre/post units as well as checks for understanding throughout the unit. We will also use the 2018 state data to form tutoring groups that will fluctuate throughout the year based on on-going data. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 19 Progress is continuously assessed using TC Running Records, which was also our MOSL selection, as well as the simulated ELA and simulated math. For the simulated exams we use Ready which is aligned with the CCLS. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 20  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. SOP(s) Addressed NA NA X NA Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child?  Upon reflection, we believe that this is an area of strength for our school. Effective communication, in collaboration with our partners of 15 years, Children’s Aid, allows us to reach beyond the walls of the classroom to effectively support our students and their families.  Our ever-expanding support system allows us to harness additional resources to address the varying physical, social, emotional, economic and educational needs of our 21st Century families through other entities such as Wellness In the Schools, The 'Walking School Bus' Initiative, Fannie Lou Hammer student volunteers, Pencil.org, 4Rs Restorative Justice.  Reviewing the Parent Community School Forum feedback, collected during our final Parent night in the spring, helps us to move towards our shared vision. The data we collected during this forum helps us move towards a safer more inclusive environment for our students, staff, and families.  As a district, our school is participating in training on Restorative Justice. One cohort of staff members have already attended and several more attended over the summer to work on the program our school will engage in--The 4Rs. Later in the year, the trainers will do work with our CBO staff members. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 21  Data Sources: School surveys School Quality Review Report    Attendance Reports  Principal's Performance Observation (PPO)  C.S.61x School Data System (SAMS)   ADVANCE Teacher Evaluation Data  Learning Environment Survey Family Feedback Forum Data Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools –Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be 5% increase (from 85% to 90%) in the percent of teachers who will agree or strongly agree that our school promotes a safe, supportive environment for our students, as measured by the results of the 2019 NYC School Survey. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 22 Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Principal, Assistant Principal, Teachers, Guidance Counselor, Parent Coordinator Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? students 2018/19  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). For an evidence based instructional program in ELA we will use TC Readers and Writer's Workshop in grades k-5. In Math we will launch Eureka Math which is in alignment with Engage NY and the CCLS. We will also implement the DOE science curriculum, Amplify, and the SS DOE curriculum Passport. Additionally we are departmentalizing ELA and math instruction in fourth and fifth grades to support deeper learning of these core content areas for our students. We will support our students with IEPs by following their goals and intend to have an ICT teacher in grades second, third, and fourth, and a 12:1 4/5 bridge class. We have an ENL teacher who works with our ENL students and to ease with the grouping we are placing our ENL students per grade in the same class. Professional Development is on-going and done in cycles of work in correlation to student data, teacher MOTP data, the Danielson Framework, and the planning for implementation of the curriculum. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Through Family Engagement Tuesdays, parents and students will meet with teachers to review individual students' progress. We will offer curriculum workshops for our families to help them support their children at home. This year we offered literacy workshops on read alouds, as well as a math workshop for upper grades. We also offered 2018-19 SCEP-FF 23  transitional workshops for pk to kindergarten and fifth grade to sixth grade. Additionally in collaboration with our CBO, we have a family garden club, and several classes for parents, including: GED classes, healthy cooking, computer classes, and ESL classes. We will continue this practice in 2018/19. The families are engaged by our Parent Coordinator, administration, teachers, guidance counselor and our CBO. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Administrators, coaches, and teachers funded with Tax Levy, Title I SWP, C4E. New Teacher Mentor funded with Tax Levy Fair Student Fund, SBO/CAS staff will be self-funded. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding X C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. We will use the data that was collected at the Community School Family Forum to 1) plan out additional workshops that the families have requested; 2) create a feedback survey to use after the workshops to get feedback on the work and to check on the progress towards meeting our goals. Additionally, we will craft a brief survey in January to assess where we are in meeting the goals with our families and what we can do to support the family engagement work for the remainder of the school year. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. School -wide survey - self created Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 24  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by SOP(s) Addressed X NA NA NA using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. As a school we are continuously growing in 4.2. In the upcoming school year, we have two newly identified Teacher Leaders, who will serve as Model Teachers for our school. One is a grade two teacher and the other is grade five. These teachers will open their classrooms up for peer inter-visitations as well as work with their peers, administration, and our ULit coach in facilitation of professional learning for our team. As a school, we will continue to meet in grade level and vertical teams for unit mapping and lesson planning to meet the needs of our students. We program our schedule to allow for grade level preps at the same time several times a week. We will continue to work on developing consistency of teacher practice, both horizontally and vertically across our school by ensuring that teachers meet during common planning and maximizing their instructional support with the TC coaches, and Ulit Coach. We will also build off the professional learning cycles that we launched this year on connections between 3c and 1e. Data Sources: School Quality Review Report   Principal Performance Observation Written Feedback 2018-19 SCEP-FF 25   C.S.61x School Data System (SAMS)  ADVANCE Teacher Evaluation Data Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will leverage a collaborative professional learning community that promotes learning opportunities for all staff members which will impact student learning resulting in a 5% increase in the percentage of students at level 3 or level 4 as measured by the results of the 2019 ELA and Math exams and/or Local Measure of Student Learning. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 26 Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) 09/2018-06/2019 Principal Assistant Principals Teachers 09/2018-06/2019 Principal Assistant Principals Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change that address one or more of the USDE Turnaround Principle(s) described in the SCEP Overview Section, if applicable. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Administrators meet monthly to analyze Advance Teachers data and develop and refine professional learning communities and activities in order to make adjustments and plan differentiated learning sessions. School has secured partnership with Teacher's College Reading and Writing Project, from which teachers and admin will receive training in TC Reading and Writing. Other outside Professional Development specialists ( Bronx Field Office Support for Mathematics) to provide additional training, curriculum development, and support for teacher improvement. Professional development on Guided Reading, Conducting effective Running Records, and TC will be provided by school level ULit coach and TC coach to help teachers on all grades focus on literacy instruction and moving students forward in reading and writing. Bronx Field Support Office consultants provide professional development on Identifying priority math standards; using effective strategies to teach math strands and components and revision of Math Block with Teachers. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Families are provided a monthly calendar with all family and school wide events for the month. We will schedule sessions and workshops that support families in the support of their children. W will expand on the literacy home connection that we did this year as well as the upper grades. Our goal for 2018/19 is to offer grade specific workshop for families that address the standards and specific content areas so families will feel more equipped to support their children in their learning. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 27  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Administrators, coaches, and teachers funded with Tax Levy, Title I SWP, C4E. New Teacher Mentor funded with Tax Levy Fair Student Fund, SBO/CAS staff will be self-funded. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP X Title I TA Title I 1003(a) Title III PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding X C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. W will use the data gleaned in our Community School Forum to determine particular interests families have for school support. for example, we plan on offering a variety of math workshops for families to build off the work we did last year with our upper grade families. We will survey the participants at the conclusion of the workshops and will do a mid year survey on the progress of meeting the goals for family engagement. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. School surveys Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 28  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, SOP(s) Addressed Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve X NA NA critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2.2 has been an area for growth for our school in 2017/18. Our School Quality guide data indicated increases in the area of Effective School Leadership. Our goal is to build on the school leadership in sharing the vision and mission of the school. Throughout the year admin was transparent with the stakeholders in our goals, planning for the school and instruction and in decision making that impacts the school. In 2018/19 we want to continue making instructional progress using distributive leadership, via our two Model Teachers, NTC coach, and ULit coach as well as other teachers in the building who have exhibited strong practices that should be shared with peers. A priority for us is to continue implementation of the TC curriculum across grades, as well as implementation of the new math curriculum. We will continue to meet as grades and vertical teams, to plan and implement meaningful instruction. We will use data from the student work and assessments and ADVANCE data, as well feedback data from teachers to formulate our professional learning plan which we will implement in cycles. Data Sources:  School Quality Review Report 2018-19 SCEP-FF 29   Principals Performance Observation Written Feedback  C.S.61x School Data System (SAMS)   ADVANCE Teacher Evaluation Data Learning Environment Survey Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART– Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will reduce the number of teachers who receive an Ineffective or developing HEDI rating in areas 3b, 3c, and 3d in the ADVANCE system by 80%, therefore positively impacting student learning outcomes. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 30  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) 1. Review data with teacher teams to assess students' progress towards grade level achievement in reading levels. students grades k-5 09/2018- 06/2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, teachers, ULit coach 2. Monitor pre/post assessments for Eureka to assess for progress towards math CCLS achievement. students k-5 09/2018- 06/2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Data Specialist, teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. School will host workshops for families in alignment with supporting curriculum at home. Families will be invited to provide feedback to the school at the Community School Forum. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1 -5 Administrators, coaches, and teachers funded with Tax Levy, Title I SWP, C4E. New Teacher Mentor funded with Tax Levy Fair Student Fund 6. School Leadership team Funded with Tax Levy, Title I SWP, C4E and reimburse with Title I SWP 7. Administrators and teachers funded with Tax Levy, Title I SWP, C4E 8. Administrators, coaches, and teachers funded with Tax Levy, Title I SWP, C4E. Parent Coordinator Funded with Tax Levy Parent Coordinator Fund Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA P/F Set-aside X 21st Century X C4E 2018-19 SCEP-FF 31  Title I 1003(a) Title III PTA Funded SIG Grant School Achievement Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Our MOSL selection in ELA supports are progress monitoring for ELA throughout the year. Our teachers are trained in running records which are captured and recorded formally four times a year. The data is used to inform instructional reading groups. In mathematics, we are using the assessments for the Eureka Math Modules. Teachers also do checks for understanding in conferencing partnerships with students 1;1 and in small groups, exit tickets at the end of a lesson, quick quizzes in math to build fluency. Additionally, in upper grades we will use the Ready assessment which mirrors the CCLS state assessments as our mid-year bench mark. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. TC Running Records, Eureka math pre/post tests, Amplify Science assessments, and Ready assessments. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 32  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. SOP(s) Addressed NA NA X X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year.  Upon reflection, Tenet 6 is an area of strength for our school, building on our strong partnerships and effective communication with our families and school community.  Our school will continue to partner with parents, ensuring to keep lines of communication open via telephone conferences, scheduled teacher/parent/student meetings, emails, through the PGA and Parent Coordinator as well as through our CBO, Children’s Aid, understanding that our parents are our children’s greatest resource.  We communicate with families during the set Family Engagement time on Tuesdays. Additionally, our teachers use the program Class Dojo to keep families up to date on progress and behaviors, in addition to our three report cards and one progress report that are shared throughout the year. Data Sources: School Quality Review Report   C.S.61x School Data System (SAMS) Part 2 – Annual Goal 2018-19 SCEP-FF 33  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 parent/family engagement attendance rates will increase by 5% as measured by Parent Communication Logs, and sign in sheets from PGA (Parent Guardian Association) meetings, Family Engagement conferences, Parent Workshops, SLT meetings. and an increase in the parent survey response rate. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 34  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Parent/Teacher conferences are held during November and March, to discuss students' progress, short and long-term goals, and next steps both at school and at home in order to ensure optimal student progress. Parents 09/2018- Principal Students 06/2019 Assistant Principals In response to the feedback from our families, we will offer a variety of content specific workshops for families on how to support their children at home. We will continue to work with our CBO and offer a variety of adult learning opportunities, such as ESL classes, healthy cooking, computer classes, and GED courses. This year, our Family gardening club was a success and families continued to care for the garden during the summer months, We are expanding the flower beds in 2018/19. We are joining CookShop and will have a family component where families will come together with our PC for cooking healthy recipes and will be able to take home the ingredients to prepare the foods at home. Teachers Teachers Families 09/2018- Principal 06/2019 Assistant Principals Teachers 2018-19 SCEP-FF 35  3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Children's Aid, Bronx Zoo Partnership, CookShop for Families Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Teachers funded with Tax Levy, Title I SWP, C4E. CAS Staff self funded Parent Coordinator funded with TL Parent Coordinator Fund CBO/CAS Staff self-funded, Parent Coordinator TL Parent Coordinator fund. Twenty per session hours budgeted for the translation services - using TL Translation and Interpretation service fund. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding X C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, we will show a minimum of a 5% increase of attendance from 2017/18 using our family engagement logs as the data point. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Family Engagement Attendance Logs Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 36  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Beginning of year benchmarks, teacher observations, NYS ELA exam information, and ongoing assessment data includingstudent work are used to determine priority status for AIS. At-risk students in grade one will receive 1:1 tutoring using Reading Rescue. Beginning of year benchmarks, teacher observations, NYS Mathematics exam information, and ongoing assessment data are used to determine priority status for AIS. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Programs include small group instruction Fundations, Wilson, guided reading groups as part of a push in support program. Students are also assigned to IX Learning, andRazKids which is individualized tutorials based on student needs. Students receive differentiated instruction and work on phonics, vocabulary, fluency, comprehension, and writing skills. Math intervention is provided for all students in grades 3-5. Strategies for problem solving, test strategies and computational skills are the focus. Computer programs like STMath, IXL, are also used to Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) A push in model for K-5 students by support teachers and paraprofessionals. When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During the school day and after school. Reading Rescue is a 1:1 pull-out program to work directly with at-risk first graders. We provide academic interventions with both push in and pull out support during small group instruction. During the school day and after school 2018-19 SCEP-FF 37 Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) individualize instruction. We are launching Amplify science curriculum this year and will use this curriculum to work with all of our students. We are launching Passport to SS curriculum this year and will use this curriculum to work with all of our students. Provide counseling to students who are at risk for academics and behavior. Students are referred to PPC by classroom teachers and then are monitored by the guidance couselor. Beginning of year benchmarks, teacher observations and ongoing assessment data are used to determine priority status for AIS. Beginning of year benchmarks, teacher observations and ongoing assessment data are used to determine priority status for AIS. Teacher observations and ongoing anecdotals, and assessment data are used to determine priority status for At-risk services in conjunction with Social Worker, School Psychologist, Crisis Management Team and PPC. We provide academic interventions with both push in and pull out support. During the school day We provide academic interventions with both push in and pull out support. During the school day During the school day and after school Students identified as needing additional support in At –Risk Services, are divided into small groups and are pulled out by the CAS Social Worker, and guidance counselor who provide intervention services on a pull out basis. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 38  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 60 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. We will provide for basic academic supplies, bookbags, notebooks, toiletries, and uniforms etc. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). see Part A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 39  See Part A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. See Part A 2018-19 SCEP-FF 40  Section 8: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Strategies for attracting Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Some of the ways that Highly Qualified Teachers can be recruited to our school include, supportive administration, competent mentor support, smaller class size, and a desire to make a difference. For school year 2018/19 we had a 100% retention rate of our staff indicating that our staff is committed to the continued growth of our community. Incoming teachers are interviewed by a hiring committee as well as asked to facilitate a demo lesson. Supportive Administration Highly Qualified Teachers understand that a supportive principal and administration are vital in making schools into true learning communities. Our school shows respect for educational decisions, and cares about and services all students, those who are at risk as well as accelerated students. Common planning time is built in to the schedule where teachers meet on grade level and plan together. Additionally, new teachers at our school are provided mentors, and opportunities for quality professional development both on and off site. all new teachers are assigned an experienced mentor teacher to guide and mentor them through their first year of teaching. Model Teachers' classrooms are used as lab sites for new and seasoned teachers to visit as well as peer observing and coaching our new staff members. Teachers are also supported in literacy development through our partnership with Teachers College, via 20 job embedded coaching visits from our TC consultants throughout the year as well as providing opportunities for our teachers to attend workshops at Columbia University with TC staff developers and participating teachers from other schools. Certification Requirements All of our teachers are certified. Background Research We check references from previous employment, and certification requirements of potential candidates to identify the most qualified candidates. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 41  2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Professional Support As a school we participate in numerous high quality professional development opportunities such as District PD, TC workshops and job embedded professional learning with consultants, and District 12 NTC Mentoring program,and the Bronx Field Office of Support. New teachers have time built into the schedule for frequent visits with mentors to observe strategies that are modeled and practiced as well as opportunities for inter-visitation to classrooms of master teachers to observe best practices. These mentors also provide professional development opportunities in effective curricula and instructional practices with intensive focus on student achievement. This year we are adding two model teachers to work as lab site classrooms to support our teachers in their professional growth. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. NA 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). NA Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). In recognizing the importance of positive early childhood experiences and effective transitions from early childhood programs to elementary school we maintain strong partnerships with families. Pre-k and incoming kindergarten families participate in an incoming orientation. Additionally, pre-k launches the year on a staggered schedule allowing children and families to acclimate to the routines of their new learning environment. Our pre-k social worker and our school guidance counselor collaborate with the early childhood staff in creating workshops for families on the Transition to Pre-k, What to Expect From Your Four Year Old, and Transitioning to Kindergarten. Our families are also invited to participate in activities throughout the year such as The Attendance Rally, Putting the Garden to Bed, and family engagement Tuesdays. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 42  Our MOSL committee meets at the beginning of the school year and quarterly throughout the school year to make recommendations and decisions regarding the selection and use of appropriate assessments. Our Professional Development Committee makes recommendations for professional learning opportunities related to the assessments used. These committees work closely with School Leaders to ensure that assessments and professional learning opportunities are aligned with the 6 tenets and the school’s instructional focus and goals. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (SCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Title I Part A (Basic) Federal Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal $256,139 $38,225 $54,219 0 $12,366 $1,574,916 Tax Levy (FSF) Local X X X X X Column B Section Reference(s) Section 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, and 5E Section 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, and 5E Section 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, and 5E Section 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, and 5E 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 43  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/SCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 44   IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 45  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. CS61 Francisco Oller School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent/Guardian Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students CS61 Francisco Oller School will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; 2018-19 SCEP-FF 46  ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of parent involvement and engagement with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Guardian Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, will be consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 2018-19 SCEP-FF 47  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act. ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and during Parent Engagement Tuesdays, in addition to other times throughout the year. ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (Parent/Guardian Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) CS61 Francisco Oller School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: 2018-19 SCEP-FF 48  ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act. I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: 2018-19 SCEP-FF 49  ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Every Student Succeeds Act.Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; 2018-19 SCEP-FF 50  ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 20 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 51  Addendum: Community School Partnerships Directions: The Community School (CS) strategy is directly aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. Community Schools bring schools and community partners together and integrate academics, health, youth development, and family engagement to provide students with the tools and opportunities they need to succeed. The Core Services in Community Schools are Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness. Part 1 – Community School Partnerships Goal(s) How is the CS strategy integrated into academic instruction at your school, and what impact has it had on student academic outcomes? Our COB, Children's Aid, works closely with school leadership in identifying students with chronic lateness and absenteeism. We partner to work with families in offering the Walking School Bus as a resource to insure that students are getting to school on time and receiving instruction. Additionally, chronically absent children are assigned a Success Mentor who works with the family and the student on attendance and the importance of being in school. Indicate the summative goal(s) of the Community School for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. 1. A goal is to increase attendance by 5% for students who are a part of the Walking School Bus initiative by June 2019. 2. first grade students who were held over will participate in the Reading Rescue 1;1 tutoring reading program. The goal is to help these children reach grade level by the end of the year. Currently we have four students in this program. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Community School Annual Goal(s): How will achieving your Community School Goal(s)--in Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness--support your academic goals for students? Our CBO hosts our after-school which includes ELT. Additionally, for Family Engagement our CBO arranges for ESL classes, GED, and computer classes for our families. We also have a Family Garden club that grows organic vegetables. Our after school holds a healthy cooking class in alignment with health and Wellness and we have a Health and Wellness committee. All of these initiatives are to build the home school connection, focusing on the well-being of our students, therefore, impacting their academic goals. Part 2 – Community School Partnerships Core Services Action Plan Part 2a. Identify the Community-based Organization (CBO) partnerships that you will develop in ELT, Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness, their target student population(s), and scope of the services provided. As well as supporting schools’ supportive environment and attendance work, CBOs should be helping to support your school’s instructional focus. CBO Partnership Children's aid Children's Aid Target Population Scope of Service SY18-19 SMART Goal students with chronic lateness Walking Bus Program Increase attendance rate by __5__% first graders who were held over Reading Rescue students will read on grade level by 6/19 2018-19 SCEP-FF 52  Children's Aid Part 3 – Budget and Resource Alignment parents, students, and staff Wellness Committee and activities to provide monthly health related activities to increase health awareness Part 3a. Indicate resources your Community Partnership will leverage to achieve your summative SMART goal(s) and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Our CBO will use funds from DYCD and OCS, and I3 grant monies to support this work. Part 3b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 3c. Describe how the school will partner with the Lead CBO to do the following: 1. Community Schools are expected to partner with a community-based partner organization (CBO) and together with members of the School Leadership Team, hire a Community School Director. The Director will lead implementation of the asset and needs assessment process, and other critically important coordinating activities. Indicate how you will leverage this aspect of the work. Community Schools are expected to personalize the needs of all students, through strategic programming and services, as determined by the asset and needs assessment, and must also offer Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and mental health programming. In completing this section, ensure that you think about how: (1) the right services are provided to the right students and families at the right time; and (2) how you will seamlessly coordinate services with instructional programming happening throughout and outside of the school day. Indicate how you will implement this work, and describe other programming you anticipate to be in place to strengthen this initiative. Community Schools are expected to emerge as Partnership Schools, which are places where parents and families feel welcome, actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. Monthly meetings and Community School Forums engaging families and community stakeholders will be a critical part of this family engagement strategy. Describe how you will implement this aspect of the work. Community School Principals are expected to meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. Data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter - and training will be available for schools to use. Indicate how you will implement this aspect of the work. 2. 3. 4. The director of CA and administration of CS 61 meet monthly to discuss issues, individual students, and supports for our students and families. Attendance meetings are held weekly attended by the school guidance counselor, as well as the counselor from CA and other key staff members representing the school staff and the CBO staff. Our Parent Guardian Association is a shared space for families to come together and work with members of the school, such as the Parent Coordinator and members of the CBO. We partner during our SLT meetings, Curriculum Night and additional family engagement areas such as classes for families in ESL and GED work. Additionally, CA staff members have been an asset in working with our Spanish dominant families and provide translation at events and during 2018-19 SCEP-FF 53  parent meetings ensuring that our parents have access to school events and that language is not a barrier to participating at our school. Part 4 – Community School Partnerships Oversight Part 4a. Key Staff and Partners 1. Name and describe the scope of involvement of all community partners working in the school (include partners supporting ELT, counseling, enrichment, etc.) 2. Name the members of your Community School Team and how meetings will be organized and structured to engage all stakeholders and be focused on results. 3. Explain data strategies including the use of the data sorter, and steps that the school will take to ensure that the appropriate interventions are provided to the right students Marjorie Sanchez, Principal 61, Maria Panora, Director IA of CA, Earlene Harris, Jessica Singh, Guidance counselor for CS 61, Vernetta Boyd, Parent Coordinator CS 61, Yselly Olivio, Parent coordinator CAS, Chevar Francis, after School director CAS: all of these members of the community come together in service of the students and families of CS 61. As a community school a big part of our focus is the health and well being of our students. We have a strong focus on attendance. Members of the staff meet weekly to discuss student attendance and supports for the the families to ensure students are in school. We use ATS attendance data and data from School Messenger (a robo call service, that calls families of absent students) to determine where attendance is increasing and students with chronic absenteeism. For this up-coming year, the principal has requested the CBO to work with teachers in support of student literacy. CBO facilitators have been trained in reading Rescue, a 1;1 literacy program for first graders. This upcoming year, the principal has requested that this work is prioritized for any students who are repeating first grade to help build their foundational skills in literacy. Part 4b. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the Community School program. CBO facilitators are trained in Reading Rescue. Part 4c. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. Implementation will continue this fall and will run throughout the school year. Part 4d. Mental Health Work Plan Separate from this S/CEP, schools will complete a Mental Health Work Plan that will become an addendum to this document. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 54  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 SCEP-FF 55  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Assessments administered over the course of the year have indicated that the school’s ELL population struggles significantly with mathematics. A closer examination of their work in the classroom made clear that their deficits are more fundamental than what could be remedied with small group work. A majority of our ELLs lack a comfort with the elemental operations of mathematics; it seems that they never acquired these skills or a meaningful mathematics vocabulary in their home countries. Additionally, the literacy challenge posed by word problems prevents most of them from understanding what questions on assignments and tests are really asking of them.To develop our ELLs knowledge of academic mathematics vocabulary and to improve their literacy skills, a once weekly, two hour after school program will be implemented for 3rd, 4th, and 5th grade ELLs. The program will run for 32 weeks from late September to May. The program will focus on deconstructing word problems and recreating them with realia and physical models. Students will first study the language of and practice the mathematical operations involved in the problem (e.g. subtraction, multiplication, fractions) using counters and other tools. After modeling the problem collectively, the students will describe the procedure used to model and solve the problem. Students will then work on a new problem in small groups that require them to create new models that conform to the new information. Students will practice academic mathematics vocabulary by orally discussing the differences between the problems. Students will apply themselves to a final problem independently, describing their steps and reasoning in paragraphs using the academic vocabulary developed and posted during the day’s lesson. Instruction will be delivered to students by the ESL teacher. The program will be conducted in English supplemented with oral and written home language supports in Spanish, French, and Arabic from the ESL teacher. The program will occur once weekly in two-hour long sessions. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Throughout the year, the ESL teacher attends several professional development workshops organized by the district and the city. In the past, these workshops have covered material such as the legal requirements for ensuring equitable ELL instruction, the use of scaffolding in ELL instruction, targeted writing strategies for ELLs, and more. The ESL teacher will continue to attend the professional development opportunities available through the city, focusing on scaffolding instruction for content classes. The ESL teacher will turnkey scaffolding workshops for the school's content and special education teachers. Additionally, the ESL teacher will lead a workshop for content teachers on scaffolds within TCRWP in September of 2018. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 56  Part C: Professional Development The ESL teacher also participates in all professional development workshops conducted for content teachers within the school, which have covered the implementation of the recently adopted Teacher's College Reading and Writing Project curriculum and intensive explorations of components of the Danielson Framework for Teaching. These workshops are designed to ensure that all teachers, including the ESL teacher, gain a deep understanding of how to foster the academic development of all students and how to best deploy the curricular materials at their disposal. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Parents and families of ELLs in the school community have regular opportunities for engagement. In addition to the initial ELL parent orientation and weekly parent engagement office hours, the school hosts two evenings annually dedicated to inviting parents into the building. One event takes place in the fall and the other in the spring. These evenings are designed to ensure that students' and families' needs are known and able to be addressed. Parents and families are welcomed into the school community with the goal of opening the necessary lines of communication to achieve this end. On these occasions, families have the chance to see their children's progress, hear from teachers about what learning is happening in the classroom, and learn more about the programs and resources available at the school. Forums are held in small groups for parents to ask questions, raise concerns, share ideas, and provide feedback to teachers and administrators. Parents and families of ELLs participate in ELL-specific breakout groups to encourage and ease their participation. Every aspect of these parent engagement evenings is made accessible to non-English-speaking parents through translation. Translation is provided in Spanish by Children's Aid staff and Spanish-speaking members of the faculty, and French translation is provided by the ESL teacher. Parents are informed of these engagement opportunities through backpacked notices, which are translated into the parent's preferred communication language. These events are also posted on a public-facing school calendar in the lobby, which is printed in both English and Spanish versions. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) 7520.00  Per session  Per diem Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 31 2-hour per session (60.65) after-school classes taught by ESL teacher twice a week 2018-19 SCEP-FF 57 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 0.00 Math counters, blocks, tools (protractors, compasses, etc.), graphing paper, anchor charts, flash cards, assorted realia objects (for modeling problems) for after school program (500.00) Child-friendly bilingual dictionaries for all classrooms with ELL students -- current stock of bilingual dictionaries targeted towards adult learners (240.00) 20 children's picture dictionaries for all classrooms with ELL students (300.00) Imagine Learning ELL literacy curriculum and software program (including professional development to implement the curriculum) 0.00 0.00 total allocation Purchased services  High quality staff 0.00 1040.00 and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) 3806.00 Travel Other TOTAL 0.00 0.00 12366.00 2018-19 SCEP-FF 58  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 12 School Name Francisco Oller Borough Bronx School Number 061 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Patricia Quigley Coach Meenu Jagtiani (Math) ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Marisol Rodriguez Teacher/Subject Area Wanda Arias/Gen. Ed Teacher/Subject Area A. Alvarez/Special Education Related-Service Provider Superintendent Rafaela Espinal Pacheco Assistant Principal E. Harris /M. Jagtiani Coach Earlene Harris (Literacy) School Counselor Jessica Singh Parent Diana Sosa Parent Coordinator Vernetta Boyd Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 2018-19 SCEP-FF 59  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 264 Total number of ELLs 27 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 10.23% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 6 0 7 0 8 0 9 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? We use DRA Running Records, NYC Performance Tasks Assessment, Core Knowledge Skills Assessments, ReadyGen Unit assessments and Student Work Samples to assess students. We use this information to guide instructional planning. We also use this data to place ELL's into small groups for more targeted instruction. This data show that our ELL students are still struggling with academic vocabulary and higher order thinking questions. ENL teacher meets with Classroom Teachers to plan together to meet the identified needs based on these assessments. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? School wide structures in place are grade meetings where Classroom Teachers meet to discuss and plan for grade. ENL teacher is a part of these weekly meetings. ENL Teacher pushes in as part of her program of services. She meets regularly 2018-19 SCEP-FF 60  with classroom teachers to plan differentiation, visuals and scaffolds for the ELL's based on her observations, the assessments, and her meetings with the classroom teachers. Every 6 weeks teachers, ENL teacher, Guidance Counselor, assistant Principals and Principal meet together to review assessment data and to plan for needs of individual students including ELL's. Teachers are provided additional planning time; outside training at District level, which is turn-keyed to staff; training on QTEL for all teachers; Push in support by ENL teacher; students are provided AIS support by Paraprofessionals who push in to classes as needed. Students are also provided differentiated scaffolds and work with teachers in small groups to enhance vocabulary development and phonics skills. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We use data throughout the year, as well as data from NYC Performance Tasks, Ed Performance, Periodic Assessments, and standardized exams to determine how successful our programs are for our ELL students. Our ELL students make progress on the NYSESLAT --moving from beginning to intermediate, intermediate to advanced and to proficient. Our ELL students do much better on the Speaking and Listening portions of the NYSESLAT. Improvement in the reading and writing sections comes naturally at a slower pace for the ELL students. Our ELL students are still struggling on the NYS exams. We continue to work to create as much background knowledge, improve content area vocabulary and comprehension so that our students can have greater success in this area. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Based on data gathered, Teachers and grade-level teams make necessary adjustments to instruction and curricula; determine and provide needed scaffolds, flexible grouping; small group instruction; Speech and ENL teachers utilize 'push in' model to work with students. Paraprofessionals also push in to classes to provide AIS services as needed to enhance vocabulary development and phonics skills. Students also are provided with additional support (Targeted Academic Intervention - TAI) during after school program. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Our school gathers data from a variety sources (DRA's, Core Knowledge Skills assessments, Ed Performance, End of Unit tests etc). We use this data to form small groups, differentiated instructional activities and tiered academic intervention services. We evaluate the data we collect every 6 weeks and make adjustments to RTI etc. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. NYSESLAT and NYSITELL, NYS ELA and Math Assessments as well as local MOSL assessments (NYS Performance Tasks in ELA and Math). 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? School provides data base with current student data (Student Assessment Management System - SAMS) that is accessible to all teachers. Teachers consistently meet on a weekly basis to discuss data from above mentioned assessments. All stakeholders are informed of student growth or lack of growth. Based on findings, teachers adjust curricula, differentiate instruction, provide needed scaffolds, provide flexible group and small group instruction; Speech and ENL teachers utilize 'push in' model to work with students. Paraprofessionals also push in to classes to provide AIS services as needed to enhance vocabulary development and phonics skills. Students are also provided additional support (Targeted Academic Intervention - TAI) during after school program. Part IV: ELL Programming 2018-19 SCEP-FF 61  Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. 1. How instruction is delivered: We have a Free Standing ENL program. We use an integrated ENL push-in model. All ELL students are in classes that receive instruction in English. The ENL teacher pushes into classrooms (gen ed; collaborative; and self contained) and works with small groups of ELL students in ELA and other content areas, according to their academic needs. b. TBE program. If applicable. n/a c. DL program. If applicable. n/a 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? 2. Organization of staff to ensure mandated instruction: We currently have 27 students receiving ENL instruction from a certified ESL teacher. She ensures that students receive the mandated number of instructional minutes based on their level of proficiency. This is programmed in the STARS Classroom System, documented, and reviewed regularly to ensure requirements are fulfilled. Entering (Beginning) Students receive 360 minutes per week. (Minimum of 180 minutes of Integrated ENL/ELA and 180 minutes of ENL); Emerging (Low Intermediate) Students receive 360 minutes per week. (Minimum of 180 minutes of Integrated ENL/ELA, 90 minutes of ENL, and an additional 90 minutes of ENL or 90 minutes of ENL Content Area); Transitioning (Intermediate) Students receive 180 minutes per week. (Minimum of 90 minutes of Integrated ENL/ELA and and an additional 90 minutes of ENL or 90 minutes of ENL Content Area); Expanding (Advanced) students receive 180 minutes per week in Integrated ENL/ELA or other content area.; Commanding (Proficient) (Former ELL's) continue to receive services for an additional two years. They receive 90 minutes of Integrated ENL in ELA or Content Area. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. 3. Content area instruction: The ENL teacher delivers instruction in English and uses visuals, bilingual dictionaries/glossaries/technology, and when possible-students’ native language to clarify content area material. Instruction is differentiated based on needs. The ENL teacher reinforces academic language and the use of ENL strategies to clarify content area information. ENL teacher also meets with classroom teachers to review student work, provide assistance, resources and advice. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? 4. We ensure that Ells are evaluated in their native language by providing testing in native language using appropriate language speaking personnel. As a free standing ENL program, all instruction and assessments are given in English except for the Spanish LAB which is administered in Spanish when required. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer 2018-19 SCEP-FF 62  c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status 5. How instruction is differentiated for ELL subgroups: a. When a SIFE student enters our school, assessments are done in Reading, Writing, Math, Speaking and Listening and other content areas. Based on the results of our extensive assessment process an individualized plan is developed for the student. Academic Intervention Services are begun as well as coordination of service discussions among the child's teachers, ENL teacher, AIS provider, coaches and administrators. Progress is monitored and updated regularly and at a minimum of every 6 weeks, the group assembles to discuss progress, adjustments that need to be made to services provided, strategies for classroom teacher and parent. b. Instruction for Newcomers or students in the pre-production stage of language acquisition is focused upon modeling, gestures, actions, visual signs, computer based programs, and context clues to obtain and convey meaning particularly in the area of functional language development. A major focus is on comprehension as students develop listening strategies which is the first area they begin to master. c. Instruction for Students who have been receiving services for 4 to 6 years is focused around increasing the limited vocabulary, extending short phrases, reading and writing longer sentences and paragraphs, responding to literal questions, understanding and retelling stories and working on the language errors that they still make. d. Instruction for long term ELL's (6+ years) is focused on strengthening their understanding, increasing their academic language and vocabulary, developing reading and writing stamina and developing higher order questioning, understanding and application of academic content. e. ELL students continue to receive instructional supports after the initial period of ENL push in support. Additionally testing modifications that include extended time and reading of the listening passages a third time are still provided. Our 5th grade students receive support that helps with transitioning to middle school. Students with IEPs who are entitled to ENL support are identified and the ENL teacher provides in class support as she does with general education students. ENL students receive AIS services in ELA and Math as well as Science along with all our students who are entitled. ENL strategies and visuals are used to clarify concepts and provide additional support. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? 6. Instructional strategies and grade-level materials that teachers of ELL-SWD's use to provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development are: We use a push-in model in a collaborative manner, QTEL strategies, reinforcement of skills and strategies practiced in conjunction with classroom teachers, the balanced literacy model, cross curricular support and collaborative planning to include content areas as well. A variety of materials such as magnetic letters, dry erase boards, technology, real life photographs, etc. are used to accelerate English language development. ELL teacher and classroom teachers also review IEP's for goals, strengths, and challenges along with classroom teachers and work together to support development of academic content knowledge and English language development. Native language materials are provided when available . Bilingual and picture dictionaries and glossaries are provided and used. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? 7. We use curricular, instructional and scheduling flexibility to meet the diverse needs of ELL-SWD's within the least restrictive environment through the use of our push-in model. Students are supported in classroom with their peers and regular teachers as well. We use flexible scheduling with push in supports wherever possible to ensure that ELL SWD's spend the maximum amount of time with their general education student counterparts. We work with our classroom teachers and ESL teacher to ensure that IEP and English Proficiency goals are reviewed and monitored regularly to ensure that students are moving towards attainment. We use differentiated instruction, academic intervention, small group tutoring and CBO supports to assist us. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 63  8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. 8. Targeted intervention programs: All students who are “at risk” of not meeting state standards of proficiency are identified for intervention services. ELL students are included in all intervention programs offered as well as after-school Children's Aid Programs that offer tutoring and homework help. ELA and Math intervention is provided by the Professional Development Coaches, teachers, and paraprofessionals. Students receive intervention in reading, writing and vocabulary development. Classroom teachers identify students in need of support for Science and Social Studies and provide differentiated support for them. All students are assessed every 6 weeks to check for progress and to make necessary adjustments in education plan. All ELL students are exposed to all resources the school has to offer including support services and technology. ESL strategies, Visual Thinking Strategies, Visual Aids, photographs, real life scenarios, multilingual dictionaries or glossaries, google translate etc are all used to assist students in strengthening their content knowledge in all subject areas. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? 9. New programs or improvements to be considered for the upcoming school year: Review of our school's data continues to show a need for increased rigorous curriculum to meet the more challenging needs of the Common Core State Standards. As a result we are utilizing the Core Knowledge Language Arts program (which focuses on exposing students to higher academic language and rich literary content) for our lower grades (PreK to 2nd Grades. ) We are utilizing Ready Gen for our grades 3 to 5 ELA. We are working now to utilize these literacy curricula within the Balanced Literacy Framework, which we believe enables us to better meet the needs of our Ell and SWD populations. We have also instituted the GO MATH program for grades K to 5. All of these programs provide options for differentiation and scaffolded supports that our teachers can use for our Ell's and SWD's. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? 10. Rationale for programs/services for ELLs that will be discontinued: We are continuing our Integrated Freestanding ENL program to meet state mandates for instruction. Historically, we do not generally have large numbers of ELL students. As a result we are planning to continue our FreeStanding ENL Program using the integrated push in model with pull out supports. No ESL programs or services are planned to be discontinued. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. 11. How ELLs are afforded equal access to all school programs: We are a School-wide Projects/Title I school. All school programs during the day and after school are open to all students. The Children's Aid Society provides our after school program for all students that includes tutoring, homework help, sports and the arts and health. ELLs are offered equal access to all school programs (curricular, extracurricular, during the school day, after school and holiday programs.) All notices and invitations are sent out in English and Spanish; translators for all preferred languages are present for all recruitment and launching events. All programs have ELLs, SWDs and general education students. Bilingual staff are available both during the school day and through our CBO (Children's Aid Society) to further support and include all students. After School and Supplemental Services offered to ELLs in our building. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. 12. Instructional materials, including technology, used to support ELLs: In order to increase the skills needed for our student to improve their Listening, Speaking, Reading and Writing skills and content areas knowledge we are using a variety of instructional Materials. We use manipulative, listening centers, picture dictionaries, laptop computers, and several online programs such as prescribed Starfall.com, Brainpop ESL, Visual Thinking Strategies, RAZ-KIDs, ST Math, IXL Math, Nessy, and Google translate features to support all subgroups of ELLs. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? 2018-19 SCEP-FF 64  13. How native language support is delivered: We have a Free Standing ENL program and classroom instruction in English. The ENL teacher pushes in and uses native language to clarify concepts as needed. In instances where further clarification is necessary, we use appropriate language personnel for assistance. We also have multilingual classroom library books and bilingual word-->word glossaries for content areas etc. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. 14. Required services support, and resources are given based on the stage of the child's language development (Beginner, Intermediate, or Advanced) and Stage (Pre Production, Early Production, Speech Emergence, Intermediate Fluency) correspond to ELLs ages and grade levels. As students achieve proficiency, there is a transitional period of continued support. Since we have a push in model, the support is given according to grade , age and proficiency levels in the student's classroom. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? 15. We're sharing building with IS 190. We shared ELL students information related to their instructional time, ENL levels, activities, and learning styles to ensure successful transition to the next grade. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). 16. Activities to assist newly enrolled ELL students before the beginning of the school year: When ELL students enroll at CS61, our ELL teacher and parent coordinator invite parents to attend an orientation session, including a video describing the model of ENL instruction provided by the school. We attempt to make the students and parents feel welcome and confident by introducing them to other ELL students, members of our Parent Guardian Association and giving a tour of the school. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? 17. Language electives offered to ELLs: We are an elementary school and do not offer language electives. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? 1. School staff attend workshops including classroom teachers - general and special ed, assistant principals, and speech teachers. In addition to the Monday afternoon Professional Learning time sessions, teachers have common preps to attend workshops and plan together. All Bilingual/ELL personnel are included in Professional Learning Sessions. 2. Opportunities for on and off site trainings are provided to staff when available such as: QTEL model – Quality Teaching for English Learners including Using ESL strategies and approaches to support our ELLs 2018-19 SCEP-FF 65  How to align ESL standards with ELL instruction Looking at Student Work to adjust instruction for ELL's and SWD's Using Centers to differentiate instruction Using small group instruction/guided reading to help ELLs Common Core Learning Standards Rigorous Questioning and Discussion Techniques Developing and Implementing Common Core Curricula Utilizing Language and Vocabulary Development in Social Studies and Science Developing Math Problem Solving Strategies Decomposing Numbers Grades Pre-K to 1Balanced Literacy Model Refresher Using the Danielson Cluster Framework to Improve Teacher Practice Building Capacity and Improving Results for All Restorative Circles to Improve Communication and Build Community 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. 2. Transitioning to middle school We are a pre-K to grade 5 school. We help students prepare for middle school by teaching to the 5th grade NYS Common Core standards which adequately prepares them for middle school academic and social expectations. Social Worker and Guidance Counselor are given training regarding the levels and stages of Ell's as well as information regarding transitioning to 6th grade. Teachers in 5th Grade review 6th Grade curriculum and along with EFL teachers make recommendations for ELL students who are transitioning to middle school. Guidance Counselor also receives training in use of QTEL teaching strategies. Meeting professional development requirements . As part of our Professional Development Plan, workshops designed to specifically address the needs of English Language Learners are provided to staff to ensure that the minimum required number of hours are met for all staff. (15% of total hours for all teachers (ENL teacher receives ELL Specific PD). The ENL Teacher, Coach and Administration work closely to incorporate ELL topics as separate PD's as well as incorporating strategies within other Professional Development such as content areas etc. Coaches and Administrators provide ongoing ELL training for all teachers such as QTEL Strategies, Differentiation for ELL's, Considering Stages of Language Development and making adjustments to instruction etc. All documentation is kept in a Professional Development binder and monitored regularly by school leaders. CS61 Professional Learning Calendar/Schedule: September - Compliance Issues/Chancellor's Regulations - Compliance Issues/Building Response Teams/Training Door Alarms/De Escalation Protocol October - Online Resources to Improve Student Achievement - Compliance Issues 504's , Academic Policies, & Translation Policy - Concussion Information Training/ ELA and Math Testing Procedures - Child Abuse and Neglect Prevention /Chancellor's Reg. A-750/ Restorative Circles to Build Community November - Full Day PD -- Danielson Framework for Teaching Cluster Pilot-Self Assessment/Effective Family Engagement Conferences - Tech Resources -- Study Island -- Meeting our Students Needs in ELA (2-5) /Looking at Lowest Third (Pre-K - 1) - Building Capacity and Improving Results for All continued… - Looking at Student Work using New Writing Program (By Grade Band) (PreK-1, 2-3, 4-5) - Quality Teaching Strategies for English Language Learners December - Cluster IV Danielson Designing Tasks- ELA (Focus Groups) - Looking at Student Work (By Grade Band) (PreK-1, 2-3, 4-5) 2018-19 SCEP-FF 66  - Unpacking the Standards/Curriculum Planning January - Looking at Student Work with focus on English Language Learners & Students with Disabilities - Using Small Group Instruction/Guided Reading to help English Language Learners - Looking at Student Work - Writing (By Grade Band) (PreK-1, 2-3, 4-5) February - Utilizing Language and Vocabulary Development in Social Studies with Science with focus on ELL's and SWD's- ---- Evaluating and Adjusting Curricula - Questioning and Discussion Techniques Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? 1. Our ENL Teacher, Parent Coordinator and Social Worker work together to plan for and provide annual, individual meetings with parents of ELL's on an ongoing basis, to discuss program goals, language development progress, assessment results, and making connections to all content areas. Parents of ELL students are encouraged to take advantage of Tuesday afternoon parent sessions for any support regarding their children's academic or language needs. Additionally, ENL teacher makes herself available regularly on Tuesday afternoons to provide parents support and information regarding assisting their children, progress monitoring, transitioning to school, translation and interpretation as necessary, etc. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. 2. Our PGA and Parent Coordinator hold meetings to address the needs of all parents, including ELL parents. Parents are notified of meetings and topics and are invited and encouraged to attend. Monthly parent workshops are facilitated by the Parent Coordinator regarding different curriculum topics including Math, ELA, Science and Social Studies; and NYS testing programs, how to identify ELL population/services offered/parent options, activities/strategies to help your child with homework and classwork. Bilingual Staff as well as Bilingual Staff from Children's Aid Society (CBO) provide translation services to assist in supporting the home/school connection. Parents are also offered translation information provide by the NYC Department of Education. Additionally, ENL teacher meets with parents on Tuesday afternoons to provide information regarding assisting their children, progress monitoring, transitioning to school, translation and interpretation as necessary, etc. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 SCEP-FF 67  2018-19 SCEP-FF 68 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Patricia A. Quigley, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 69  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: CS61 Francisco Oller School School DBN: 12X061 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Patricia Quigley Title Principal E. Harris/M. Jagtiani Assistant Principal Vernetta Boyd Parent Coordinator Marisol Rodriguez ENL/Bilingual Teacher Diana Sosa Parent M. Rodriguez Teacher/Subject Area A. Alvarez Teacher/Subject Area Meenu Jagtiani Earlene Harris Coach Coach Jessica Singh School Counselor Rafaela Espinal Pacheco Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 5/18/17 5/18/17 5/18/17 5/18/17 5/18/17 5/18/17 5/18/17 5/18/17 5/18/17 5/18/17 5/18/17 5/18/17 5/18/17 5/18/17 5/18/17 2018-19 SCEP-FF 70  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 12X061 School Name: P.S. 61 Francisco Oller Superintendent: JacquelineRosa The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Elizabeth Mitchell ELL Teacher Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. As part of the admissions process, parents are interviewed to complete the Home Language Identification Survey. We utilize information from this survey to determine their preferred language of communication and to identify a resource who can assist them when needed. Data from the ATS report of parents' written and spoken language preferences is generated and reviewed to ensure that all parents are provided with appropriate and timely information in a language they can understand. Additionally, we reference Student Emergency Contact cards to verify parents' perferred language of communication. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 71  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral 3 0 238 106 Arabic Mossi English Spanish Data as of 09/12/2018 0.86 0 68.59 30.55 3 1 235 108 0.86 0.29 67.72 31.12 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A as of 09/12/2018 Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families School Handbook, Parent Newsletters, Calendars, Flyers September and throughout the year as needed Announcements, After-School program information, Principal letters, September and throughout the year as needed Assessment/Testing information, Curriculum overviews, etc. September and throughout the year as needed How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. The translation is done primarily by our ELL teacher and CBO staff on papers or through ROBO calls as needed. The translation is done primarily by our ELL teacher and CBO staff on papers or through ROBO calls as needed. The translation is done primarily by our ELL teacher and CBO staff on papers or through ROBO calls as needed. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 72  Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to VIP Night (Welcome Back to School/Curriculum) September Parent/Teacher Student Conferences November, March Additional Curriculum Night - Prep for Next Year May Attendance Teacher Outreach/Social Worker Outreach Ongoing September -June Teacher - Parent Communication Ongoing September -June IEP Meetings Ongoing September -June provide interpretation service(s)? The interpretation is done primarily by our ELL teacher and CBO/CA staff or through ROBO calls as needed. The interpretation is done primarily by our ELL teacher and CBO/CA staff or through ROBO calls as needed. The interpretation is done primarily by our ELL teacher and CBO/CA staff or through ROBO calls as needed. The interpretation is done primarily by our ELL teacher and CBO/CA staff or through ROBO calls as needed. The interpretation is done primarily by our ELL teacher and CBO/CA staff or through ROBO calls as needed. The interpretation is done primarily by our ELL teacher and CBO/CA staff or through ROBO calls as needed. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. School communicates with parents in their native language via bilingual staff, letters, and robo calls. For parents whose preferred language is not spoken by any staff, interpretation is provided though Language Line. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. CS61 will fulfill all parental notification requirements for translation and interpretation services, as per Section VII of Chancellor's Regulation A-663, by ensuring that all staff are trained accordingly, including this information in staff and parent handbooks, and reviewing this information periodically.. The Language Access Coordinator and other related personnel are sent to district workshops relating to Language Access, ELL topics and other regulations throughout the year. The Language Access Coordinator trains office staff and teachers in how to use the Language Line over-the-phone intepreter and other translation services available through the DOE or DOE vendors. Office staff and teachers are also provided with a printed reference sheet explaining how to contact Language Line. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services 2018-19 SCEP-FF 73  Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) This information is provided to parents speaking a language other than English in their preferred language through letters backpacked home in September. In the lobby and around the school, translated signage is posted explaining the availabilty of interpretation services. Brochures are available from the LAC detailing the availability of these services as well. This information is also communicated by teachers during parent conferences. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? The ENL Teacher, Parent Coordinator and School Counselor will work together to gather feedback from parents on the quality and availability of services through parent surveys and informal polling throughout the year. They will document this information and school leaders will use it to improve quality and availability of services provided. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 74 
