 07X065 School Name: P.S. 065 MOTHER HALE ACADEMY Principal: JASMINE GONZALEZ 2018-19 SCEP-P 1  School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Section 4: SCEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Section 7: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 8: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 9: Title I Program Information Section 10: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 SCEP-P 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information Mother Hale Academy / PS 65x 07X065 3207000010065 PK - 5 School Number (DBN): 677 East 141 st Street Bronx, New York 10454 718-292-4628 718-292-4695 School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Phone Number: Jasmine Gonzalez Fax: JGonzalez@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Jasmine Gonzalez Email Address: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: GrisselleGonzalez-Fortuna GriselleVives Parents’ Association President: Deborah Sanabria/ Jasmine Gonzalez SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Cruz Nereida Chavez n/a n/a District Information Geographical District: 7 Raphael Alvarez Superintendent: 501 Courtlandt Avenue, Bronx, New York 10451 Superintendent’s Office Address: RAlvarez4@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718- 742-6595 Phone Number: 718-742 - 6548 Fax: FSC: Bronx Field Support Center (FSC) Executive Director: Jose Ruiz 2018-19 SCEP-P 3  Executive Director’s Office Address: 1230 Zerega Avenue Bronx, New York 10462 One Fordham Plaza Bronx, New York 10458 Jruiz2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: Phone Number: Fax: 718-828-7776/718-741-8895 718-828-6280 2018-19 SCEP-P 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the SCEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Jasmine Gonzalez GrisselleGonzalez-Fortuna GrisselleVives KeshaLee AlinaAlmonte N/A N/A N/A Alina Almonte ChantelMima Angelica Pagan Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Elected Parent Elected Parent Elected Parent 2018-19 SCEP-P 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Andre Seymour Elected Parent Atira Wood Michelle Warren Samuel Morales Deborah Sanabria 3/4th Grade Special Education Teacher Kindergarten Teacher Parent Coordinator Principal Assigned Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 SCEP-P 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) is a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. The process of developing and implementing the SCEP is aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding SCEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and SCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 SCEP-P 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: 2018-19 SCEP-P 8  Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the SCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the SCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for SCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you 2018-19 SCEP-P 9  monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 5: Build consensus around activities, strategies and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 6: Step 6: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 7: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 SCEP-P 10  Section 4: SCEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Our school’s mission is to make all learners academically prepared, respectful and capable of using their learning to succeed in life and be positive contributors to their community. In these, we believe: Trust: Getting along with people is the single most important talent we bring to our profession and fostering positive relationships is our goal. Together we will work toward a common goal to improve student outcomes and prepare our students for success. Empowerment: We believe in empowering people to think out of the box, be creative in using data to meet the needs of our entire community: students, parents, and staff. Culture: The culture of our school is unique and important!! We must nurture, welcome and celebrate our community in order for it to be a happy, healthy, and productive place to learn and grow. Teamwork: Teaching and learning cannot be done in isolation. We are our greatest strengths and we are accountable to our entire community. It is our personal and professional responsibility to communicate, care, and listen to each other for the success of our school. Feedback: Effective feedback and proper use of data will enable all members in our community to acknowledge his/her own strengths and areas in need of growth to reallocate our resources to meet our common goals. The Future: We have a positive view of the future and will strive to ensure each and every student can successfully compete in the 21 st century workplace. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Public School 65, Mother Hale Academy, is an elementary school located in the South Bronx. Based on the 2017 School Performance Dashboard the enrollment of 400 students ranging from PK – 5 th grade includes 26% Students with Disabilities, and 13% English Language Learners The student population is composed of 3% Asian, 32% Black, 64% Hispanic and 1% White. P.S. 65 is a Title I school with 34% of students in Temporary Housing and an Economic Need Index of 96%. A core value at PS 65 is to foster a collective efficacy that supports the development of the whole child. The instructional program is in the forefront yet the enrichment program is robust. The innovative after school clubs including, Robotics, Boxing, Basketball, Cheer Leading, Soccer, Afro-Latin dance, African Drums, Swimming, are designed to promote students' positive social interactions and self-esteem. A second core value of the school is to foster relationships with organizations and leverage resources that enrich the entire school community. Local partnerships include the House on Beekman, 40th Precinct, the Fire Department of New York, and Vernon C. Bain Correctional Facility. The partnerships in the broader community includes the Young Scholars Society, Archbishop Carney High School, and Citizens for New York. 2018-19 SCEP-P 11  3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. There are several special student populations in P.S. 65. The SWDs evidenced the specific need to meet proficiency levels in ELA based on the decline in NYS ELA Exam data SY 17'. According to the NYSESLAT data, the identified need of the ELLs sub-group is integrated support in reading and writing as they learn the academic content material presented in class. In addition to stand-alone services, two highly qualified ENL Teachers will provide integrated support to ELL students in their classroom setting. These teachers will provide explicit vocabulary instruction and front load requisite information. The Fountas and Pinnell reading assessment data reveals that the sub-group of students in Temporary Housing have a specific need for small group strategy based instruction that is consistent overtime. The special student population of HoldOvers evidenced the specific need for targeted instruction that is individualized such as through the Small Group Instruction and Response to Intervention structures in P.S. 65. Additionally, the data from the school-wide Fountas & Pinnell reading assessments and the ongoing end-of-unit assessments in Math, Social Studies, Science and Writing identified a special student population of Advanced Learners that have a specific need to be challenged at higher levels through targeted small group instruction. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. The element of the Framework for Great Schools in which PS 65 made the most progress is Rigorous Instruction. According to the 2015-16 School Quality Guide the survey score in the element of Rigorous Instruction was 2.90. The 2016-17 School Quality Guide indicates a score of 3.04 for the element of Rigorous Instruction. This evidences a gain of .14. The key area of focus for this school year emerged from the element of the Framework for Great Schools in which PS 65 decreased notably. According to the 2015-16 School Quality Guide the survey score in the element of Strong Family/Community Ties was 3.82. The 2016-17 School Quality Guide indicates a score of 2.43 for the element of Rigorous Instruction. This evidences a decrease of 1.39. 2018-19 SCEP-P 12  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 07X065 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 395 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 44 42 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 1 1 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 98.0% % Attendance Rate 97.2% % Reduced Lunch 11.4% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.5% 60.5% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 1.3% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 7.35 0% 24% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 28.4% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 76% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO N/A NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A YES NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 65 66 88.8% 0.0% 21.8% 34.4% 1.8% 2.0% 2 0% 6.1 29.6% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No NO N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 SCEP-P 13  2018-19 SCEP-P 14  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths: +According to the 2018 School Quality Guide, 75% of 4th grade students met or exceeded proficiency benchmarks as measured by the State Education Department Science Test +According to the 2017-2018 NYC School Survey, 89% of teacher responses indicated their access to resources and tools needed to include multiple opportunities for students to interact with academic language +According to the 2018 June Instructional Report, there was a 5.8% gain in 4th grade ELA progress against NYC Average (percentile) and a 5.5% gain in 5th grade ELA progress against NYC average Priority Needs: -According to the 2018 School Quality Guide, respondents indicate a 66% positive response rate when referencing quality of student discussion; -6% compared to district-wide average; -7% compared to citywide average 2018-19 SCEP-P 15  -According to the 2017-2018 School Survey Report, 82% of teacher responses indicated their access to resources and tools needed to include multiple opportunities for students to interact with complex grade level text -According to the 2018 June Instructional Report, there was a 0.2% gain in 3rd grade ELA progress against NYC average (percentile) Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all teachers will ensure the delivery of rigorous instruction by collaboratively creating standards aligned reading units whereas 75% of general education students will make 1 year's growth of reading gains (2/3 of a year's growth for SWD's) as measured by DRA levels. 2018-19 SCEP-P 16  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Instructional leaders and all teachers will incorporate the research-based Thinking Maps resources when planning standards-aligned reading units. This common visual language will support multiple entry points for subgroups of learners and will improve student efficacy, resulting in deeper thinking, more authentic learning, and enhanced student outcomes. Partnership with St. Francis will afford classroom teachers the opportunity to provide interest-based texts for targeted subgroups (i.e. male students; ENL students). Additionally, classrooms will boast balanced libraries in alignment with CCLS shifts in instruction All K-5 Students Sept Classroom Teachers 2018 – IEP Teacher June 2019 Instructional Leaders All Classroom Teachers Sept Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Literacy Coach Thinking maps' Facilitators Administration Parent Coordinator 2018 – St. Francis personnel June 2019 Classroom teachers Literacy Coach Instructional Leaders Administration Technology Specialist Instructional Leaders Classroom Teachers AIS /ENL Providers Sept 2017- June 2018 IEP Teacher Sept Administration 2018 – Grade Facilitators Digital Paths (i.e. iReady; Capstone interactive) will be integrated as viable resources in standards-aligned reading units. These individualized opportunities will promote independence, enhance student engagement and support ENL and SWD's access to complex texts. All K-5 Students Daily, weekly, monthly schedule to reflect planning and inquiry periods necessary to drive the development, analysis and refinement of standards-aligned reading units. In addition, grade facilitators will meet as a team to identify vertical trends with a keen All Pedagogical Staff 2018-19 SCEP-P 17  lens on high needs subgroups (i.e. SWDs; ENL; students in need of enrichment). Literacy Coach June 2019 Classroom Teachers Instructional Leaders Literacy Coach AIS /ENL Providers IEP Teacher Continual differentiated learning opportunities to support teacher efficacy in developing and refining rigorous standards-aligned units. In addition, teachers and Educational Assistants will receive 49 hours of Thinking Maps professional development to enhance their skill-set to facilitate intentional and specialized instruction using these visual tools in support of all learners. All Pedagogical Staff All K-5 Students Sept Administration 2018 – Grade Facilitators June 2019 Classroom Teachers Instructional Leaders Literacy Coach Thinking Maps Facilitators AIS /ENL Providers IEP Teacher 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Monthly teacher led parent workshops to familiarize them with critical grade level reading standards. School-based progress reports aligned to the units of study at each grade level that outline the standards, content, and home activities to enhance the learning experiences. Monthly Literacy events where parents and their children will have the opportunity to read a book related to the standards aligned Unit of Study, watch the affiliated movie and co-write a comparative book/movie review. The key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight are the grade facilitators and the administration. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Programming Scheduling for Weekly Teacher Team Meetings, Classroom Intervisitations; DOE Videos to view and support instruction and best practices. Literacy Coach (Weekly sessions) Math Coach / Consultants (Outside Agencies) Team Tuesdays 2018-19 SCEP-P 18  Grade 3: HIStory / Her Story (Book making art program developing the student from within) Parent Coordinator to meet with parents Attendance Committee Members to ensure students are in school every day Mid Winter PUSH (Persevere Until Success Happens) Academy for Grades 3, 4, & 5 (during mid-winter break) Spring PUSH Academy for Grades 3, 4, & 5 (during Spring break) 1 additional common planning period Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, all teachers will collaboratively create rigorous standards aligned reading units whereas 75% of general education students will make 5 months growth of reading gains (2/3 of a year's growth for SWD's) as measured by DRA levels. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. I-Ready Diagnostics for Mathematics; Go Math Unit Assessments Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 19  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. x SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Strengths +According to the 2018 School Quality Guide, respondents indicate a 80% positive response rate when referencing social-emotional support; -6% compared to district-wide average; -5% compared to citywide average +According to Office of School Youth Development 2017-2018 data, less than 1% of incidents occurred during the Small Group Instructional period Priority Needs Strengthen student understanding of behavioral expectations in the larger settings of the school; Based on our 2017-2018 data, incident occurrence rates are highest between the hours of 12:00pm and 1:00pm, thereby, we need to educate and offer PD in TCIs (Therapeutic Crisis Intervention in Schools) for staff members supervising large groups of students 2018-19 SCEP-P 20  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools –Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 85% students will display a sense of ownership of their learning experience through the development of critical peer relationships via schoolwide supports as evidenced by the results of the 2019 NYC OORS report. 2018-19 SCEP-P 21  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Utilizing Brain Power techniques, students as a whole class will engage in a daily combination of physical, emotional and cognitive exercises to tap into brain potential. This research based program serves to empower students and improve focus, confidence, memory, creativity and emotional wellness while reducing stress and anxiety. Students in crisis will learn to self-monitor and perform learned strategies as a way to self regulate. Thinking Maps graphic organizers will support self-directed inquiry and learning. Students will use the tools to make their thinking visible so that peer partners may provide critical feedback. Using learned strategies connected to Thinking Maps, all students will have access to the lesson and standards-aligned tasks. All K-5 Students Sept All Staff Members 2018 – Administrators June 2019 Parents/guardians All K-5 Students Sept Administration 2018 – Grade Facilitators June 2019 Classroom Teachers Students and teachers will continue to use the language associated with a growth mindset to encourage risk taking and productive struggles to drive achievement. All K-5 Students PBIS expectations will drive a culture of respect, responsibility and problem solving. Students and teachers will foster a safe environment where peer support is central to the learning experience. Teachers will facilitate the creation of student goal setting in reading. A public classroom display will illuminate student's current DRA level and indicate the goal level. Students will use the visual to monitor progress and support peers. Students will maintain logs to track reading and progress. All K-5 Students All K-5 Students Instructional Leaders Literacy Coach AIS /ENL Providers IEP Teacher Sept All Staff Members 2018 – Administrators June 2019 Sept All Staff Members 2018 – Administrators June 2019 Parents/guardians Sept Administration 2018 – Grade Facilitators June 2019 Classroom Teachers 2018-19 SCEP-P 22  Instructional rounds will provide administrators the opportunity to engage in professional conversations with teachers and educational assistants to strengthen the alignment between tools/strategies identified on student's I.E.P.s and access to these supports during instructional time. All students in Kindergarten through Grade 2 will have multiple opportunities to obtain a library card. Frequent walking trips to the Mott Haven Public Library will allow students to select interest-based books for independent and partner reading sessions. The structural organization of the school day will allow students daily opportunities to participate in just-right independent activities as well as teacher guided small group instruction to hone reading skills. This RtI model allows for flexibility and gradual release of responsibility. Through consistent informal and formal data collection, at risk students will be flagged to participate in intense AIS cycles designed to accelerate their lagging progress and students ready for enrichment will be challenged to think more deeply. Special consideration will be given to SWDs and ENL learners who will receive instruction and participate in reading activities aligned to research-based best practices. Instructional Leaders Literacy Coach AIS /ENL Providers IEP Teachers Administration Sept Administration Classroom Teachers Educational Assistants All K-2 Students All K-5 Students 2018 – Classroom Teachers June 2019 Educational Assistants Sept Classroom Teachers 2018 – Administrators June 2019 Parents/guardians Sept Administration 2018 – Grade Facilitators June 2019 Classroom Teachers Enrichment Teachers Instructional Leaders Literacy Coach AIS /ENL Providers IEP Teachers Administration Grade Facilitators Classroom Teachers Enrichment Teachers Instructional Leaders Literacy Coach AIS /ENL Providers IEP Teachers All stakeholders will review the schoolwide PBIS matrix with students to support their level of understanding behavioral expectations in every part of our school community. In addition, the Cloud 9 curriculum will be taught and expounded on throughout the day to support character education that will guide student behaviors that lead to their social and emotional success with self and their peers. All PK -5 Students September 2018 - June 2019 2018-19 SCEP-P 23  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. School Based Support Team will conduct bimonthly self- monitoring , goal setting workshops for families and school community. Copies of the PBIS Matrix will be sent home in English & Spanish so that parents are aware and can support our mission for social & emotional awareness for success. A monthly Cloud 9 parent activity is shared with parents to do at home to support learning at home with their child(ren). Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Programming Scheduling for Weekly Teacher Team Meetings, Classroom Inter-visitations; support instruction and professional growth / understanding/ implementation Inquiry Group on common special education trends   Effective & Consistent Parent Outreach Programs / Incentives / Parent Engagement Initiatives  Administrative Assistance  Special Education District Support Staff Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 45% students will display a sense of ownership of their learning experience through the development of critical peer relationships via schoolwide supports as evidenced by the results of the 2019 NYC OORS report. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. I-Ready ELA Diagnostics; F & P; DRAs Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 24  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. SOP(s) Addressed X 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths +According to the 2017-18 School Quality Guide 92% of teachers responded positively when reporting their belief that professional development experiences included opportunities to work productively with colleagues in the school +According to the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide, 89% of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that overall, their professional development experiences this year have included enough time to think carefully about, try, and evaluate new ideas +According to the 2018 June Instructional Report, 5th grade average points earned on short and extended response writing questions totaled 56% as compared to the citywide average of 57% and 4th grade average points earned on short and extended response writing questions totaled 51% as compared to the citywide average of 55% Needs -According to the 2017-18 School Quality Guide 65% of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that overall, their professional development experiences this year have included opportunities to work productively with teachers from other schools 2018-19 SCEP-P 25  -According to the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide, 74% of teachers reported their eagerness to try new ideas -According to the 2018 June Instructional Report, 3rd grade average points earned on short and extended response writing questions totaled 34% as compared to the citywide average of 49% The priority needs at PS 65 for the element of Collaborative Teachers is to expand opportunities for teachers to explore research-based best practices and strategies with both internal and external colleagues for the purpose of planning results-driven annual, unit, and daily lesson plans so that all student goals and needs are addressed. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all teacher team will develop a comprehensive data analysis plan in alignment with the school's existing assessment plan whereas 65% of general education students will make 1 year's growth of reading gains (2/3 of a year's growth for SWD's) as measured by DRA levels. 2018-19 SCEP-P 26  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) In collaboration with analytics professional consultants from School Data Corp., all school-based stakeholders will be exposed to professional learning opportunities designed to develop their skill-set to effectively analyze current data and make informed practice refinements to improve student outcomes. All Sept School Data Corp. Teachers 2018 – Administration June 2019 Classroom Teachers Teams of teachers will collaborate with Literacy coach and administration to create a data analysis calendar aligned to the school's assessment plan. Using the Data Wise Improvement Process, teachers and educational assistants will reflect on instructional practice, identify student-centered problems and propose refinement to current pedagogical approaches. Educational Assistants Grade Facilitator All Teachers Sept Administration 2018 – Classroom Teachers June 2019 Educational Assistants Grade Facilitator Sept Administration 2018 – Classroom Teachers June 2019 Educational Assistants Literacy Coach Grade Facilitator Strategically timed periodic simulation testing will allow teacher teams to glean data, conduct inquiry, identify trends, and make recommendations for future practice. All grade 2-5 Students In collaboration with administration, highly effective teacher teams will be identified so that colleagues may observe how the data analysis process informs their adjusted practice to meet the needs of all identified subgroups. K-5 Classroom Teachers Sept Administration 2018 – Classroom Teachers June 2019 Educational Assistants Literacy Coach 2018-19 SCEP-P 27  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. In collaboration, school leaders and teacher teams will create a monthly newsletter of academic data with strategies for families to further support students at home. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Literacy & Math Coach; Flexible Scheduling; Inter-visitations Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, all teacher team will develop a comprehensive data analysis plan in alignment with the school's existing assessment plan whereas 40% of general education students will make 5 months growth of reading gains (2/3 of a year's growth for SWD's) as measured by DRA levels. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The DRA will be used to measure student's reading levels at the 5 month progress monitoring date. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 28  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths +According to the 2017-2018 School Performance Dashboard, school practices and conditions that drive student achievement in the tenant Effective Leadership met scaled quality expectations at 3.86 +According to data gleaned from Advance APPR reports, there was a 10% increase in teachers rated effective in component 3d when comparing 2016-2017 and 2017-2018 end of year reports Needs -According to data gleaned from 2017-2018 Advance/APPR reports, 52% of teachers were rated effective in component 3d Part 2 – Annual Goal 2018-19 SCEP-P 29  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART– Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, administrators and teacher leaders will collaborate to develop guiding principles to build teachers' capacity to assess student learning in alignment with effective practice described by component 1f and 3d of the Danielson Framework for Teaching whereas 75% of general education students will make 1 year's growth of reading gains (2/3 of a year's growth for SWD's) as measured by DRA levels. 2018-19 SCEP-P 30  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Principal as instructional leaders will adopt Thinking Maps as a common visual language for learning. Consistent and coherent exposure will support teacher's understanding of the tool and implication for impact on student learning. Principal and critical stakeholders will design a professional development plan to support teacher's understanding of the Data Wise Improvement Process, as they adopt best practices to use data to drive instruction for all students and sub groups. Areas for professional development will be considered based on needs of the school (teacher's efficacy and effectiveness in component 1f and 3d of the Danielson framework for Teaching) and in alignment with the district focus/goals. Teachers will utilize feedback from administration, colleagues, instructional leaders and self-reflection tools to identify 1 instructional goal aligned to component 3d of the Danielson Framework for teaching. Teachers will engage in learning opportunities and professional development to bolster their efficacy and target improvement. Principal will expose staff to research-based strategies and best practices to meet the diverse needs of all students and will allocate resources to meet the needs of teachers (i.e. scheduling, sustained professional learning opportunities, per session allocation, technology allocation to drive initiatives, human capital). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Sept Principal 2018 – June 2019 All staff members All students K-5 All Teachers Sept Principal 2018 – Superintendent June 2019 District Level - Support Staff All Teachers Sept Principal 2018 – Instructional Leaders June 2019 All Teachers Sept Principal 2018 – Superintendent All Support Staff June 2019 District Level - Support Staff Borough Field Support Staff New Teacher Institute will inculcate new staff members with an understanding of the guiding principles and values of the school community. School based supports as well as external professional learning opportunities will support new teacher's understanding of the common language and research based-best practices that drive the pedagogical vision for all learners. All New Teachers Sept Principal 2018 – Teacher Mentors June 2019 Teacher Leaders 2018-19 SCEP-P 31  Instructional Specialists Superintendent District Level - Support Staff 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. School Principal will conduct interactive monthly workshops to provide a toolbox of strategies and resource to increase parents' efficacy to support students at home. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. School-wide schedules; Tuesday Parent Engagement Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2018, administrators and teacher leaders will collaborate to develop guiding principles to build teachers' capacity to assess student learning in alignment with effective practice described by component 1f and 3d of the Danielson's Framework for Teaching whereas 75% of general education students will make 5 months growth of reading gains (2/3 of a year's growth for SWD's) as measured by DRA levels. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. DRA will be used to measure student's reading levels at the 5 month progress monitoring date. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 32  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school X community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths +According to the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide, 94% of parents/guardians strongly agreed that school staff regularly communicate with them about how they can help their child learn. +According to the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide, 95% of parents/guardians responded that since the beginning of the school year, they have communicated with their child's teacher about their child's performance sometimes or often. +According to the 2017 School Performance Dashboard, school practices and conditions that drive student achievement in the tenant Strong Family Community Ties met scaled quality expectations at 3.82 Needs -According to the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide, 86% of parent/guardians responded that they are somewhat or very likely to attend a general school meeting or school event 2018-19 SCEP-P 33  +According to the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide, 67% of parents/guardians responded that, since the beginning of the school year, they have been asked or had the opportunity to volunteer time to support their school. -According to the 2017 School Quality Guide, parent involvement is reported at 88% Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2018, the school will invite parents to attend at least 4 literacy events to foster a strong home/school partnerships as evidence by a 40% increase in parent attendance to school functions. 2018-19 SCEP-P 34  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff)  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  School will be a consistent host for learning opportunities targeted to empower family members. Inclusive workshops will be delivered in English and Spanish. Special efforts will be made to provide information in multiple languages such as French, African and Bengali to reach more parents in our community. 1. Parents will understand through workshops, what academic language looks like and sounds like in a classroom and how they can ask high order thinking questions at home to promote consistency. 2. Parents will learn how they can improve the quality of their child’s academic communication by asking questions and expounding on each day’s lesson, incorporating the same strategies during family time. 3. Parents will understand that better speakers become better readers and writers and will engage their children in meaningful dialog. 4. Parents will learn how to ask differentiated levels of questions to deepen their child's thinking 5. Parents will attend interactive academic workshops with their child and submit evidence of the home extension activity at the following meeting. All Sept Parent Coordinator Parents/Guardians 2018 – Principal June 2019 Assistant Principal Teachers Instructional Specialists SLT Members PTA Officers 2018-19 SCEP-P 35  6. Parents will learn how Thinking Maps are used at school as a consistent theme to extend thinking and discover ways to support coherency at home Families will receive monthly progress reports to illuminate child's progress and focus areas for continued growth. Teachers will use Parent Engagement Tuesdays to support parents understanding of standards-based instruction through targeted workshops designed to promote student achievement. In addition, Assistant Principal will host monthly data meetings to support families broader understanding of the state of the school and areas for continued development. Parent engagement punch cards will be used as an incentive for families to partner with the school. Each category of the punch card will reflect areas in which parents can demonstrate involvement at the school level. Families completing punch cards will be invited to attend a special event in June honoring their commitment to their school partnership. All Parents/Guardians Sept Parent Coordinator 2018 – Principal June 2019 Assistant Principal Teachers Instructional Specialists SLT Members PTA Officers Parent Coordinator All Parents/Guardians Sept 2018 – Principal June 2019 Assistant Principal Teachers Instructional Specialists SLT Members PTA Officers Partnerships with the community and broader based stakeholders will be forged and sustained. Support from the Mott Haven Public Library, District Grants (My Brother's All Family Members Sept Principal 2018-19 SCEP-P 36  Keeper), St. Francis of Brooklyn, Archbishop Carney High School in Vancouver Canada will afford the school the opportunity to provide resources and books to build family's at-home library. District sponsored Book Clubs will build parents efficacy and understanding of the importance of reading and unpacking literary themes with their child. 2018 – June 2019 Assistant Principal All Teachers Instructional Specialists Superintendent District Level - Support Staff Supporting Stakeholders A Reading Culture in the school and at home will be fostered to develop students love of books. Monthly School hosted literacy-themed events listed below will be designed to promote engagement and excitement. All Family Members Sept Principal 2018 – Assistant Principal June 2019 All Teachers 1. Camp Fire Story Night: Families will be invited to bring a blanket and attend this event where they will sit around a "camp fire" and learn the craft of story telling. S'mores will make the evening complete! 2. Snuggle up and Read: Parents and guardians as reading 3. buddies are invited to come to the classroom where along with their child they will wear cozy pajamas and snuggle up with a good book! Interactive Movie Night: Put down the popcorn! Parents/guardians and family members are the main attraction at this interactive event where participants take the starring role and perform skits based on the characteristics of the main characters portrayed. All movies selected will be based on appropriate books of the same title. As high percentages of students attending the school live in temporary housing, literacy events will be planned to take place at these facilities. Families in crisis will be given special consideration and accommodated so that students with interrupted education be given every opportunity to succeed. All Families in Temporary Housing Sept 2018 – June 2019 Instructional Specialists Superintendent District Level - Support Staff Supporting Stakeholders Department of Housing Principal Assistant Principal Teachers Parent Coordinator School Aides 2018-19 SCEP-P 37  PTA Officers SLT Members School Support Staff District Support Staff 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Young Scholars Community Based Organization; Citizens Committee for New York City; House on Beekman Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Parent Engagement Tuesdays; Monthly Parent Workshops with Principal; Evening Open House; Classroom Invitation to View ELA / Math Workshops; Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, all stakeholders will design a calendar of literacy events that will foster a strong reading culture and strengthen the home/school partnership resulting in 65% of general education students will make 5 month growth of reading gains (2/3 of a year's growth for SWD's) as measured by DRA levels. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Monthly Attendance Sheets; Parent Surveys; Follow-Up Surveys; Parent Reflection Sheets; Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 38  Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Program Description Directions: Expanded Learning Time activities are directly aligned to the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, Rigorous Instruction, Supportive Environment, and Strong Family and Community Ties. ELT provides enriching educational experiences that happen outside of the traditional school day and blend skill acquisition, relationship-building and fun to foster academic and social-emotional growth. Summer learning, afterschool programming, and extended-day ELT models, when well-implemented, play a critical role in supporting students in all grades and ensuring that they graduate from high school, college and career ready. SED requires that Priority schools offer a minimum of 200 additional student contact hours as Expanded Learning Time in addition to the current mandated length of 900 hours of instruction per year (25 hours per week) in grades K-6 and 990 hours of instruction per year (27.5 hours per week) in grades 7-12. Effective ELT models will blend school staff with community partners, and will provide a balanced curriculum that can include ELA, Math, STEM, arts, physical activity, and leadership development. Complete the sections on this page to demonstrate how the school will meet these requirements. Part 1 – ELT Program Goal(s) Describe the summative goal(s) of the ELT program for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. Persevere Until Success Happens (PUSH) after school and PUSH Saturday programs have been added to assist our lowest 1/3 students in grades 1-5. The PUSH after school program comprises of currently holdover students, multiple holdover students, ENL students and struggling students. Additionally, our PUSH Saturday program invites our ENL students in Grades 1-5; our SWDs and general population for academic support in both ELA and Mathematics using a project-based learning model. Furthermore, we have Flipped Classrooms on Saturdays for our 5th grade students designed to enhance their academic understanding of specific content focused areas. By June 2019, 75% of general education students will make 1 year's growth of reading gains (2/3 of a year's growth for SWD's) as measured by DRA reading levels. Part 2 – ELT Program Type Is the ELT program voluntary or compulsory? Voluntary X Compulsory If the ELT program is voluntary, indicate how you will actively encourage the participation of all students, with the goal of serving at least 50% of students. It is not voluntary Part 3 – ELT Program Description The ELT program will be offered to all students eligible for Academic Intervention Services (AIS), with the goal of serving a minimum of fifty percent of AIS-eligible students. Describe how the school will meet the following SED requirements for an ELT program in a Priority School:  Integrate academics, enrichment, and skill development through hands-on experiences that make learning relevant and engaging.  Offer a range of activities that capture student interest and strengthen student engagement in learning so as to promote higher attendance, reduce risk for retention or drop out, and increase the likelihood of graduation. 2018-19 SCEP-P 39   Actively address the unique learning needs and interests of all types of students, especially those who may benefit from approaches and experiences not offered in the traditional classroom setting.  Contain components designed to improve student academic, social, and emotional outcomes, including opportunities for enrichment programs such as in music and art.  Ensure instruction in any core academic subject offered in the program will be delivered under the supervision of a teacher who is NYS certified in that particular content area.  Engage in outreach activities made to families. Our lowest 1/3, current holdovers and multiple holdovers students must attend our PUSH After School and Saturday Academy Programs, which provides our students with standards-aligned hand-ons activities and strategies they need to grow academically. We also offer our Flipped Classroom studies on Saturdays for our 5th grade students, where they view explicit instructional videos, pod-casts and/or websites designed to enhance their academic understanding of specific content focused areas to further their preparation for the classroom discussion on Monday. Part 4 – ELT Program Implementation and Oversight Part 4a. Who will implement the ELT program? Who will oversee the program? 1. Indicate the key personnel that will be responsible for implementing and overseeing the ELT program, including school-based staff and any high-quality community partners that will be involved. If applicable, describe the scope of involvement of all community partners and how the joint ELT program is structured. 2. 3. Explain how you will evaluate the program to assess impact on student achievement. Assistant Principal, IEP Teacher and Effective/ Highly Effective Teachers will be responsible for overseeing the ELT programs. Following identified 4 week intervals, students will be administered assessments aligned to individual unit plans for their prescribed ELT programming. Part 4b. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. October 2018 - June, 2019 Part 5 – ELT Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the ELT program. Human resources needed are those teachers rated effective/highly effective; instructional resources are digital programming and supporting technology devices; Schedule adjustment to secure permits for extended weekday hours and Saturday hours; funding to cover per session and permit costs Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support the ELT Program. Note: If the program is funded by 21st Century Community Center Learning Funds, it must be offered in conjunction with a high quality, high capacity community partner. 21st Century Title I 1003(a) Tax Levy Title III Title I SWP PTA Funded Title I TA X P/F Set-aside SIG Grant School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 6 – ELT Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 2018-19 SCEP-P 40  By February 2019, 85% of students consistently attending PUSH ELT programs will have made at minimum 3 levels of reading gains from benchmark entry point as measured by the DRA. Part 6b. Indicate the instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. DRA Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 41  Section 7: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) 1. Students fallingbelow median scale score on state exam 2. Students 1. SGI/ RtI period 2. During thedailyReader's Workshop 3. During thedailyReader's Workshop 4. PUSH Afterschool Program 5. PUSH Saturday Program 1. SGI/ RtI period 2. During thedaily mathematics block 3. PUSH Afterschool Program 4. PUSH Saturday Program 1. Students 1. Science Exemplars fallingbelow median scale for grades 2-4 1. Small group Instruction 1. SGI/ RtI period 2018-19 SCEP-P 42 Interactive Writing 1. 2. Guided Reading 3. Shared reading strategy to build close reading skills 4. Guided Writing 5. Digital Path ( i-Ready 1. Small group Instruction 2. Differentiationof tasks 3. Educators scaffold for support adaptive program) 4. Differentiated scoring below proficiency levels on baselineDRA scores 6. Thinking Maps to support students in making their thinking visual open-ended questions, to build towards higher order thinking (DOK) 5. Collaborative Group Work 1. Small group Instruction 2. Differentiationof tasks 1. Students 1. Digital Path (i.e. Reflex Math fluency builder; i-Ready adaptive program) fallingbelow median scale score on state exam 2. Students scoring below proficiency levels on beginning of year prerequisite assessment in mathematics 2. Concrete/Visual/Abs3. Educators tract methodology to build conceptual understanding 3. Thinking Maps to support students in making their thinking visual scaffold for support 4. Differentiated open-ended questions, to build towards higher order thinking (DOK) 5. Collaborative Group Work Mathematics Science score on 4th gradestate exam 2. Studentsscoring a Level 1 on baseline science assessments 1. Students fallingbelow median scale score on state exam 2. Students scoring below proficiency levels on baselineDRA scores 1. Students identified by Pupil Personnel Team (PPT) requiring at risk services Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) 2. Project-based 2. Differentiationo2. During thescheduled Science period 3. PUSH Afterschool Program 4. PUSH Saturday Program 1. SGI/ RtI period 2. During thescheduled Social Studies period 3. PUSH Afterschool Program 4. PUSH Saturday Program 1. During the school day learning f tasks 3. Hands-on inquiry-3. Educators based science exploration 4. Science Expo Projects aligned to scientific method 5. Thinking Maps to support students in making their thinking visual 1. Project-based learning 2. Ready Gen Literacy/Social Studies integration 3. Passport Social Studies Curriculum 1. 2. Individual and group counseling sessions Individual an group speech and language sessions scaffold for support 4. Differentiated open-ended questions, to build towards higher order thinking (DOK) 5. Collaborative Group Work 1. Small group Instruction 2. Differentiationof tasks 3. Educators scaffold for support 4. Differentiated open-ended questions, to build towards higher order thinking (DOK) 5. Collaborative Group Work 1. On the spot crisis intervention bySchool Psychologist 2. On the spot 3. crisis intervention bySchool Counselors Individual and group counseling sessions and speech and language sessions 4. Our SchoolCounselorwill provide in class 2018-19 SCEP-P 43  observations and assists teachers with creating FBAs and BIPs to address students’ needs 5. Classroom activities will be given using Project Exsel to develop social skills through play therapy, interactive games, role playing videos on conflict resolution, bullying, and anger management. 2018-19 SCEP-P 44  Section 8: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) Currently, we have 135 students in Temporary Housing or Double Occupancy homes. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Multiple New Uniforms; School supplies; Book bags, under clothes, socks, T shirts, ... Academically, the students will receive math manipulatives to take home to practice their skills independently or with family members; Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 SCEP-P 45  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. $0.00 2018-19 SCEP-P 46  Section 9: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Teachers  Targeted learning opportunities to meet the needs of various developmental stages o Fundations Professional development for Early childhood educators o Division of Early Childhood Education to enhance teacher's efficacy in providing developmentally appropriate socio-emotional support (PK) o Early Reading Matters Coaching to support balanced literacy best practices aligned to ELA Common Core Instructional Shifts (K-3) o ULIT Coach to support the facilitation of high quality common core standards-aligned early childhood reading instruction (K-2) o World of Words specialist partnering with early childhood educators to support the development of content-based vocabulary/student-led discourse aligned to common core standards (PK-1) o Thinking Maps specialists to build teacher's capacity to develop student's healthy academic habit of making their thinking visible (K-5) o Data Corp. specialists to enhance data visualization and teacher's efficacy to analyze data, refine instruction, provide targeted interventions, and close the education gap (K-5) o Mathematics Coach to support the facilitation of ECAM (Early Childhood Assessment if mathematics) to diagnose o NTN mathematics specialists to support grade 3 teachers in preparing first year state test takers in securing common core standards o Generation Ready mathematics specialists to support teacher's capacity to differentiate common core aligned lessons (K-5)  Teacher-led differentiated learning opportunity series (Learning cycle consists of a series of 3 PDs) 2018-19 SCEP-P 47   Advance data driven learning opportunities targeting high leverage instructional areas (Danielson Framework for Teaching Domain C) Principals  District Learning Summits to align instructional focus to district goals  Priority School Focus Group to support rigorous instruction and enhanced student outcomes  City-wide learning opportunities aligned to the elements of the framework for great schools   Special Education learning opportunities to ensure all learners have access to common core standards Intervisitations to showcase schools (Within and Outside of the District) Paraprofessionals  Chancellor's Conferences: learning opportunities to support culturally relevant pedagogy and instructional equity  Differentiated learning opportunities driven by needs assessment/surveys    Consistent feedback and support from supervisors/ IEP teacher to ensure crisis/health paraprofessionals Full access to all content specialists/coaches for individualized support Inclusion in all professional learning opportunities supporting rigorous instruction employ research based best practices Supporting Staff Special Education learning opportunities to develop educator's efficacy in research based best practices   ENL professional learning opportunities to develop educator's efficacy in research based best practices   New York Association of School Psychologists conferences to improve assessment interpretation and SLD SESIS training to support online monitoring of student services identification Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). n/a Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). 2018-19 SCEP-P 48  PK students and parents visit our Kindergarten classroom and receive classroom tours led by Kindergarten students; Former PK parents meet with current PK parents to support transitional stage from PK to Kindergarten; 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. We will be using our data from multiple resources to determine next steps to meet our students academic, social and emotional needs 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (SCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. 359,855.00 0 60,000 143,326.00 x x x Title I Part A (Basic) Federal Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Federal Federal Title II, Part A Federal Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) Section: 5: b,c,d,e Section: 6, 7 n/a Section 5E: Strong Community Section: 5: a, b In grades K-3, funded teachers provide integrated support during the SGI/RTIperiod. Dual campus status restricts the school from opening additional classrooms 2018-19 SCEP-P 49 Title III, Part A Federal Title III, Immigrant Federal Tax Levy (FSF) Local 11,200.00 0 2,512,704.00 x x x Section 6: Afterschool/Sat Program Section 5; a,b Section: 5: b,c,d,e Section: 6, 7 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/SCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not 2018-19 SCEP-P 50  available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 SCEP-P 51  Section 10: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. PS 65X Parent Involvement Policy (PIP) Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. PS 65x, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. PS 65’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students PS 65x will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; 2018-19 SCEP-P 52  ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality In developing the PS 65 Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the PS 65 School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act; 2018-19 SCEP-P 53  ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; PS 65x will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. PS 65’s School-Parent Compact Template School-Parent Compact (SPC) PS 65x , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Public School 65’s Responsibilities: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: 2018-19 SCEP-P 54  ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; 2018-19 SCEP-P 55  ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; PS 65’s Parent/Guardian Responsibilities: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; 2018-19 SCEP-P 56  ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; PS 65’s Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 SCEP-P 57  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): K 6 1 7 2 8 3 9 4 10 5 11 12 55 2018-19 SCEP-P 58  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: PS 65X Mother Hale Academy will implement a Title III after school program in which our ELL students will listen, speak, read, and write in English through the use of plays and drama, and selected academic activities to supplement their learning as ELLs. Our ELL after school program will utilize the Abrams Reading Theatre to actively engage drama-based participation and encourage the interests of our ENL students through this use of drama. Our after school program will meet two (2) times per week for two (2) hours per session on Wednesdays and Fridays, and will be divided into two groups by grade levels. One group will consist of our ELL students in grades K - 1 - 2, and the other group will consist of our ELL students in grades 3 – 4 – 5. The expected start date for our direct instruction supplemental program is November 7, 2018, and continuing weekly until June 1, 2019. The program will have three (3) NYS certified teachers, with a NYS certified ENL teacher and two (2) NYS certified general education teachers providing direct supplemental instruction. BREAKDOWN OF ALLOCATION OF INSTRUCTION: • three (3) teachers per session, two (2) hours per session • per session rate including fringes of $55.23 / hour • per session rate of $165.69 / hour for three teachers ($55.23 x 3 teachers / hours = $165.69) • total per session rate of $331.38 / session ($55.23 x 3 teachers for 2 hours = $331.38) • 37 sessions (11/7/18 – 03/17/2019) for a total per session rate of $12,261.06 • no allocation for supervisor per session; supervisor is already on site • all of our Title III Supplementary money will be used for direct supplementary instruction as PS 65 X is conceptually consolidated. The Title III direct instructional supplementary program will begin after school with a meal in the cafeteria, followed by an exercise and movement activity when the students reach the classroom. The main portion of our ELL-designed after school academic activities will then take place with the students’ participation in the listening, reading, performing, and development of plays based upon the Abrams Reading Theatre and the students’ own imagination. The student performances of the plays will also be produced for and acted before fellow students, parents, other family members, and the community surrounding our school. We anticipate the participation of thirty (30) to forty (40) ELLs as active after school drama participants, from kindergarten through fifth grade (K - 5). The ELL after school program will focus on and stress the modalities of listening, speaking, reading, and writing in each after school sessions. Also, our after school ELL students will be evaluated and grouped according to their current proficiency levels, grades, and ages (Entering, Emerging, Transitioning, Expanding, and Commanding), and the three participating teachers will monitor each groups’ participation and 2018-19 SCEP-P 59  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information interaction through the use of our four modalities in English (Listening, Speaking, Reading, and Writing). As our after school teachers consist of an ENL-certified teacher and two general education-certified elementary teachers, each of our three teachers will make use of their specified areas of expertise and teaching experience to enhance the instruction of the play/drama-related materials and ELL-specific curricular materials designed for this ELL after school program. The materials to be used will primarily consist of the Abrams Reading Theatre, Set 1 and Set 2, as well as any academic and drama-related materials provided by our three after school teachers. We expect our ELL students will be highly motivated to participate and learn in our after school drama program based upon their enthusiasm and participation in past years of utilizing these methods and this program. Through our Title III after school program, our ELL students will be given the opportunity to actively participate and learn while practicing their English language communication skills of listening, speaking, reading, and writing through drama, as well as learning to work collaboratively in groups, on teams, as characters, in role-play, and in the sharing of ideas while learning both ELL-specific content and ELL-related social skills. Additionally, our ELL students will actively participate in culminating drama activities through their involvement in and excitement emanating from student-performed live productions presented before audience members of students and staff, parents, guardians, family members, and others in the surrounding P.S. 65 neighborhood and community. We anticipate the production of these culminating student performances to take place in March 2017, with specific calendar dates to be selected nearer to the end of the program. We intend to present both in-school and after-school performances to maximize the ability of our student body and parent/family community to “see the show!” Each culminating presentation will consist of three or four plays or drama-related activities performed by a group consisting of kindergarten to second grade ELL students (K – 2), and a group consisting of third to fifth grade ELL students (3 - 5), on to-be-determined future dates, with costumes, sets, and playbills designed by our students intended to enhance the overall quality, participation, and production of their performances. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Our ESL teacher regularly attends English Language Learner professional development seminars held by the Department of English Language Learners and Student Support (DELLS), under the direction of Mark Weisman, ELL Services Coordinator, Bronx Borough Field Support center (BBFSC), and Dr. Olga Mejia-Glenn, Senior Compliance and Performance Specialist, Division of English Language Learners (DELLS), District 7, and the New York City Department of Education. These professional development seminars are held throughout the school year and cover various English Language Learner topics and concerns directly benefiting English as a New Language teachers and ELL students. Past and present professional development seminars have focused on various curricular, educational, and organizational matters related to ELL teaching, ELL learning, ELL administrative duties, and special education ELL students. We anticipate that future ELL professional development seminars will focus on like-minded topics, as well as any new ELL/ENL topics, concerns, strategies, and/or areas of information related to 2018-19 SCEP-P 60  Part C: Professional Development the teaching of and learning by our ELL students. Our ENL teachers, Mr. Mehno & Ms. Merlino, held various professional development seminars during the 2017-2018 school year for the P.S. 65 X staff and administration, accounting for the mandated fifteen percent (15%) of ELL professional development devoted to ELL-related subjects and instruction. Future seminars will be held during professional development hours on our Monday professional development days, as designated by the Department of Education, with specific dates and ELL topics to be implemented at future dates amenable to the P.S. 65 administration. The proposed ELL topics to be presented during these professional development sessions will include an overview of the NYSITELL and Spanish LAB, the NYSESLAT, NYSESLAT testing and results, differentiation for ELL students (and others), using ELL strategies in the classroom, the push-in and pull-out models, and a focus on ELL/ESL students in the classroom and their various learning abilities and accompanying needs for support. All ELL professional development seminars for all teachers may be given twice by Mr. Mehno & Ms. Merlino on different dates: one session to our Kindergarten, first, and second grade teachers and support staff, and a second session to our third, fourth, and fifth grade teachers and support staff, if and when necessary. Our ENL teachers will also attend the mandated fifty percent (50%) of total professional development hours at ELL-specific PD held for ENL teachers by the New York City Department of education. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Our ELL students in the Title III after school program will perform several of their rehearsed plays, and other forms of dramatic presentations, to their parents and guardians at the conclusion of the after school program. We will present plays from the Abrams Reading Theatre and from the productions and skits written and created by the students themselves. We expect our performances to take place both during our after school program and at a separate assembly when we present our play-acting and play-writing skills in a public performance in the spring of 2017. Our ELL after school drama activities will involve performances by all of the students participating in the after school program. The rationale behind these activities is to increase our ELL students’ academic success with and use of the four modalities of listening, speaking, reading, and writing, while simultaneously promoting a sense of confidence, pride, and self- and group-accomplishments, while increasing their English language skills by performing before each other in the program and before a live audience. Our ELL students will also acquire a greater knowledge of and improvement in their overall English language skills while attaining a greater confidence in reading, writing, and speaking as they increase their vocabulary, comprehension, and fluency in English. Parents will be notified of our live ELL play productions by letters, phone calls, flyers, student word-of-mouth, and our parent coordinator’s effective outreach of information to our parents, families, and the P.S. 65 neighborhood and community. Our ENL teachers, Mr. Mehno & Ms. Merlino, have also proposed to initiate a Saturday academy of English language learning in fall 2018 for our parents wanting to learn English, or improve their already existing English language. This program would begin In October, every 2018-19 SCEP-P 61  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Tuesday during Parent Engagement. These parent ENL classes will focus on teaching English language skills to the parents and other family members in our P.S. 65 community. We plan to invite our parents, families, and other community members to participate in these workshop sessions as a way of increasing school involvement in our community, and increasing community involvement in our school. Additionally, our ESL teachers, Mr. Mehno & Ms. Merlino, communicate with our ELL parents and their families through face-to-face meetings and frequent letters and flyers intended to establish an open line of communication and information between PS 65 and our ELL students and their parents. Parental notifications are sent home at the beginning of the academic school year to our ELL parents and guardians in the form of Entitlement Letters, Continued Entitlement Letters, Non-Entitlement Letters, Parent Preferred Language Forms, Placement Letters, and ELL Parent Brochures in the home or preferred language of our parents and guardians. The parents and families of newly identified ELLs are also invited to P.S. 65 for a Parent Orientation, and a viewing of the Parent Orientation Video explaining their options and rights as the parent or guardian of an ELL student. In the fall, the parents also receive the Title III Letter explaining the supplemental services their child will receive as an ELL student, and the details of the after school program in which their child is invited and encouraged to participate. In the spring, letters are sent to our ELL parents informing them of the upcoming NYSESLAT assessments, the NYSESLAT’s significance towards ascertaining their child’s assessed level of English proficiency based upon the results of the NYSESLATs, and the importance of their child’s participation in the NYSESLATs. P.S. 65 will provide all oral and written communication with translated services in the home language or preferred language of the parents and guardians of our ELL students, which at the present time is a majority of Spanish and minority of French and Mandingo. We will provide oral and written Spanish translation by the P.S. 65 administration, parent coordinator, Spanish-fluent teachers, and Spanish-fluent staff, and the Department of Education’s Translation and Interpretation Unit. For our French-based and Mandingo-based oral and written translation services we will avail the services of the Translation and Interpretation Unit provided by the New York City Department of Education. To ensure timely provision of translated documents, we will prepare our materials-to-be-translated ahead of our scheduled release dates by working within a turnaround date for the translation to be completed and returned, whether translated in-house at P.S. 65, by the Department of Education’s Translation and Interpretation Unit, or by a New York City Department of Education contracted outside vendor, when necessary and/or applicable. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 2018-19 SCEP-P 62  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title.  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 2018-19 SCEP-P 63  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 07 School Name Mother Hale Academy / PS 65x Borough Bronx School Number 065 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Jasmine Gonzalez Coach Michelle Warren, Lit Coach ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Richard MehnoLucy Merlino Teacher/Subject Area Jewan Baboolal, Sp Ed TeacherN Teacher/Subject Area Sylvia Santiago Related-Service Provider Luciana Bautista, Bil Guidance Superintendent Richard Cintron Assistant Principal Danielle Presto Coach Grisselle Gonzalez-Fortuna, M School Counselor Salonia Henderson Parent Maria Hernandez Parent Coordinator Samuel Morales Field Support Center Staff Member Socorro Diaz Other (Name and Title) K. Dela Cruz, ELL Director C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 1 2 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 2018-19 SCEP-P 64  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 416 Total number of ELLs 56 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 13.46% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 2 3 4 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? At PS 65, early literacy skills are assessed using iReady Reading Diagnostics, Writing on Demand, Ready Word Study, the NYSITELL, the NYSESLAT, and DRAs from the prior school year. These assessments provide us with valuable data and information as to our students’ reading engagement, oral reading fluency, reading comprehension skills, and English proficiency levels. These data assist us in planning and implementing our differentiated instructional plans to best meet the learning needs and learning styles of our ELL students, and to make progress against any apparent learning gaps. Our students in grades K-2 are emergent in story books and develop their reading fluency within their grade leveling within the first four to five months of the school year. By midyear, students' retelling of accounts in the story improve, along with the interpretation (skill to infer) as to the main idea and reflection of a story. We have also incorporated the ReadyGen curriculum school-wide, which provides additional literacy support across content areas for our ELLs. 2018-19 SCEP-P 65  2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? PDs are offered to support our teachers with assessing students using F/P; SGI period every morning to support our students in small group instructions tailored to meet their leveled needs in math and literacy. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The success of our program for ELLs is evaluated through the achievement of our ELLs in the following assessments: How well our ELL students in grades 3 - 5 perform on the NYS ELA exams, math exams, and grade 4 science exams; How well our ELL students in grades K - 5 progress on their iReady Reading Diagnostics levels over the course of each school year; How well our ELL students in grades K - 5 progress on all four modalities of the NYSESLAT (Listening, Speaking, Reading, and Writing), as they progress year to year through the new proficiency levels of Eentering (EN), Emerging (EM), Transitioning (TR), Expanding (EX), and Commanding (CM). 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Immediate interventions such as small group instruction, Saturday support, visuals, technology, ... 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] As required by New York State, the data attained from the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS), as well as individual interviews with the student and parent/guardian, determine a student’s ELL status as they enter school, and assess whether literary skills and competencies are at grade level. If the ELL student is identified as at-risk, the student receives RtI instructional support. This initial identification process assists in determining targeted factors which may influence the student’s English language learning process, which in turn may guide instructional strategies. Data from the NYSITELL and previous year's NYSESLAT scores are used to determine our ELL students’ current level of English proficiency. Additionally, teachers administer iReady Reading Diagnostics to gather detailed data as to oral fluency and English reading comprehension skills. PS 65 is currently using ReadyGen for literacy, which is aligned to the Common Core curriculum, and includes a Response to Intervention (RtI) methodology. In using ReadyGen in the classroom, our teachers provide step-by-step Tier 1 and Tier 2 support to our ELLs. Within the classroom, we focus on intentional small-grouping under the direction of the classroom teachers and the ENL teacher. This instructional strategy affords students the opportunity to practice oral and written language with strong vocabulary support, along with topics that include home language and cultural knowledge connections. ELL students also have writing journals that capture ELL student English language progress and provide on-going data to teachers as to further instructional support to provide our ELLs. Additionally, these RtI practices are used in mathematics, science, and social studies at PS 65. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The students that scored Emerging (EM) and Transitioning (TR) from last years’ results in the NYSESLAT (2014-2015 SY) improved from Beginning (B) and Intermediate (I) and were primarily students in kindergarten and first grades. The students that progressed to Transitioning (TR) and Expanding (EX) from last years’ results in the NYSESLAT (2014-2015 SY) improved from Intermediate (I) to Adanced (A) and were primarily students in third and fourth grades. The students that progressed to Commanding (CM) ) from last years’ results in the NYSESLAT (2014-2015 SY) were primarily those students in the fourth and fifth grades. Our NYSITELL data patterns reveal that the majority of our ELLs tested in grades (K- 5) performed at the new Emerging and Transitioning levels. 2018-19 SCEP-P 66  Our NYSESLAT data patterns reveal that the majority of our ELLs tested in grades K- 5 performed at the new Expanding (EX) and Commanding (CM) levels. The NYSITELL and NYSESLAT data combined indicates that on average, the majority of our ELLs are progressing one to two language proficiency levels per school year. The NYSESLAT indicates that the greatest rate of progress occurs with the younger students and in the areas of Listening and Speaking. However, students need more targeted support in Reading and Writing and in achieving Cognitive Academic Language Proficiency (CALPS). 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Share data with parents, classroom teachers, Teacher teams, Grade Facilitators, Coaches to provide additional support for our students and teachers; Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. At PS 65, our ELL students receive services in a Freestanding ENL Program (ENL) which incorporates both the push-in and pull-out models of instruction. In kindergarten, grade one, and grade two (K-2), our ELLs are grouped through NYSITELL and NYSESLAT language proficiencies, as well as additional ELA-related data from our iReady assessments. Both small group pull-out ENL instruction and ELA/social studies content area push-in ENL instruction are delivered by our New York State TESOL certified teacher, with co-teaching being the model used for our ENL push-in instruction. In grades three to five (3-5), our ELLs are grouped primarily based upon their NYSESLAT scores under the four (4) modalities of listening, speaking, reading, and writing, as well as the iReady data we have initiated during the 2015-2016 school year. Both small group pull-out ENL instruction and ELA/social studies content area push-in ENL instruction are delivered by our New York State TESOL certified teacher, with co-teaching being the model used for our ENL push-in instruction. In grades three, four, and five (3-5), our ENL teacher co-teachers during the ELA content instructional period with the general education ELA teacher, and special education teacher in our integrated CCT classes. Our ENL teacher also pushes into our special education ELA classes in grades three, four, and five (3-5), and co-teaches with the special education teacher in the classroom. Our ENL teacher also pulls out small groups in grades kindergarten through five (K-5) for listening, speaking, reading, and writing instruction, with a focus on the DOE-approved “Recipe for Reading” reading recovery program. Our ELLs in grades one through five (1-5) are placed in one to two mainstream general education classes per grade, with an additional one special education class per grade. Our ELLs, fifty-five in total (55), receive their ELA content area instruction in their classroom, with the ENL teacher pushing in on a regular basis, except for small group reading recovery and RtI instruction, as necessary. Our ENL teacher pushes into classrooms to provide integrated ENL instruction and pulls out ELLs from their classrooms to provide instruction with five to eight (5-8) students per group for stand-alone ENL. Our ELLs are provided with home language supports such as bilingual dictionaries, bilingual glossaries, translated texts, and both peer-led and teacher-led academic and social scaffolding in their home language, when possible. Per CR 154.2, our ELLs receive the following mandated ENL minutes: ENTERING: Students at the Entering (EN) proficiency level will receive 360 minutes of ENL instruction per week. 180 minutes of the 360 minutes will be stand-alone ENL instruction, and the remaining 180 minutes will be in integrated ENL instruction. 2018-19 SCEP-P 67  EMERGING: Students at the Emerging (EM) proficiency level will receive 360 minutes of ENL instruction per week. 90 minutes of the 360 minutes is will be stand-alone ENL instruction, and the remaining 270 minutes will be in integrated ENL instruction. TRANSITIONING: Students at the Transitioning (TR) proficiency level will receive 180 minutes of ENL instruction per week. 90 minutes of the 180 minutes will be stand-alone ENL instruction, and the remaining 90 minutes will be in integrated ENL instruction. EXPANDING: Students at the Expanding (EX) proficiency level will receive 180 minutes of integrated ENL instruction per week. COMMANDING: Students at the Commanding (CM) proficiency level will receive 90 minutes of integrated ENL instruction per week for an additional two (2) years after testing out as ‘commanding’ on the NYSESLAT. NOTE: Stand-alone English as a new language is an ENL delivery model in which students receive instruction in order to acquire the English language needed for success in core content courses. A student cannot receive stand-alone English as a new language in lieu of core content area instruction. Integrated ENL is an ENL delivery model in which students receive core content area (i.e., English language arts, math, science, or social studies) and English language development instruction from a dually certified teacher or two certified teachers b. TBE program. If applicable. Not applicable. c. DL program. If applicable. Not applicable. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? At PS 65, we maintain the mandated number of instructional minutes per student in STARS, as well as by emails to the principal with the ENL teacher’s instructional program. The amount of Integrated ENL instruction and stand-alone ENL instruction is based on each student’s proficiency level as outlined in CR Part 154.2. Per CR 154.2, our ELLs receive the following mandated ENL minutes: ENTERING: Students at the Entering (EN) proficiency level will receive 360 minutes of ENL instruction per week, which translates to two (2) units of study. 180 minutes of the 360 minutes will be stand-alone ENL instruction, and the remaining 180 minutes will be in integrated ENL instruction. EMERGING: Students at the Emerging (EM) proficiency level will receive 360 minutes of ENL instruction per week, which translates to two (2) units of study. 90 minutes of the 360 minutes will be stand-alone ENL instruction, and the remaining 270 minutes will be in integrated ENL instruction. TRANSITIONING: Students at the Transitioning (TR) proficiency level will receive 180 min. of ENL instruction per week, which 2018-19 SCEP-P 68  translates to one (1) unit of study. 90 minutes of the 180 minutes will be stand-alone ENL instruction, and the remaining 90 minutes will be in integrated ENL instruction. EXPANDING: Students at the Expanding (EX) proficiency level will receive 180 minutes of integrated ENL instruction per week, which translates to one (1) unit of study. COMMANDING: Students at the Commanding (CM) proficiency level will receive 90 minutes of integrated ENL instruction per week, for an additional two (2) years after testing out as ‘commanding’ on the NYSESLAT. NOTE: Stand-alone English as a new language is an ENL delivery model in which students receive instruction in order to acquire the English language needed for success in core content courses. A student cannot receive stand-alone English as a new language in lieu of core content area instruction. Integrated ENL is an ENL delivery model in which students receive core content area (i.e., English language arts, math, science, or social studies) and English language development instruction from a dually certified teacher or two certified teachers. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Our ENL teacher uses the Sheltered Instruction Observation Protocol (SIOP) method to make the content area material accessible and comprehensible to our ELLs. The core content is delivered by both the general education classroom teachers, the special education teachers, and the ENL teacher in a co- teaching workshop model. Our ENL teacher will make avail of various scaffolding techniques to foster accessibility and comprehension of the content area material. These techniques include, but are not limited to, graphs and charts, organizers and webs, previewing the vocabulary, making the vocabulary ‘ELL-friendly and accessible (with such techniques as pictures, videos, physical gestures, mental pictures, and an ELL understandable breakdown of the words used when defining such academic vocabulary), front loading, and accessing and connecting to prior knowledge and background knowledge. Differentiated instruction is mandated and included in each and every lesson in every classroom, and is based upon and grouped by the needs, levels, and abilities of our ELL students. Our ENL teacher’s push-in and pull-out sessions, as well as our general classroom and special education classroom, are purposefully differentiated for all PS 65 lessons on a daily basis. Students are provided with bilingual dictionaries and glossaries, when available, to foster further comprehension of the instructional and content material delivered in the classroom. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? After it has been determined, through the interview process and administration of the HLIS, that a newly enrolled student has a home language other than English, we administer the NYSITELL. If the results of the NYSITELL indicate that the student is an ELL, and was identified as having a home language of Spanish (SP) on the HLIS, our ENL teacher administers the Spanish LAB. Our HLIS and NYSITELL identified Spanish speaking students, as well as our other students identified by the HLIS and NYSITELL as having a non-English home language, will be provided with bilingual dictionaries, glossaries, and other language aids, as available. Additionally, our ELLs are entitled to translated versions of the New York State math and science examinations. For our grade three through five (3-5) ELL students, the PS 65 test coordinator will request and provide translated versions of the New York State math examinations in the identified languages of our ELLs. For our grade four (4) ELL students, the PS 65 test coordinator will request and provide translated versions of the New York State science examinations in the identified languages of our ELLs. All translated math and science examinations will be provided with the English version. The ELL student may then decide which version in which they wish to use record their answers. For those low incident languages for which there are no translated versions of the exams, PS 65 will request ahead of the testing period, and provide on the days of the exams, an interpreter provided by the Office of Translation and Interpretation Services. 2018-19 SCEP-P 69  5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Our ENL teachers, classroom teachers, and special education teachers differentiate their content area instruction for every lesson, as well as incorporating the four language modalities of listening, speaking, reading, and writing into every lesson. Some of the strategies used for differentiated their instruction include small group instruction, webs and organizers, photos, videos, technology, graphs, and diagrams. Our ENL teacher also incorporates various SIOP strategies into the content area lessons (these strategies include, but are not limited to turn-and-talk, think-pair-and-share, and think-aloud). Our ENL teacher also focuses on our ELL students’ use of vocabulary, grammar, and phonics. This differentiation will also include the use of manipulatives, realia, visual materials, and audio materials, a. The strategies employed for SIFE students would be used to make both English language acquisition and content area material comprehensible to the SIFE student, who comes to us with a vast deficit of both English language skills and content area knowledge. Therefore, we need to accelerate their English language acquisition while simultaneously promoting content area material to overcome these deficits area material. Our SIFE students will receive sheltered language instruction which is modified to increase their comprehension of content material, as well as to make a connection with their prior knowledge of the content area. Our SIFE students also require explicit instruction in phonics, phonemic awareness, and vocabulary, as well as explicit instruction in the practice of improving fluency and comprehension in their reading and writing skills. b. Our ELL Newcomers, those students with less than three years of school, benefit from differentiated instruction in small group work, including small group pull-out, which promotes their language acquisition needs and understanding of the content material presented in the lesson. Some of the strategies used to differentiate instruction for Newcomers include visual aids, photos, videos, manipulatives, and realia. For our Newcomers, we model language through gesturing, role paly, and physical demonstrations. Through both peer-to-peer and teacher-to-peer interactions, Newcomers are afforded the opportunities to develop their oral English language proficiency through less pressure to perform, as they view many of these activities as “fun.” Our Newcomers are also permitted and encouraged to respond to written prompts through student-drawn pictures, and to respond in their home languages c. Our Developing ELLs, those receiving services for four to six (4-6) years, are taught with clearly defined content area objectives and language objectives. Our ENL teacher provides activities which integrate lessons along with language, such as restating the question when answering, answering in complete sentences, summarizing the concept or lesson presented, and writing prompts leading from paragraph writing to essay writing Students are taught to use and recognize transition words, use content area vocabulary, and read for information from context clues. Graphic organizers, webs, and other assistive strategies are used for pre-writing, writing, and editing. Students are to become familiar with these techniques and strategies to use not only when formally assessed, but in their own listening, speaking, reading, and writing skills put to use in their daily and actual lives. d. Any Long-Term ELLs who has been held over and completed six years of ENL services are usually those students with a disability that limits their ability to pass the NYSESLAT. These students are usually placed in an ICT setting. Our ENL teacher will create instructional objectives and strategies particular to this individual student, taking into consideration the abilities, needs, requirements, and IEP program for this student. According to CR part 154, ELL students who do not make adequate progress will receive additional supports, such as RTI and AIS, and, if necessary, the student may be referred for additional instruction. e. At PS 65, we provide testing accommodations to Commanding (CM) ELLs for up to two years after achieving the Commanding proficiency on the NYSELAT. Per CR 154, our ELL Commanding students will also receive 90 minutes of ENL 2018-19 SCEP-P 70  instructional support for two years. Additionally, Commanding ELLs are also invited to participate in our Title III after school program, Readers’ Café. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Some of the instructional strategies implemented are think-aloud, turn-and-talk, stop-and-jot, and think-pair-share. Our ENL and special education teachers also provide sentence frames for answering questions both orally and in writing, which helps to develop clear language objectives. At PS 65, we also have available school psychologists, social workers, guidance counselors, speech teachers, a physical therapist, and a family worker. Our newly formed Language Proficiency Team (LPT) will now be responsible for determining if students who have, or are suspected of having, a disability should be initially identified as an ELL student and receive ELL services. Furthermore, the LPT will determine on an individual student basis how best to evaluate an ELL with special needs. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Our ELLs-SWDs receive instructional support to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment. Our ELLs- SWDs also receive support from a licensed special education teacher, a licensed common branch teacher, and a licensed ENL teacher in inclusion classes (mainstream and special education). We provide the required mandated services to meet the diverse needs of our ELL-SWDs within the least restrictive environment. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. At PS 65, our RtI teams use and identify students on basis of the 3 Tier system. In Tier 1, students are served by their classroom teachers in small group settings based on the data and teacher observances, with the goal of these students becoming self-sufficient in terms of learning and leading their own RtI sessions. The data from the RtI program, as well as other ongoing assessments, assist the teacher in creating these small groups. The Tier 1 classroom encourages student collaboration, and increases the instruction for the students in this small group setting. There are ongoing informal assessments to ensure the groups are productive and advancing academically. Our Tier 2 RtI instruction requires teacher-led lessons and practices in small groups, in which the teacher and students work together on the lessons and activities focusing on specific skills and abilities of this small group of students. Our ENL teacher utilizes Tier 2 RtI small group settings with our Newcomers acquiring English language for the first time. Our Tier 3 RtI instruction is in a very small group setting. Our ENL teacher will work with one or two students on acquiring English language skills in an intimate educational setting. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? At PS 65, we will consider some of the following programs as improvements over our past programs: 1. To provide classroom teachers with ENL methodologies in content areas classrooms. 2. To have the ENL teacher and ELA teachers co-teach more ELA lessons. 3. To provide additional professional development for all teachers and administrators regarding the specific needs of ELLs, language acquisition, and cultural awareness. 4. For Commanding (CM) ELL students to receive two (2) years of additional ELL support, including 90 minutes of Integrated ENL instruction. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? 2018-19 SCEP-P 71  Currently, we do not have a bilingual program. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All of our ELLs at PS 65 are afforded equal access to all school programs. All ELLs are invited and encouraged to participate in all of our academic and social after school programs. Additionally, our ELLs are encouraged to participate in our classroom field trips, in-school dance and music programs, and after school parental engagement activities (such as holiday dinners, movies, and events), as well as in the numerous sports activities and teams we have at PS 65 (basketball, cheerleading, soccer, and boxing, to name a few). 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Our school uses the following instructional materials to support our ELLs: teacher-created ELA units of study based on the “Recipe for Reading” program; “ReadyGen” literature; “Fundations;” BrainPop; and access to the internet through classroom computers and iPads available for classroom use; as well as bilingual dictionaries and glossaries. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Home language support is delivered in our ENL program through the translated texts, bilingual dictionaries and glossaries, and vocabulary, when applicable (cognates). and key vocabulary. All school memos and school- home correspondence are translated for ELL families. In the ENL program, home language support is delivered by providing dictionaries, glossaries, and bilingual or monolingual books in home languages. TBE: not applicable. DL: not applicable. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Our administration ensures that the ENL teachers, service providers, and classroom teachers support our ELLs with the mandated minutes of instruction and support. All required services, supports, and resources correspond to the grade levels and ages of our ELL population. The resources offered are age and grade level appropriate, such as leveled books, picture dictionaries, and bilingual dictionaries and glossaries for our ELLs. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Our school uses the following instructional materials to support our ELLs: teacher-created ELA units of study based on the “Recipe for Reading” program; “ReadyGen” literature; “Fundations;” BrainPop; and access to the internet through classroom computers and iPads available for classroom use; as well as bilingual dictionaries and glossaries. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). At PS 65, the administration, LPT, ENL teacher, guidance counselors, parent coordinator, and pupil accounting secretary work as a team to assist our newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year, and continuing throughout the school year. Our PS 65 team assists students and their families by assisting them in completing school documents, holding parent orientation meeting, holding regular scheduled parent engagement every Tuesday from 2:20-3:00, and the ENL Title III summer program. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? PS 65 does not offer any language electives. 18. For schools with dual language programs: 2018-19 SCEP-P 72  a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Not applicable. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Our ENL teachers, Mr. Mehno & Ms. Merlino, provide professional development for all ELL-related and invested school personnel regarding NYSESLAT testing, ELL ELA and math state testing, and CR 154 updates. Our ENL teacher also provides professional development regarding the Language Access Handbook & Tool Kit, NYSESLAT updates, ELL student preparation for assessments, and translation and interpretation services. Our ENL teachers attends NYC DOE professional development seminars on a regular basis, as necessary and/or warranted (for both DOE and ELL-related information and career development) throughout the school year. The ENL teacher also attends various UFT professional development seminars. These professional development seminars may be ELL-related, content area related, or teaching- related. Professional Development is also offered to our teachers of ELLs as they engage in and navigate the Common Core Learning Standards as developed by the NYS Education Department. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Our administrative staff, guidance counselors, parent coordinator, ENL teachers, and fifth grade classroom teachers assist our ELLs and their families when researching, visiting, and applying for middle school. Additionally, our fifth graders take numerous field trips to local middle schools during the school year. Our neighboring middle schools also come and visit our 5th grade students throughout the year to answer questions and promote awareness of their middle school options. Our guidance counselors and parent coordinator also assist our ELL parents by providing information regarding academic programs at the middle schools, and help them to select the best choice of middle school for each child. Per CR 154.2, fifteen percent (15%) of the total hours of professional development for all teachers will be ELL-specific, and the ENL teacher will attend and receive professional development for fifty percent (50%) of the total hours. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Our ENL teachers schedule individual meetings with the parents of our ELLs during Parent Engagement, which is held every Tuesday (from 2:20 – 3:05 pm in the 1st floor gymnasium) to afford quicker and easier access to our teachers. These parent meetings are scheduled to discuss the goals of our ENL program, individual student progress, and language proficiency assessments and results. Our ENL teachers makes available translated documents and language interpretation services so the parents of our ELL students fully understand and have access to the data, program information, and both the academic and linguistic development of their child. 2018-19 SCEP-P 73  2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Our ENL teacher are developing an “Introduction to English” class for our ELL parents as a way of fostering both parent engagement opportunities and parental involvement. This class would consist of our ENL teachers teaching this class. The class may be held either during Parent Engagement Tuesdays or as an after school or Saturday program. Our administration and PS 65 staff and personnel hold various dances, themed dinners, movie nights, and other family-related activities throughout the school year. All parents of all students are encouraged to attend with their families. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. An added special consideration is given to our ELLs living in temporary housing. Our students are invited one day in early July (July 9th, 2018) for a day of special activity. Ms. Gonzalez, Principal, invites students with their parents for a day of interactive reading and writing. Students enjoy a snack of milk and cookies. As a parting gift, each child receives a bookbag containing a uniform, a health kit, and grade level books to read during the summer. 2018-19 SCEP-P 74 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Jasmine Gonzalez, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 SCEP-P 75  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Mother Hale Academy / PS 65x School DBN: 07x065 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Jasmine Gonzalez Title Principal Danielle Presto Assistant Principal Samuel Morales Parent Coordinator Richard Mehno Lucy Mer ENL/Bilingual Teacher Maria Hernandez Parent Sylvia Santiago Teacher/Subject Area Nathalie Diaz Teacher/Subject Area Michelle Warren Coach Coach Salonia Henderson Luci School Counselor Richard Cintron Kim Dela Cruz Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 7/2/18 7/2/18 7/2/18 7/2/18 7/2/18 7/2/18 7/2/18 7/2/18 7/2/18 7/2/18 7/2/18 7/2/18 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 SCEP-P 76  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: School Name: Superintendent: The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral 2018-19 SCEP-P 77  3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents 2018-19 SCEP-P 78  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? 2018-19 SCEP-P 79 
