 School Name: 08X107 P.S. 107 Principal: KATHERINE HAMM 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 1  School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Section 4: SCEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Section 7: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 8: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 9: Title I Program Information Section 10: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: PS 107X 320800010107 PreK- 5 Grades Served: School Address: 1695 Seward Ave School Number (DBN): 08X107 Phone Number: 718-860-8760 Fax: 718-860-8771 School Contact Person: Katherine Hamm Email Address: khamm2@schools.nyc.gov Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Katherine Hamm Ron Bradford Jessica Dokyi Kim Ray JaniqueGittens N/A N/A N/A District Information Geographical District: 08 Dr. Erika Tobia Superintendent: 1230 Zerega Ave Bronx, NY 10462 Superintendent’s Office Address: etobia@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-828-6653 Phone Number: 718-828-2760 Fax: FSC: Bronx Field Support Center (FSC) Executive Director: Jose Ruiz 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 3  Executive Director’s Office Address: 1230 ZeregaAvenue Bronx, NY 10462 jruiz2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-828-7776 Phone Number: 718-828-6280 Fax: 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the SCEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Katherine O. Hamm Ron Bradford Jessica Dokyi Donald Robinson Piedad Valentin N/A N/A Ms. Benejam Jennifer Bacon Jasmine Diaz IrhinaDe La Cruz *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/Parent Representative Member/ Parent Representative Member/ Parent Representative 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 5  Name BernardaCaraballo Elizabeth Rende Kim Ray Alyson Parry Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/ Parent Representative Member/ TeacherRepresentative Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) is a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. The process of developing and implementing the SCEP is aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding SCEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and SCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 7  comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 8  Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the SCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the SCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for SCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: New this year, instead of self-rating, in Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 9  major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 5: Build consensus around activities, strategies and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 6: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 7: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 10  Section 4: SCEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? PS 107X is a Pre-Kindergarten through fifth grade elementary school located in the Soundview area of the Bronx. We serve 534 students. At PS 107X we celebrate the unique and diverse individuality of each child. We are dedicated to providing opportunities for students with different learning styles to achieve academic success. We continually collaborate on important issues which will impact the successful achievement of students’ academic and social goals, as well as help foster a respectful partnership with parents and the wider community. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. All our academic programs are aligned with New York State Common Core Learning Standards on each grade level. Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classroom and students. They consistently collaborate and analyze student data in an effort to meet all targeted benchmarks. They strive to implement a rigorous and diverse curriculum, which recognizes the child’s need for differentiated instruction. As a learning community, we will continue to work on our collaborative work of utilizing data to best meet the needs of each individual child and inform instruction. PS 107X encourages children to learn to make the right choices in order to be successful, well-rounded, lifelong learners. Through a process of collecting and analyzing data, we continuously make academic and social emotional improvement that reflect current practices and accommodate the needs of all learners to successfully reach their potential. As a result, PS 107 students show excitement to learn and are actively engaged in classrooms that are welcoming, safe and orderly. Students show their enthusiasm for learning by actively participating in class discussions, school clubs, attendance to school enrichment programs, and sharing their new learning with classmates and parents during performances and parent engagement events. At PS 107 we provide all learners with a variety of social emotional resources. Students social emotional needs are supported through our PBIS program (Positive Behavioral Interventions and Support), our Child Study Team, and our school SAPIS Counselor. Our PBIS program includes weekly incentives, student of the week acknowledgement, and periodic celebrations that publicly acknowledge students commitment of the schools essential agreements of BLAST ( Be responsible, Learning ready, Act respectfully, Stay safe, Talk kindly). We reinforce our positive behavior support through the principals book of the month and assemblies that encourage all our students to be respectful, responsible and well rounded citizens. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Our student population consists of 63% Hispanic, 32% African American, 3% White and 1% Multi-Racial. PS 107 has a variety of learners in which 12% of our students are English Language Learners and 35% of our students are Special Needs. As we strive to meet the needs in phonics, reading, and mathematics of our diverse learners at PS 107 we will provide small group differentiated instruction in ELA and Math based on student data. We will continue to provide tiered level of academic intervention and social needs. The schools schedule provides blocked scheduling to provide more direct instruction in ELA and Math. PS 107 will also provide support through Response To Intervention (RTI), and After School Programs. Students social emotional health will be supported through ourPBIS program, guidance counselor, school social worker, and SAPIS Counselor. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 11  4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Key Focus: Rigorous Instruction is an area of focus in which our school has made progress over the past year. As a school we have worked in customizing our instruction so that it is aligned to the Common Core and meets the needs of our students based on ongoing assessment. This school year we will continue to focus on rigorous instruction as well as plan and strategically set up ways to actively engaged students in intellectual activities and develop critical thinking skills. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 12  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 08X107 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 514 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 58 58 33 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 42 36 33 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 99.0% % Attendance Rate 97.3% % Reduced Lunch 13.4% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.4% 63.0% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 2.5% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 7.64 0% 6% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 34.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 75% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES N/A NO YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YSH N/A NO YSH Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Yes N/A 66 65 87.5% 1.6% 30.2% 33.5% 0.4% 0.6% 2 0% 8.5 34.6% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES N/A N/A N/A YES YES N/A N/A N/A YSH YES N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 13  2018-19 SCEP-SIG 14  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed N/A X N/A X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. PS 107 has planned common planning time three or more times a week for each grade level. Teachers and out of classroom staff have the opportunity to meet during Monday and Tuesday professional time to work in grades and across grade levels to examine curriculum and analyze student data. New York state data shows that 33% of our students are meeting proficiency in ELA. This is a direct impact of teacher teams analyzing data to plan small group guided instruction and the planning of ELA units aligned to the common core standards. PS 107 will continue to work in developing the areas of 3.3 and 3.5, developing and insuring that unit lesson plans are data driven, are aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards, and planning short and long term curriculum planning that involves tracking, ownership of learning, and addresses all learners needs. As a result, PS 107 has strategically planned professional development around gathering and analyzing data, using data to continue curriculum planning lessons and adjust instruction to meet all learners. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 15  priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 100% of teachers will develop four rigorous common core aligned units in English Language Arts and four units in Math that will result in differentiated instruction as measured by student engagement and progress in critical thinking skills through periodic assessments. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 16  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff)  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Teachers will meet weekly by grade level to analyze student data in one of the following content areas: reading, writing, or math. Reading data will be analyzed twice a month to adjust reading units. Quick running records and DRA's for reading will be analyzed periodically in order to adjust reading units and guided reading instruction. Six week cycles of DRA's will be used to adjust students progress in meeting the Common Core Reading standards. Student writing will be analyzed after writing pre-assessments and mid unit check-ins to strategically target areas of deficiency in writing. Post-assessments will be used to adjust future units and focus on specific Writing standards. Math data will be analyzed twice a month for adjustments to units and differentiated instruction. Teachers will use a student work protocol to analyze student work, pre-assessments, quizzes, unit assessments, conference notes, or any form of formative data to identify trends and areas of deficiency in the focus content areas. Teachers will record their findings and modifications on curriculum maps and lesson plans, with a focus on ELL's, students with disabilities, and students not meeting the benchmarks assessed. Student data from quizzes, unit assessments, formative and summative assessments on focused content areas will be reviewed periodically by the Professional Development Team and then turn key findings to grade level teams. Teachers will participate in a series of professional development six week cycles focused on gathering purposeful data, analyzing data, planning lessons and differentiated instruction to address the various needs of students, including students with disabilities, and English language learners. Cycles of focused monthly observations and learning walks will be utilized to observe the implementation of modified lessons in ELA, Writing, and Math. General findings will be discussed monthly with consultants and plans of action will be created as needed. General data on classroom observations will be shared with the professional development team, and turn keyed to teachers. All teachers, paraprofessionals, school support staff Sept. 2018- June 2019 School Administration, Professional Development Team All teachers, paraprofessionals, school support staff Sept. 2018- June 2019 School Administration, Literacy Coach, Lit Life Consultant, National Teaching Network Consultant 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 17  Parents will participate in a series of monthly Parent Workshops that will help them understand the content and structures to support their child's academic and social emotional development. Topics that will be addressed in these workshop include but are not limited to: the common core learning standards in ELA and Math, strategies to help their child with homework, strategies to help their child's social emotional health. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Parents Sept. 2018- June 2019 Parent Coordinator, PS 107X Teachers, ASPIRA of New York How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. PS 107 staff will provide parents with four ELA, two Math, and two Science workshops on Tuesdays during parent engagement time by June 2019 in order to address the role of parents in supporting their child in common core standards. Parents will also be invited to monthly celebrations of students progress in reading, writing and math. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. School schedule will reflect weekly common grade level meeting time for teacher teams to meet and analyze, discuss data and work on modifications of ELA and Math curriculum and pacing. Monthly meetings will be schedule for the Professional Development Team and grade level teams to meet and discuss grade level trends and curriculum modifications. Scheduled Professional Development Calendar will reflect professional development offered to teachers, reflective of the schools goals and will be planned during school hours or during the mandated Monday Professional Development Time. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy Title I SWP X Title I 1003(a) X Title III Title I TA PTA Funded X P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Progress monitoring will occur in a variety of ways. Monthly monitoring will occur with grade level teams submitting their grade level findings of ELA and Math trends, areas of focus, and unit curriculum maps/lesson plan modifications. At the beginning of 2018-2019 school year, student baseline assessments in Reading, Writing, and Math will be used to address the impact of curriculum modifications and lesson adjustments by grade levels in order to plan next steps to meet the end of year goals. In February 2019, student data in ELA (running records, writing pre and post assessments) and Mathematics (mid year benchmark assessments) will be used to measure the schools progress towards meeting the annual goals. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 18  Instruments of measure that will be used to assess progress include: I-Ready for Reading and Math, Writing Pre and Post Assessments, Envision Unit Assessments, Engage New York Mid Unit and End of Unit Assessments, and Mastery Connect Assessments. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 19  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. SOP(s) Addressed N/A N/A X N/A Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? PS 107X reflects an effective on 5.4 showing that there are established systems in place that support and sustain the students social and emotional development and academic success. Students are recognized for their citizenship during weekly assemblies and celebrations. The school articulates and promotes the vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for the PS 107 community. All classrooms participate in a series of PBIS and RULER lessons that support our schools essential agreements of BLAST (Be responsible, Learning ready, Act respectfully, Stay safe, Talk kindly) and social emotional awareness. Monthly, the principals book of the month touches upon social emotional aspects, which are discussed in the classroom and include our WWT (Walk away, use your Words, Tell an adult) initiative, and are enforced by all staff. The school leader and staff will work together to provide teachers with professional development in understanding students social and emotional developmental needs. Staff and students will continue to be immersed in a year long professional development on emotional intelligence in partnership with YALE University RULER with support of the district and PS 107X RULER Committee. The Child Study Team will continue to meet monthly to discuss students needs based on referrals made by teachers or families, in order to address the social emotional needs of students. The 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 20  schools professional development team, reviews and discussed data that reflects OORS or referrals made as a means to discuss next steps or modifications to best support students social emotional health. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools –Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 there will be a 5% decrease in OORS as the result of periodic review of data with the professional development staff team, the PS 107X RULER Committee and Child Study Team. Strategic plans and interventions will be discussed and shared with school staff. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 21  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). School will implement PBIS (Positive Behavior Intervention Strategies) lessons, Principal’s Book of the Month lessons, weekly town hall meetings, and RULER to support students’ social and emotional health. The child study team, SAPIS Counselor, and administration will meet every four weeks to review data on students social emotional and OORS reports. Students will also engage in conversations around social emotional topics via the Principal's Book of the Month. School will support students’ social emotional health through at-risk strategies based on meetings held every four weeks by the SBST (School Based Support Team), Child Study Team, and School SAPIS Counselor. Data based on analyze OORS reports and behavioral referrals. Students Sept. 2018- June 2019 Administration, SAPIS Counselor, Child Study Team, Teacher PD Team Students Sept. 2018- June 2019 Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Teachers, school psychologist, school counselor, school social workers, SAPIS Counselor, administration SAPIS Counselor, school counselor, school social workers, administration, school staff, outside agencies Parent Workshops will be hosted every four weeks by members of the Child Study Team, school staff, or outside agencies on healthy social emotional and the schools social emotional support system PBIS. Parents Sept. 2018- June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. PS 107 community will provide parents with five Social Emotional workshops provided by community partnerships during the months of December 2018, January 2019, February 2019, March 2019 and April 2019. School parent coordinator and school social worker will monitor workshops provided. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 22  Resources that will be used to promote a positive and safe learning environment include: schedule adjustments, instructional resources, and human resources. . Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) X Title III Title I TA PTA Funded X P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Monitoring of students social emotional health will be done weekly (by school SAPIS Counselor, School Administration, School Staff) and quarterly (November 2018, January 2019, March 2019, May 2019) by school PD team (compromised by one teacher from each grade) , and SLT of reports from OORS, and SBST referrals. A mid year review of referrals and occurrence trends will be analyzed by the PD team and child study team/school based support staff in order to identified needed modifications and adjustments to the school behavior plan. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Measurement will be made through OORS reports. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 23  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. SOP(s) Addressed X 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards N/A (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. N/A 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. N/A 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. PS 107's strengths include grade level teams ensuring that instructional practices and strategies around unit or daily lesson plans address all students’ goals including English Language Learners and students with disabilities. Based on our Quality Review, developing ratings were addressed in the following areas: Teachers providing coherent instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. For example, teachers ability to use a variety of modalities to support students access to content was not evident across all classrooms. The implementation of learning environments that are reflective to students varied experiences and tailored to the strength and needs of all students. Teachers classroom environments differed, some providing scafolded learning environments, and others generic. Teachers use of summative and formative data sources to plan and foster participation in students learning process was not consistent across all classrooms in all grades. Some classroom teachers were able to share data that influenced grouping, differentiated instruction, and meeting the needs of the varied learners in each class. As a result, PS 107 teachers will participate in a series of professional development workshops that will support their planning of instruction that leads to multiple access points, creating learning environment that are responsive to students' varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of students, and the fostering of student participation in their own learning. Part 2 – Annual Goal 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 24  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 100% of PS 107 teachers will modify four English Language Arts units and four Math units based on student data from weekly and end of unit assessments. Modifications will be documented in grade level pacing calendars and teacher lesson plans. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 25  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Using the theory of action planning, teachers will plan lessons that engage all students including ELL’s and students with disabilities in data driven instruction. These lessons will be reviewed every four weeks during common planning periods or weekly Professional development time. Teachers, students Sept. 2018- June 2019 Using the Danielson Framework for Teaching, teachers will participate in four week cycles of professional development around lesson planning. These cycles may include learning walks, modeled lessons, and co-teaching support in the classroom. Teachers Sept. 2018- June 2019 Weekly, teachers and school staff will provide parent workshops on supporting their child's achievement and engagement in lessons. Parents Sept. 2018- June 2019 Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Administration, Teacher Teams, Professional Development Team, Literacy Coach, Consultants NTN, LitLife Administration, Teacher Teams, Professional Development Team, Literacy Coach, Consultants NTN, LitLife Administration, Teacher Teams, Parent Coordinator 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. PS 107 will provide parents with opportunities to visit the classrooms by having open house and parent workshops in collaboration with the parent coordinator and PTA. Parent workshop will occur weekly on Tuesdays during Parent Engagement times and information will be available for parents via the school website or PTA office. Classroom visits will occur four times a year, September 2018, November 2018, February 2019, and March 2019. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The school schedule will include grade level common planning time in which teachers will be able to review and plan lessons that meet the needs of all students and are aligned to the common core standards. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 26  X X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) X Title III Title I TA PTA Funded X P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. During the course of the 2018-2019 school year, teachers will be engaged in cycles of observations in which the focus will be engaging students through various entry points and the planning of guided instruction. The Professional Development team and administration will review data reflective of such observations from the Advance tools in November 2018 as the first midpoint for the adjustment of Professional Development Cycles and support from support staff in meeting these goals. Data from Advance will be review data again in March 2019 for adjustment to the support provided for teachers in PD and from support staff. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance will be used to assess progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 27  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). SOP(s) Addressed N/A N/A N/A X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. As a reflection of the 2017-2018 school review, the review shows strength in the following areas: The school leader ensures that the school community has an understanding of the schools goals, mission as outlines in the SCEP. The school leader is transparent about this information during SLT meetings as well as monthly Professional Team meetings. The school leader has put a system in place to cycle observations and feedback in order to impact teacher practice and students progress. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART– Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. As a result of targeted PD and instructional inquiry progress, by June 2019, as a result of professional development, targeted feedback to teachers, and instructional collaborative leadership the average rating in Danielson Domain 3 will increase by an overall average of 5% per teacher. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 28  2018-19 SCEP-SIG 29  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) School professional development team will meet every four weeks to analyze data from one of the following: School Quality Review, School Quality Report, Learning Survey, and Advance Measure of Teacher Practice Data. Based on the Danielson Framework for Teaching, teachers will participate in cycles of professional development every four weeks that reflect teacher practice based on data from Advance Measure of Teacher Practice. Teachers Teachers Based on the Danielson Framework for Teaching, instructional leaders will engage in four week cycles of observations and feedback sessions with teachers which will guide weekly professional development cycles. Teachers Sept. 2018- June 2019 Administration, Professional Development Team Sept. 2018- June 2019 Administration, Professional Development Team Sept. 2018- June 2019 Administration, Professional Development Team 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. PS 107 staff will engage families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and Strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement at monthly parent meetings in collaboration with the parent coordinator. Information on these meetings will be available via the school website and monthly parent newsletter sent school wide. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. In support of annual goals money from a variety of funding sources will be used. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) X Title III Title I TA PTA Funded X P/F Set-aside SIG Grant X 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 30  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. The professional development team will participate in conversation on school wide baseline and mid-point benchmark data every four weeks. The analyzed data will be presented to staff at monthly professional development meetings. The data discussed will influence the focus of professional development cycles. Administration will meet weekly to discuss progress monitoring and next steps. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The instrument used to assess progress are assessments through advance. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 31  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment  Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school N/A N/A N/A SOP(s) Addressed community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Ensemble School engages in the following ways with families and the community: School sends out monthly communication letters to families in each grade level, that outlines the CCL Standards learning objectives in all content areas and social emotional health School organizes celebrations around students learning across the content areas, music, art, drama and social emotional growth School partners with various CBO’s to support students’ academic and emotional health: ASPIRA, Harmony, Project Pawn (Chess), National Double Dutch, Soccer Champions, Makeosity, Computer Club, The Audubon Society, HEART, New York Cares, Bronx Arts Ensemble, Food Bank of New York, Partnership with Soundview Library, and ELL After School Programs. School has various forms of communicating with parents and the community: PTA Meetings, Monthly School Newsletter, School Website ( www.ps107x.org ), Emails, School Messenger 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 32  School hosts various parent workshops. Weekly parent engagement that focuses on workshops, teacher parent communication on students strengths and weaknesses Such engagement show a growth in student daily attendance to school and parent attendance to parent teacher conferences. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 PS 107 will increase parent participation in school events by 6% as measured by parent attendance. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 33  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) School staff will host weekly parent workshops on the CCLS and NYS content standards as well as strategies that impact students’ progress. Parent attendance data will be collected and discussed every four weeks by the SLT. Parents Sept. 2018- June 2019 Parent Coordinator, Schoo Staff, School Administrators, PTA Every four weeks PS 107X will invite guest speakers to support parents’ inquiries on various academic and emotional topics including English Language Learners, Students with Disabilities, and high needs students. Parent attendance data will be collected and discussed at SLT meetings monthly. Parents Sept. 2018- June 2019 Parent Coordinator, School Staff, School Administrators, PTA School will hosts parent engagement workshops and parent-teacher meetings weekly on Tuesdays to engage parents in discussing students’ academic and emotional growth. Parent attendance data will be collected and discussed every four weeks at SLT meetings. Parents Sept. 2018- June 2019 Parent Coordinator, School Staff, School Administrators, PTA The SLT and parent coordinator will meet every four weeks to discuss the coordination of family activities to increase parent participation and promote students’ academic and emotional growth. Parents Sept. 2018- June 2019 Parent Coordinator, School Staff, School Administrators, PTA 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. ASPIRA of New York, New York Cares Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. In support of this annual goal, the PS 107 community will engage parents on a monthly basis in workshops co-hosted with PS 107 staff and PTA. PS 107 will also work collaboratively with the PTA to plan weekly parent engagement workshops that address the CCLS and provide them with strategies to engage their child in learning activities to support the home-school connection hosted by PS 107 staff and community based organizations. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA P/F Set-aside 21st Century C4E 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 34  X Title I 1003(a) X Title III PTA Funded X SIG Grant School Achievement Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Mid-point benchmarks that will indicate progress will occur: ● December 2018, February 2019, April 2019: parent survey , analyzing parent attendance to events Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Data will be gathered from parent meeting and discussed at SLT meetings. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 35  Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Program Description Directions: Expanded Learning Time activities are directly aligned to the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, Rigorous Instruction, Supportive Environment, and Strong Family and Community Ties. ELT provides enriching educational experiences that happen outside of the traditional school day and blend skill acquisition, relationship-building and fun to foster academic and social-emotional growth. Summer learning, afterschool programming, and extended-day ELT models, when well-implemented, play a critical role in supporting students in all grades and ensuring that they graduate from high school, college and career ready. SED requires that Priority schools offer a minimum of 200 additional student contact hours as Expanded Learning Time in addition to the current mandated length of 900 hours of instruction per year (25 hours per week) in grades K-6 and 990 hours of instruction per year (27.5 hours per week) in grades 7-12. Effective ELT models will blend school staff with community partners, and will provide a balanced curriculum that can include ELA, Math, STEM, arts, physical activity, and leadership development. Complete the sections on this page to demonstrate how the school will meet these requirements. Part 1 – ELT Program Goal(s) Describe the summative goal(s) of the ELT program for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. N/A Part 2 – ELT Program Type Is the ELT program voluntary or compulsory? Voluntary X Compulsory If the ELT program is voluntary, indicate how you will actively encourage the participation of all students, with the goal of serving at least 50% of students. N/A Part 3 – ELT Program Description Target Population: The ELT program will be offered to all students in the school, with the goal of serving a minimum of fifty percent of students. Describe how the school will meet the following SED requirements for an ELT program in a Priority School:  Integrate academics, enrichment, and skill development through hands-on experiences that make learning relevant and engaging.  Offer a range of activities that capture student interest and strengthen student engagement in learning so as to promote higher attendance, reduce risk for retention or drop out, and increase the likelihood of graduation.  Actively address the unique learning needs and interests of all types of students, especially those who may benefit from approaches and experiences not offered in the traditional classroom setting.  Contain components designed to improve student academic, social, and emotional outcomes, including opportunities for enrichment programs such as in music and art.  Ensure instruction in any core academic subject offered in the program will be delivered under the supervision of a teacher who is NYS certified in that particular content area.  Engage in outreach activities made to families. N/A Part 4 – ELT Program Implementation and Oversight Part 4a. Who will implement the ELT program? Who will oversee the program? 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 36  1. 2. Indicate the key personnel that will be responsible for implementing and overseeing the ELT program, including school-based staff and any high-quality community partners that will be involved. If applicable, describe the scope of involvement of all community partners and how the joint ELT program is structured. 3. Explain how you will evaluate the program to assess impact on student achievement. N/A Part 4b. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. N/A Part 5 – ELT Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the ELT program. N/A. Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support the ELT Program. Note: If the program is funded by 21st Century Community Center Learning Funds, it must be offered in conjunction with a high quality, high capacity community partner. 21st Century Title I 1003(a) Tax Levy Title III Title I SWP PTA Funded Title I TA X SIG Grant P/F Set-aside School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 6 – ELT Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. N/A Part 6b. Indicate the instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. N/A Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 37  Section 7: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Pre and post curriculum assessments, NYC Benchmark Assessments, DRA Scores Pre and post curriculum assessments, NYC Benchmark Assessments Pre and post curriculum assessments, NYC Benchmark Assessments Summative Assessments PBIS, SBST, Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Guided Reading, shared reading, independent reading, close reading Games, group problem solving, manipulatives and visual aids, multiple problem solving strategies Interactive, hands-on, experimental Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small groups, one-to-one, tutorial During the school day, after school Small groups, one-to-one, tutorial During the school day, after school Small groups, one-to-one, tutorial During the school day, after school Interactive, project based Mandated, intervention, at-risk Small groups, Small group, one to one During the school day, after school During the school day 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 38  Section 8: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 108 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Extended learning time will be provided with social emotional support from the school counselor, family workers, and SAPIS counselor. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 108 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 39  Extended learning time will be provided with social emotional support from the school counselor, family workers, and SAPIS counselor. 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. A minimum of 2400 will be set aside for students in temporary housing. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 40  Section 9: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. In collaboration with the SLT, the school community discusses possible teaching positions in the 107 community. In adherence with the New York City Department of Education recruitment procedures, prospective openings are posted online. In collaboration with the UFT and the Professional Development Team rubrics are created for interviewing candidates. Candidates applications, interviews, and reflective feedback are compiled by the professional development team and shared with all SLT members. The administrative team considers the PD teams recommendations for all final hiring decisions. Strategies for the retention of teachers include celebrations, attendance acknowledgement, and support through the school sunshine committee. Teachers assignments and support that include high quality professional development are supported through three school based instructional coaches, consultants from National Teaching Network, LitLife and Makeosity. Ongoing professional development opportunities are afforded to teachers through school professional development and district wide professional development. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). In accordance with NYC contract for excellence, all teachers are engaged in PD on a weekly basis. All professional development is aligned to the specific needs of our learning community in meeting CCLS in ELA and Math and is constantly reassessed by the MOSL (Measure of Student Performance) and MOTP (Measure of Teachers Practice) Data. Teachers will engage in PD that supports their learning of the CCLS through support from consultants from the National Teaching Network, LitLif, and city wide PD opportunities. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 41  3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). In collaboration with the office of early childhood, PTA, SLT and parent coordinator, and the school social worker, the PS 107 learning community will engage children and their parents from the pre-school initiative in a cycle of parent workshops to ease the transition from pre-school to early childhood programs. Parents will be invited to participate in various workshops in order to understand the NYC public school system, build the home school connection, and support the social-emotional needs of their children. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. In collaboration with the SLT, Professional Development Team (made up grade level leaders in grades K-5), and School Leadership Team, the PS 107 learning community is engaged in a reflective conversation regarding CCLS curriculum alignment, student progress, initiative to enhance students learning, and strategies for creating bonds between quarterly assessments and daily learning and instructional planning. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (SCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) X Column B Section Reference(s) Section 7 Title I Part A (Basic) Federal 512,587.00 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 42 Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Local N/A N/A 129,460.00 11,200.00 N/A 2,597,018.00 N/A N/A X X N/A X N/A N/A Section 7 Section 7 N/A Section 5 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/SCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 43  available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 44  Section 10: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. P.S. 107X, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. PS107X will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ●providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; ●providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ●fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ●providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ●sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 45  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ●actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ●support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ●maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ●conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ●provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ●host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 46  ●schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ●conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ●holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ●encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ●supporting or hosting Family Day events; ●establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ●encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ●providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ●developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ●providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) PS107X in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 47  ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas;  providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 48  ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 49  ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; III. Student Responsibilities ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 50  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 51  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: After careful review of the New York State English as Second Language, (NYSESLAT), MOSL and New York State Assessments, English Language Learners here at PS 107 are having difficulty in reading comprehension and writing. The NYSESLAT data for students who have scored at the advanced level for two consecutive years reveals that writing is the area that they score the lowest in each year. The math data for our school from the 2016-2017 ELLs shows that less than 23% of students are scoring on grade level in Math. Students need extra support and practice with reading comprehension, writing skills and math academic language. Therefore, a critical need exists to create a program with an after-school. The after-school program will provide opportunities for students to engage in language and literacy experiences to enhance their listening, speaking, reading, writing and math skills. The After school Program will provide opportunities for students to engage in literacy activities that promote reading as a fun and interactive experience. These may be push in or pull out based on the students needs. Students will also participate in enrichment programs that will support their oral skills with peers. Parents will be invited to attend after school workshops that incorporate students attending the after school program. Parents will be taught language learning strategies and activities to help promote language acquisition and development with their children. The after-school program will support 86 ELL's on grades K-5. Kindergarten 20 Grade 1 17 Grade 2 17 Grade 3 16 Grade 4 8 Grade 5 8 Schedule and Duration The after-school program will begin on October 23, 2018 and conclude May 15, 2019 . It will occur on Tuesdays and Wednesdays from 3:45 pm to 5:30pm , with a total of 50 sessions. Enrichment hours which exceeds Title III budget with be covered by additional funds. Language of Instruction The instruction will provided in English with home language support resources. Certified Teachers There will be one certified ESL teacher to provide instruction for the After-school program. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 52  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Materials The primary materials for the after school program will be aligned with the Next Generation Standards. ELA FUNDATIONS AND READING A to Z . All programs are standards Aligned with supplemental Phonics, vocabulary building, and language acquisition. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Our school has two ESL teachers for all English Language Learners. These teachers are responsible for providing services for all students grades K-5. While students receive this mandated instruction in the classroom for specified periods of the day, the rest of their time is spent in English dominant classrooms. Teachers have the responsibility of differentiating and providing extra support for ELLs. With this in mind, PS 107 wants to ensure that teachers have the knowledge and skills needed to provide this support to ELLs. Professional development will focus on providing teachers with scaffolding and differentiated strategies to meet the needs of ELLs. It will also focus on how to use data to prepare ELLs to meet and exceed the Common Core Learning Standards. To ensure our students' success, a plan for professional development is necessary. All teachers and staff in the school building will be included in the professional development activities. The professional development will begin in October 2018 and continue through May 2019. There will be one workshop planned each month for one hour. Additional professional development opportunities will be provided by a learning partnership with the Bronx Borough Support and Division of English Language Learners, with specific interest in learning styles, differentiating instruction and using data to influence planning. All teachers and staff who work with ELLs on grades K-5 will focus on using data to plan guided reading instructional groups. Topics: Strategies for enhancing Instruction through Planning, Strategies for supporting student Involvement Strategies for building Vocabulary and Fluency Strategies for Building Comprehension 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 53  Part C: Professional Development Providers: Bronx Borough Support and Division of English Language Learners along with the support of one certified ENL teacher will provide workshops for the staff Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Parents sill receive training in accessing data on their child through the NYC Account Initiative with a supporting focus for ENL parents. During parent conferences teachers have expressed concerns that parents need more training in using technology for its basic functions in order to successfully access student data independently. After accessing this data, parents requested assistance with locating and utilizing resources online to assist their children with homework and building literacy/math skills. The workshops will support the parents needs with technology. Schedule/Duration There will be one workshop scheduled monthly starting October, 2018 and continue to May 2018. Each workshop is 1 hour in length topics to be covered. ENL Family Professional Development every third Tuesday October 17, 2018 November 21, 2018 December 19, 2018 January 16, 2018 February 20, 2018 March 20, 2018 April 24, 2018 May 15, 2018 The workshops will focus on teaching parents how to use technology, work with their children on different skills at home, and to create activities and games to engage their children. Each workshop will provide parents with various resources for their children to progress in the English language. Provider: Bronx Borough Support and Division of English Language Learners, along with support from the ESL teacher will provide the workshops. All handouts will be translated into parents' native language. An interpreter will be provided during each parent workshop. Notification, Parents will be notified through notices that will be sent home with students. The dates for workshops will also be placed on the school website, and monthly calendar sent home to parents. All communication notices will be translated to each parents' home language. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 54 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. After School Programs to service ELL's. Professional Development for ENL Teachers Purchasing of instructional materials to support after school programs. Technology and Applications to support ENL students. Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) $7420.00 $1240.00 $1236.00  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) $1240.00 Travel Other TOTAL 0 $12,366.00 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 55  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 08 School Name Public School 107 Borough Bronx School Number 107 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Katherine Hamm Coach Lourdes Mercado ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Leah Pisaniello Catherine Acos Teacher/Subject Area Elizabeth Rende/ 2nd grade Teacher/Subject Area Earica Minott/ 3rd grade Related-Service Provider Addy Ortiz-DeJesus Superintendent Karen Ames Assistant Principal Victoria Najera Coach n/a School Counselor Penny Dearman Parent Amy Ortiz Parent Coordinator Annette Diaz Field Support Center Staff Member n/a Other (Name and Title) n/a C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 2 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 1 0 2 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 56  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 522 Total number of ELLs 82 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 15.71% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 K 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a Lang. n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? P.S. 107 uses several assessment tools to assess the early literacy skills of our students, DRA running records, teacher conference notes, CCLS assessments in I-Ready and Mastery Connect. Our data supports the need to differentiate instruction according to reading level. The data shows that ELLs need strategies to build fluency and comprehension in reading and and vocabulary to improve upon their writing skills. Our literacy program offers our students opportunities and strategies to improve upon their skills. Key components to our instructional plan include: phonics instruction (Fundations), read alouds, shared reading and writing strategies, explicit and context embedded vocabulary development, guided reading and reading independently in just right books. Our instructional plan includes differentiated instruction in order to achieve the learning goals for each student. The instruction plan includes building comprehension through scaffolding strategies and sheltered 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 57  instruction, increasing academic vocabulary through a context rich curriculum and writing strategies that focus on the writing process, (pre-writing, drafting, and revising, editing, and publishing). During integrated instruction we provide students with small group instruction as well as parallel teaching. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Opportunities to collaborate with teachers for co-planning, co-teaching, co-assessing and co-reflecting. Flexible PD and Prep schedule provides an opportunity for ENL teachers to meet with grade levels/teachers for planning and incorporating language objectives for ENL students. Additionally, time might be given during Monday and Tuesday Professional Development times. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Progress is being measured through NYSITELL/NYSESLAT data, the ELA and Math MOSL, anectodal/conference notes, DRA, and weekly assessments. These forms of measure are then used as a form of data to identify areas of needs. To track student progress, DRA's are given monthly throughout the school year to see if the student has progressed and to continue targeting the needs of the student based on the assessment. Weekly assessments are reviewed to guide the teachers on what needs to be targeted to provide the students with the proper tools. Areas of need include areas in ELA and Math that align to the four modalities. These include word work, writing, reading, spelling, sentence structure, phonics and grammar. For math, multiplication, division, word problems, and fractions are target topics that are areas of need. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Once the summative data has been gathered, with the classroom teacher's assessment and the ENL teacher's assessment, the ENL teacher will re-teach the discrepancies shown by the students based on the assessment. This will be addressed during a stand-alone period (small group instruction) and will be broken down in order for the student(s) to understand what they had trouble with. Various scaffolds will be implemented according to the skill or strategy that needs to be re taught. In addition to addressing interventions, the parents are always invited to take part in their child's education. The teacher will send home materials to reinforce what was taught/re- taught in the classroom. ex. flashcards, worksheets, books etc. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Danielson's Framework and the RTI Framework are embedded in the teaching practices at PS 107. For our ELL's and all students, teachers plan and prepare lessons, create a positive classroom environment, and instruct by modeling and checking for understanding which aligns with the framework of Danielson. The RTI framework is implemented to guide students throughout their learning experiences and is a useful tracking device for teachers as they can make sure their students are learning properly and understanding concepts and information presented to them in the lessons implemented. Students are placed in differentiated small groups which allows the teacher to follow the RTI framework. If students are not following through with the Tier's, the teacher will re-evaluate the performance of the student and will potentially re-teach and provide further scaffolds for the student to master the skill or strategy taught. The RTI framework and Danielson's framework are carried into other services provided at our school. Based on the results of assessments as a form of data, teachers conference with one another to discuss student progress and to decide what the next steps are in order to move students through the Tiers. After school programs are provided to enrich these steps and to further target the needs of all students. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. To evaluate students performance in the four modalities (listening, speaking, reading, and writing) we use NYSITELL/NYSESLAT, and the ELL Data Analysis Tool that provides individual student notes based on their needs from the NYSITELL/NYSESLAT . We also use authentic assessments, anecdotal/conference notes, and teacher feedback of student progress. According to the data analysis of 2017 NYSSESLAT, a large majority of the students moved up atleast one level in proficiency. A few students moved up 2 levels in proficiency. In terms of the ELA and Math assessments, there was a large improvement in 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 58  Math. Our school looks at this data very meticulously to find ways of how to improve. As a school we look at this data during Professional Development periods and look at various resources to widen our knowledge on how to improve the instruction. We also discuss this by grade level to strictly target the needs of each grade level. The classroom and ENL teachers collaborate to drive the instruction for our freestanding ENL program. Teachers confer with one another to work on scaffolds and differentiated instruction for the ENL students during both integrated and stand alone periods throughout the day. Based on the student's proficiency level, each student will be provided with the proper guidance needed to improve. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Scheduled grade level meetings and professional development periods allow for discussion around student progress. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Presently, there is a Free-Standing ENL program servicing general and special education students in grades K-5. The Free-Standing ENL program provides students with integrated and stand-alone instruction where differentiated instruction and scaffold supports are provided to meet the needs of all ELL students. Students are grouped based on the proficiency levels that they are placed in according to the NYSITELL and NYSESLAT state assessments. Depending on the level of proficiency, each student is provided with a mandated time frame of integrated or stand-alone instruction. For example, if a student is at the Entering level, they must be provided with 360 minutes per week of integrated (180 minutes) and stand-alone (180 minutes) instruction. For stand-alone instruction, students will be grouped by their proficiency level, however, two grade levels might be grouped together (1st and 2nd grade, 3rd and 4th, etc). Grouping students like this during the stand-alone period will provide students with the opportunity to interact with each other and might increase the opportunity for higher-order thinking to occur. Social interaction is a necessity for ELL's and this type of constructivist point of view is enforced in our school environment. b. TBE program. If applicable. c. DL program. If applicable. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? To ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in the Free-Standing ENL program, we first look at the RLAT document provided on ATS that shows the proficiency levels of each student. Once this is known, we then look at CR Part 154 and look at the mandated hours for each proficiency level. A schedule is then created according to the mandated hours that each student needs weekly. Looking at the chart, some students might require more integrated instruction than stand-alone. Students who are at the Entering and Emergent levels receive four 45/50 minute integrated instruction periods and four 45/50 minute stand-alone periods totaling 360 minutes per week of ENL instruction. Transitioning students receive 180 minutes per week. Ninety of those minutes must be integrated instruction, however, the other 90 minutes are flexible and can either be integrated or stand-alone instruction. For Expanding students, they also receive 180 minutes a week that must be integrated instruction only. For the Commanding students, they receive a 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 59  total of 90 minutes of integrated instruction for two years after they have exited the ENL program. Once a schedule is in place, the data is entered into STARS. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. The core content is delivered in each program model by providing differentiated instruction and scaffolding techniques in order to meet the needs of the ELL's in the classroom. The content is aligned with the NYSCCLS, however, language objectives are embedded into the curriculum to meet the language needs of the students. Explicit instruction will be provided by both co-teachers (mainstream and ENL) where language will be specified, instructional approaches and methods will be used, and language will be fostered to mold the development and meet the demands of the grade-level content expected and the four modalities, In Math, our school focuses on Engage NY. Although the curriculum is created by New York State and aligns with the Common Core Standard, the mainstream and ENL teachers co teach to support the needs of ELL's and all students. Whole class and small group instruction occurs, where manipulatives and social interaction periods occur. For additional support in math instruction, students use GO Math in English and Spanish if needed. Providing both languages will allow the students to feel confident in understanding the lesson (making it more accessible to them) and widening the students' language acquisition device. In Science, teachers use Fossil Science which comes with hands-on activities and experiments to de-contextualize the material that students are learning. In Social Studies, teachers use the Social Studies Scope and Sequence and standards to create lessons for students. The children have access to social studies books and materials in Spanish if needed. In the classrooms, teachers use Fundations and Expeditionary Learning program which has ELL support and differentiation built into each lesson. Teachers have visual aids such as charts and other pictures that support the lesson. Our school has also incorporated the use of Thinking Maps for all Literacy lessons. All classrooms are equipped with math manipulatives and hands-on science kits to help build comprehension of lessons. When the ENL teacher pushes into classrooms, we collaborate with the programs that teachers are using in the classroom. When students taken for their Stand-Alone instruction, the ENL teacher focuses on Guided Reading aligning with the Lucy Calkins rubrics and lesson format. Lessons are created according to the students reading levels (text-leveled books) where students work with the ENL teacher increase vocabulary and reading comprehension skills. Visuals and other ENL supports are included where it is best needed. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Weekly assessments are a key component of our literacy program. When students with another language enroll in the school, their parents complete a Home Language Survey (HLIS). Based on the HLIS, all students will take the NYSITELL if they are identified as an ELL. If they speak Spanish, they will also be administered an exam, the Spanish Lab, which will identify their proficiency in their native language. Both exams are given within 10 days of enrollment to new admits and will appropriately place them in the proper proficiency level that they belong in. At the beginning of the school year, as well as the end of the school year, students are given the MOSL exam, which measures the student needs in specific content standards. Students are able to take reading assessments using the Raz-kids program in their home language, DRA's are given quarterly, and authentic assessments are given monthly to track student progress and further continue increasing their reading proficiency. As an online assessment for tracking, IReady, Myon, and Mastery Connect are assessed throughout the school year. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 60  Our plans for different subgroups of our school are as follows: Students with Interrupted Formal Education are placed in a Collaborative Team Teaching classroom so that they receive additional support throughout the school day. Each classroom takes a Sheltered Instruction Approach to help make content comprehensible. Students are placed in collaborative leaning activities during each content period. Modeling and an increased use of visuals are use to aid in their understanding of the content and vocabulary embedded into each lesson or unit. Units in our literacy program are thematic to allow for student to follow and make connections in the curriculum. They also participate in literacy twice a week with lower grade classrooms to help them catch up with what they might have previously missed. During classroom time, explicit instruction in phonics, morphology, and vocabulary is provided for the students. SIFE students are also targeted for peer tutoring and Academic Intervention Services. The SIFE students participate in our extended day program three-120 minute periods a week (Tuesday-Thursday). During this time, students work to build basic math skills, so that they are able to function on grade level in math. Also we focus on increasing literacy skills and guide students through homework. Our newcomers are grouped with other newcomer students across grades where they receive integrated and stand-alone ESL services. Each classroom takes a Sheltered Instruction Approach to help make content comprehensible and more accessible for these students. Students participate in many hands on learning activities and are frequently involved in lessons where group work is in place. Explicit instruction is given for vocabulary and reading comprehension through scaffolds, TPR, chunking texts, etc. Newcomer students who are at the beginning proficiency level, participate in Fundation in their homeroom classes or in a lower grade classroom in order to boost letter recognition and sound skills. Technology is also incorporated in the ESL classroom where students are able to develop skills in phonemic awareness, vocabulary, letter recognition, and story comprehension on online programs such as starfall, abcya and raz-kids and other instructional activities that are technology based. NYSESLAT data for students who have been receiving services for 4-6 years shows that they need extra support in reading As for ELLs that have attained proficiency, we support them after exiting the program for 2 years (90 minutes) by placing them in a classroom where the ENL teacher will be providing push-in services to current English Language Learners so that they still have access to all of the Native Language supports. Students are able to participate in small groups with the ENL teacher and receive explicit instruction with their areas of focus that are needed. The instruction will be differentiated by providing the Commanding students with scaffolds that are more challenging and make them use higher order thinking skills. Additionally, they will be working independently, but the teacher will be present when needed for support. Students are also invited to participate in ELL after school-programs, no matter what proficiency level they are. We continue to provide them with their NYS approved testing modifications. At the moment PS107x does not have LTE. In the event of having LTE in our school we will provide specific /differentiated ELA reading and writing strategies. Reading strategies includes pre writing, modeling, shared writing and word walls. LTA will be invited to attend STARS, after school program and Saturday Academy. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Some of the strategies used are: * Modeling explicitly by giving clear examples of what is requested of them for imitation. *Bridging- an approach of learning new concepts and language by firmly building them on the students previous knowledge and understanding. * Guided Instructional Groups- this approach is used specifically during reading and math periods as a source of intervention. During these periods, scaffolds and other forms of differentiation are provided, which tailor the needs of all students and ELL's based on their proficiency levels. It is ensured that the four modalities are incorporated into these guided groups. *Contextualization- using manipulatives, pictures, film (w/o sound) flash cards, graphic organizers and other resources to engage the students. *Schema Building- clusters of meaning that are interconnected will help with their understanding of new concepts. *Text Re-Presentation- engaging the students in activities that require them to change linguistic constructions they found modeled in one genre into forms used in another genre. Chunking is used as a strategy to provide students with an appropriate text based on their proficiency level. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 61  7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? All classroom teachers and the ENL teacher have copies of ELL-SWD IEP. During common planning periods, the collaboration of the mainstream and ENL teacher is occurring, where we plan strategies for these students to meet their IEP goals in small groups instruction. PS 107 uses scheduling flexibility to support ELLs and SWD. All specialists collaborate at the beginning of the year to create a schedule that works for both the teacher and the student. The specialists also collaborate to intertwine the IEP and language acquisition goals which can be implemented in all services. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Interventions include: Technology is incorporated in the mainstream and ESL classrooms where students are able to develop and strengthen their skills in ELA, math, and other core content areas. Mainly, technology is used to strengthen areas in phonemic awareness, vocabulary, letter recognition, and story comprehension on online programs such as Starfall, Abcya, and raz-kids. The I-READY./ MYON program uses a method of interpretive reading and discussion known as Shared Inquiry. Students are able to use all four modalities of listening, speaking, reading, and writing. They engage in in-depth reading, thinking, and writing activities that foster their growth in questioning and discussion. In the classrooms, ELL's are broken into small guided groups where they work with the teacher using the source of technology. Before allowing the students to work independently on an activity, the teacher will model what the students will be doing before they work on their own. Modeling will help to target the needs of the group and will help to avoid any discrepancies that could occur. The ELL's are monitored by the teacher(s), and the teacher will intervene and conference with the students when appropriate. Additional intervention services from these guided reading groups include a guided math intervention class period, focusing on various math skills and/or what the students are learning in their classes. This classroom period is given in addition to classroom instruction of math in the mainstream classroom and the ENL classroom. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? At the moment, all ELLS students are invited to afterschool programs (ELL after school program, ESPIRA, Trailblazers). ELLS in grades 2-5 will have the opportunity to be apart of the afterschool ELL program. These grades have SIFE students and are mostly newcomer students in our school. These students are highly encouraged to attend this afterschool program to provide them with extra intervention periods besides their mandated hours. An afterschool program will give them more time to build their English Language skills and meet the challenges of their grade-level material. Students in these grades are SIFE, newcomers, and students who are not on grade level and require extra intervention. An afterschool program is also beneficial for newcomers because they can interact in additional social situations with their peers, make friends, and become more comfortable with their environment. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? No program will be discontinued 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. As for ELLs that are and have attained proficiency, we support them by placing them in an appropriate classroom where the ESL teacher will be providing integrated and stand-alone services for current English Language Learners so that they still have access to all of the Native Language supports. Students are able to interact in small groups with the ESL teacher and receive explicit instruction with their struggling areas using all programs mentioned above. Students are generally placed with other students that share the same proficiency level. Students are provided with the opportunity to arrive to school before it begins, which is an excellent source of interaction for all ELLS. They are also invited to participate in the ELL after school-program. We continue to provide them with their NYS approved testing modifications. At the time of testing, students are given extra time, separate location, choice of content exams in the native language, and bilingual glossaries if desired. Students are able to use all four modalities of listening, speaking, reading, and writing. For specific tests, such as the NYS Math Exam, they are given the option for their first year, as a newcomer, to take the exam either in English or their primary language. Overall, students engage in in-depth reading, thinking, and writing activities that foster their growth in questioning and discussion. As supplemental services, additional reading and math intervention periods are embedded throughout the day in order to 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 62  provide students to focus on their specific needs. Interaction periods are important for ELLS to participate in. Students coming to school early, working throughout the day with their classes, and ENL teachers, and participating in after school programs allows them to constantly interact with one another to learn and strengthen their language. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. There are many instructional materials that are used at PS 107 to help ensure that the students' needs are met and provide engaging activities for the students. Teachers use visual aids such as charts, sentences strips, flash cards, graphic organizers and other pictures that support all lesson implemented (scaffolds). Our school has also incorporated the use of Ipads for online assessments and lessons. All classrooms are equipped with math manipulatives and hands-on science kits to help build comprehension of lessons. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? In the classrooms of all English Language Learners, teachers use the Core Knowledge program which has ELL support and differentiation built into each lesson. This program also comes with books that are of the same story as all of the other students but ELL stories take a Sheltered Language Approach. Teachers use visual aids such as charts, sentence strips, flash cards, pictures that support the lesson, and the use of technology (IPADS and SMARTboards). When the ENL teachers integrate into the classroom, these scaffolds are brought in specifically to help the students understand the lesson. It is modified and at times when needed, provided in their home language to help them to relate and further understand. Our school has also incorporated the use of Thinking Maps for all Literacy lessons. All classrooms are equipped with math manipulatives and hands-on science kits to help build comprehension of lessons. In addition to aligning lesson to the NYSCCLS, the ENL teachers reference to the NYS Bilingual Standards that focus on the four modalities. Rubrics are used to deliver feedback to students and student-teacher conferences are conducted to praise their work but also focus on the next steps and the goals for the student based on the assessment. Home language supports are delivered and assessed in each program model by providing the same structures implemented in the classroom at home. Most of our ELLS complete their homework in the ENL after school program, where the ENL teachers continue to work with and modify the homework in order to help each student understand what they are completing. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Newcomer students will participate in extended day with the ESL teachers for three - 120 minute periods a week. During this time, students work to build basic math skills, so that they are able to function on grade level in math. Also we focus on increasing literacy skills and guide students through homework. Students will utilize their ipads for additional support in word recognition, phonetics etc. Materials are provided to guide students according to their proficiency level. They will be in small groups for reading conferences utilizing independent reading materials provided. The reading material integrates Social Studies themes that students learn about has they receive direct instruction in vocabulary and comprehension skills. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Our school shares the building with a charter school. To meet the academic, linguistic, and socioemotional needs, when necessary, resources are shared such as guided reading texts, visuals, etc,. These are shared in order to meet the needs of all ELL's in the school environment. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). To assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year, the HLIS, Parent Survey, and Student Emergency Contact Cards are given to all parents. Using this information, important information and documents are given in the preferred language by the parents. Native language support is provided for every parent/guardian with translated signs posted in the building, assistance from the main office, labeled classrooms, content area material, literature in their native language, and technology resources in their native language. In terms of activities, students are invited to socials and events that allow them to meet students and teachers in the building. School personnel who are present include the Principal, Assistant Principal, teachers, and other school personnel such as the school counselor, social workers, and parent coordinator. Translators and bi-2018-19 SCEP-SIG 63  lingual teachers will be in attendance, where they can assist parents who prefer another language based on the documents and surveys given. Throughout the school year, if new ELL's enroll, they will be invited to social events and the after school program where they will be provided with additional services from their mandated hours. Students will actively engage with other students who share the same language and whose L1 is English. Opportunities for communication, but most importantly, feeling comfortable with the teacher and school environment will be on-going during this time. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? We do not offer language electives. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? The ESL teachers participate in professional development provided through Quality Teaching for ELLs (QTEL) as well as trainings provided by NYC BETAC Offices. Most of the Professional Development meetings are also administered by the Bronx Field Support Center ELL Liasons. Upon completion of the workshops, teachers will return to the school to turn-key the information. Teachers of ELL's attend as many workshops as are available through the Division of English Language Learners and Student Support. ESL services are provided, based on their proficiency level, for students inside of their English dominant classroom. Teachers and ENL teachers have the responsibility of differentiating and providing extra support for ELLs. With this in mind, PS 107 wants to ensure that teachers have the knowledge and skills needed to provide this support to ELLs. To ensure our students success, a plan for professional development as a year focus is in place for all staff. During these professional development periods, which are conducted by the ENL teachers, the ENL teachers will focus on discussing the co-teaching model used in the school and strategies to make the model work for all teachers, ways to integrate language and content instruction, a focus on language acquisition in alignment to the NYSCCLS, and Language Access and Translation Plans will be taught during these periods as well (how to use the language line(3 way call). 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. ENL Teachers attend periodic professional development meetings provided by the district and field support personnel. ENL teachers also attend Monday and Tuesday Professional Development Workshops. Records are kept for professional development through a sign-in sheet as attendance, and agendas given to provide the teachers with the goals that need to be met during the professional development period. The ENL teachers keep binders that include the agendas and attendance sheets from all PD's attended throughout the year provided by the district and other personnel as well as the PD's that are given in the school. The in-school PD's given by the ENL teachers allow the school to meet the professional development requirements as per CR Part 15.2. The hours embed further goals for the co-teaching model used in the school. ways to integrate language and content instruction, language acquisition needs that align to the NYSCCLS, and a consecutive review/reflection of data and how to improve the needs of all students who are ELLs. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 64  Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Throughout the school year there are four Parent-teacher conferences. The ENL teachers meet with the parents individually and discuss their child's progress. If a parent is in need of interpretation, the ENL and/or bilingual teachers will provide the translation. If a bi-lingual teacher is unable to speak the parent preferred language, the language line will be used during this time and a three way phone call will be conducted. PS 107 is highly populated with Spanish speaking students/parents and this is generally the language that is being translated. If there are parents who prefer another language, the school will provide an interpreter (for other languages such as French, Bangla etc.) through the DOE. Also, for ELLs, an annual meeting is given that informs parents that their child will take the NYSESLAT exam in June, and also provides an end of the year review of their child's progress. Next steps and goals are given and discussed during this meeting as well. Attendance sheets are created and kept for records and agenda sheets are created for each event and meeting provided to parents. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Our parents are involved at the school level through the P.T.A. and other events hosted by the Parent Coordinator in the school. Our P.T.A. is very involved with the community as well as our school. The Parent Coordinator hosts meetings three times each month with the parents. These workshops are different topics that are held in the school to keep parents informed. In these workshops they are also able to voice their opinions, give recommendations for changes in the school, and get information on upcoming events in the school. Translation services are offered to the parents as needed. Workshops are planned according to information gathered from these meetings and through a survey. As parents voice their opinions, notes are taken by our Parent Coordinator. Other events that are hosted by parent coordinator provide the opportunity for parents to engage in activities that will encourage parents to be more involved in their child's education. These events include movie nights, carnivals, family night, etc. Parents are also invited to chaperon school trips. Additionally at the end of the school yaer, a parent survey is given, where parents can evaluate the school year and what they would like to change for the next school year. This is evaluated and the feedback is highly taken into consideration. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Translation and Interpretation Services PS 107 assessed all data that shows that a large parent population is native speakers of another language, predominantly Spanish. The data used to assess our school’s written translation and oral interpretation needs were obtained from the Home Language Survey (HLIS) form and a Parent Survey, which is administered to all new entrants during registration. The primary language of each parent is maintained on the ATS, the student emergency card and in students’ cumulative record card. The findings are provided in the monthly parent meetings with the administration. Parent letters, notifications, academic programs and interventions, and calendars need to be addressed in the students' native language for full parental comprehension and involvement. The major findings of the school’s written translation and oral interpretation needs include an in-house dedicated oral and written translator and access to outside translation contractors and a more efficient method of home/school communication. These services are communicated to the school community through bi-lingual parent letters, Principal/PA meetings, parent/teacher conferences and through Guidance services. The school will provide a dedicated staff member for written translation which is primarily the Parent Coordinator, Ms. Diaz who 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 65  will be available daily to translate incoming and outgoing correspondence. In addition, various staff members are available to translate written home/school communication. Information that needs to be translated in Spanish can be submitted to Ms. Acosta, ENL teacher, and or any other bi-lingual staff member a week in advance of the date to send the letter. The school will be in contact with the the Department of Education's Translation and Interpretation Unit to provide two translators for our parent open house in the Fall and in the Spring. For oral translation of meetings, the schools parent coordinator is available to translate for parents. If another language is present other than Spanish, the teacher's will plan to use the Language Line and conduct a 3 way call when necessary. All parents who require language assistance services will be given written notification of their rights regarding translation and interpretation services, and instructions on how to obtain the services. The school will post, in the main lobby, a sign indicating the room where a copy of such written notification can be obtained. The school’s safety plan ensures that parents in need of language assistance services will be accommodated. The Department of Education’s website, that provides information in covered languages, will be sent to parents via bi-lingual informational letters. There is a parent information board in the entry way of the school as well as a parent center. Signage on the board, monthly parent newsletter, and resources in the parent center are made available in the predominant language of Spanish in addition to English. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 66 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Katherine Hamm, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 67  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: PS 107X School DBN: 08X107 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Katherine Hamm Title Principal Victoria Najera Assistant Principal Annette Diaz Parent Coordinator Catherine Acosta ENL/Bilingual Teacher Amy Ortiz Parent Leah Pisaniello/ ENL Teacher Teacher/Subject Area Earica Minott Teacher/Subject Area Lourdes Mercado n/a Coach Coach Penny Dearman School Counselor Dr. Ames Elizabeth Rende Addy Ortiz De-Jesus Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other 2nd Grade Teacher Other Related Service Provider Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 9/1/17 9/1/17 9/1/17 9/1/17 9/1/17 9/1/17 9/1/17 9/1/17 9/1/17 9/1/17 9/1/17 9/1/17 9/1/17 9/1/17 1/1/01 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 68  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 08X107 School Name: PS107X Superintendent: Dr. Karen Ames The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Leah Catherine Pisaniello Acosta ENL Teacher ENL Teacher yes yes yes yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. To assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication, PS 107 administers a Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS), which allows the parent to write their child's language(s) along with the language that they prefer to receive any information regarding their child. Additionally, we ask parents to complete a Student Emergency Contact card, which asks parents their preferred language for written and oral language for communication. Both of these are documented in ATS, which allows the main office staff to be aware of this language preference and teachers are relayed this information as well. The HLIS is placed in the child's cumulative record, and the Student Emergency cards can be found in the main office. If there is any important information going out to parents (flyers, newsletters,calendars,etc.) the main office will use a call system that translates any information into their preferred language. Additionally, we encourage parents to use the Language Line, which is a free language interpretation system. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 69  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral English Spanish Bengali French 546 103 2 2 83.36 15.73 0.31 0.31 540 109 2 2 82.44 16.64 0.31 0.31 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. n/a Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families PT Conference announcements Sept/Nov/Mar/May Monthly Calendar Monthly Newsletters/Flyer's Monthly Website On-going Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. 107 uses the DOE Intranet template for the languages preferred in our school. We use school-based personnel for non-covered languages when needed. Administered both in English and Spanish. For other preferred languages, Administered both in English and Spanish. For other preferred languages, the call system is used that translates documents into the preferred language. Additionally, parents are encouraged to use the Language line. The website is provided in English and Spanish. For other preferred languages, the Language Line is encouraged to be used. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 70  2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Parent Teacher Conferences Sept/Nov/Mar/May Curriculum Nights Parent Workshops Monthly Monthly End of Year Conference for ELL's June interpretation service(s)? Over the phone interpretation services, bi-lingual school personnel. Over the phone interpretation services, bi-lingual school personnel. Over the phone interpretation services, bi-lingual school personnel. If available, an interpreter will be invited to work with the parent. Interpretation services are offered face to face in English/Spanish. If the parent prefers another language. the Language Line is used during this meeting. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In the event of a school emergency, parents are notified through PS 107's call system that translates any important information into the language preferred by the parent. Additionally, the language line is used and a three way call is conducted to relay the information. Teachers and other school personnel are trained to do this. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. The Language Access Coordinators will conduct a Professional Development training where all teachers and school personnel will have an understanding of the protocol; language line training. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 71   Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) PS 107 makes all information accessible to parents in their preferred language by providing translated signage at the front entrance of the school and in the main office regarding any important information( brochures, flyers, any information shared with parents). Parent engagement events are also provided in the preferred language of the parents. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? To gather feedback, a Parent Language Survey is administered at the end of the school year, different than the one administered at the beginning of the school year. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 72 
