 10X118 School Name: J.H.S. 118 WILLIAM W. NILES Principal: GIULIA COX 2018-19 SCEP-FL 1  School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Section 4: SCEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Number (DBN): 10x118 718-584 7763 Fax: Gcox3@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: William W. Niles 321000010118 6, 7, 8 577 East 179 th St, Bronx NY 10457 718 584 2330 Phone Number: Giulia Cox School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Giulia Cox Lisa Baccari Sandy Magny Giulia Cox Dean Parker N/A N/A N/A Community School District 10 Geographical District: Superintendent’s Office Address: District Information Maribel Hulla Superintendent: 1 Fordham Plaza, Bronx NY 10457 mhulla@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: (718) 741-5852 Phone Number: (718) 741-7098 Fax: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 3  FSC: Bronx Executive Director’s Office Address: Field Support Center (FSC) MeishaRoss Porter Executive Director: 1 Fordham Plaza, Bronx NY 10457 / 1230 Zerega Ave, Bronx NY 10462 mrossporter@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: Phone Number: Fax: 718-828-7776/ 718-741-8895 718-828-6280 2018-19 SCEP-FL 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the SCEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) GiuliaCox Lisa Baccari Sandy Magny N/A N/A N/A N/A Malik Ketcham Robin Plummer *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member Yr 2 / Teacher; Staff # 3 Member Yr 2 / Teacher; Staff # 4 2018-19 SCEP-FL 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) AdeyemiMurphy-Higgs Member Yr 1 /Teacher; Staff # 5 Terri Periello Jenny Mantuano Cyntia Caimares DenalCallendar Carmen Mateo KieraMingo Member Yr 1/ Teacher; Staff # 6 Member / Parent 2 Member/Parent3 Member/Parent4 Member/Parent5 Member/Parent6 Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 SCEP-FL 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) is a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. The process of developing and implementing the SCEP is aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding SCEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and SCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 7  In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement 2018-19 SCEP-FL 8  NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the SCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the SCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for SCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 9   Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 5: Build consensus around activities, strategies and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 6: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 7: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 10  Section 4: SCEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? MS 118 School Mission: To empower every child to achieve a bright future as an individual and as a member of our nation and the world. To that end, we partner with young people and their families to support students as they begin their development into thoughtful, informed, caring and productive adults. The values of hard work, personal responsibility and compassion are the foundation of our community of learners and leaders. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. In 2018-19, the school is comprised of three academies serving approximately 1,200 students: 1) The Academy of Excellence : a zoned / unscreened academy serving approximately 25 classes of students in General Education, Transitional Bilingual, ICT (team-teaching) and small class special educational settings. The academy meets several different student instructional language needs, serving ENL students who have diverse home languages other than Spanish in the mainstream with push in and pull out supports programmed as required by NY state laws. Spanish speaking students may be served in the mainstream, or in our two Transitional Bilingual (TBE) General Education classes spanning 6-8th grades. This year, we have also added a bilingual Special Education 12:1:1 6th grade class. Over the next two years, we will add a class each year, allowing us to serve students across all three grades 6-8 by September of 2019. 2) Spectrum Academy , an honors program with an accelerated curriculum serving 9 classes of students in General Education and 3 in ICT (team-teaching) classes. (4 classes per grade) 3) Pace Academy , an academically accelerated program serving 12 classes of students in General Education and 3 in small special educational classes. (5 Classes per grade) The school offers eighth grade students opportunities to prepare for Regents exams for HS credit; over 400 individual Regents exams (Algebra 1, US History and Living Environment,) were administered in Spring 2018 to students. The school has several important academic and enrichment partnerships benefiting students including with the Manice Environmental Education Center, Astor Services for Children and Families, the Bronx DA's Youth Leadership Program, Urban Advantage, Chess in the Schools, as well as with NYC Arts organizations including Dreamyard Arts Partners and the Lincoln Center Shakespeare program. Professional learning and teacher development partnerships include New York City's Urban Advantage's Science program, as well as deep partnerships with Ramapo for Children (School Culture), and Generation Ready (Classroom Teaching Quality) MS 118 relaunched its UFT Teacher Center in September of 2017, building on our prior participation in the Teacher Development Coaching project funded by the citywide Federal Teacher Incentive Fund grant. Our full time UFT Teacher Center Coach, in partnership with school administration and a part time consultant from Generation Ready, offers teachers job-embedded, school based professional development in all departments that increases successful integration of research-validated teaching practices. MS 118 hosts a SONYC afterschool program offered by Community Based Organization PAL. The program is held every school day of the year and offers enrichment programming and homework help. PAL participants participate in many 2018-19 SCEP-FL 11  special events, including recreational field trips such as snow tubing, professional sports events and performances. Students in the program enjoy seasonal family events as well as daily activities such as dance, archery, journalism, basketball and technology. In SY 2017-18, the program has added restorative circles and other social-emotional components to the program, with support and encouragement from the school. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. As a large, comprehensive school, MS 118 serves many student populations with special needs. These particularly include: 1. Students with Special Needs / IEP's: These students vary in their needs, but they typically need support with improving their literacy skills, developing their conceptual understanding of grade-level content in the subject areas, understanding and regulating their own emotions and behavior. Many students need help developing strategies for academic persistence in the face of attentional challenges, difficulty processing or producing speech, dyslexia / dysgraphia, etc. 2. Students in Temporary Housing: Current data indicate that as many as 20% of our students are in some form of temporary housing -- they may be doubled up with other families or in long term or emergency shelters. These students typically need additional support with academic support, social and emotional support, and logistical supports, such as with clothing and school supplies. Attendance interventions are also indicated for a subset of these students. 3. Our English Language Learning students' academic progress in 2016-17 was roughly proportional on average to that of our non-ELL students, indicating that these students are supported in accessing the general education curriculum at rates similar to those of their native English speaking peers. Nevertheless, we recognize the need to improve our supports for non-Spanish ELLs with 'entering' and 'emerging' levels of English. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. In 18-19, our greatest area of growth was in the area of Rigorous Instruction in ELA. In this area, our school as a whole showed an eight percentage point increase in students proficient at levels 3 and 4, outpacing the State and the District in terms of growth. We are confident that this is a direct result of the curriculum work that the school has been invested in over the last two years. Our key areas of focus for 18-19 are: -- Clear Expectations for student learning: clear, concrete learning targets and strong formative assessments to boost mastery. -- The use of iReady to support targeted interventions for students in their diagnosed areas of need. -- Continuing to improve our horizontal and vertical literacy curricula, -- increasing students' feelings of safety at school through supporting positive behavior among all students. -- providing dedicated support for developing strong ICT practice, and -- Increasing parent involvement through increased opportunities for families to help students achieve their learning and behavioral goals. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 12  2018-19 SCEP-FL 13  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 10X118 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 1174 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual YES Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 115 117 1 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 49 40 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 90.0% % Attendance Rate 85.6% % Reduced Lunch 10.7% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.5% 59.9% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 2.9% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 8.81 2% 21% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 49.5% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No No Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities N/A YES YES NO YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO YES NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES N/A NO YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 106 106 1 91.2% 3.7% 23.0% 21.8% 14.8% 0.6% 8 31% 7.2 35.1% 18% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Yes No YES YES N/A NO YES NO YES N/A NO NO NO YES N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 14  Economically Disadvantaged N/A ALL STUDENTS N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 15  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed X X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. According to 2017-18 and School Quality Review (SQR) and SQ Guide and Performance Dashboard, MS 118 has robust areas of programmatic strength. These include: a. Strong preparations for success in high school and beyond. MS 118 students perform well in HS, with over 90% of students earning the expected number of HS credits as 9th graders; this applies across all academies and includes students in subgroups such as SPED and ELL's. In addition, a large number of students take and pass one or more Regents exams, allowing them to accelerate their high school careers and take advanced courses. The school has a robust and strategic approach to High School articulation, offering two-in house HS fairs, and 1:1 application counseling with experienced guidance staff. MS 118 also partners with DREAM, and became a specialized HS school day testing site this year. In 2016-17, nearly one in four PACE Academy students earned a seat in a specialized HS program, and for the last several years, our students across academies have matched to their preferred HS programs at a higher rate than the rest of the district. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 16  b. Our school uses curricula that are aligned to the Common Core and New York State Standards, and that support students across programs with opportunities to engage in rigorous thinking and engage in challenging tasks. Students receive four report cards and four progress reports annually, providing opportunities for students and families to monitor progress along with teachers. Engrade became a schoolwide expectation this year, allowing students and parents a consistent platform for communicating with teachers. c. In Spring of 2018, the school showed its greatest recent achievement growth in ELA, bringing 50% of its students to ELA proficiency at levels 3 and 4. The school had previously posted modest gains (1-2% proficiency) in ELA in recent years, generally on a par with the city growth average. The trend among ELL and SPED students has been similar. Math achievement has remained generally consistent, showing 1-2 points of growth or loss generally on par with NY State and City averages. 2. Because the school's programs serve students with such a wide range of performance levels, we have identified school "impact" (as measured by the NYC SQG,) as the key area of academic need for the 17-18 academic year ahead. This metric is calculated by comparing student growth in Mathematics and ELA at 118 with the average growth in performance of a comparison group of statistically similar students. We want students at MS 118 to show better than average growth when compared to same-grade students at other schools with similar academic and demographic profiles. In SY 2015 our schoolwide average impact score was .47; in 2017, it was .37, which tells us that even though some scores rose slightly, we actually underperformed the city average and the previous year's growth. In order to achieve high rates of growth, all teachers will need to a) understand individual and class performance as compared to the city, 2) be able to use this understanding to select specific standards to focus on, and 3) engage in an inquiry process to address those focus areas, teach and asses into them, and them spiral back as needed to improve all students' outcomes. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, MS 118 will attain an overall school "impact" score of 50 or higher as reported by the school performance dashboard, reflecting overall school results that meet or exceed the average for its comparison group of similar students. In order to achieve this outcome, we will continue to use the ELA curriculum that produced strong gains for students at levels 2-4 in 17-18, but add on the use of iReady to provide better diagnostic data and customized practice for students performing at level 1 in both ELA and Math, including students with disabilities and those learning English as a new language. (SOP 3.2 and 3.3) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 17  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). in prep Provide increased instructional time in ELA and Math to all students to ensure adequate time for teaching, independent practice, assessments and re-teaching as needed in order to support students' growth. (ELA Rows 1 - 8) Implement Word Generation schoolwide to improve student proficiency with academic vocabulary. (Rec'd by MSQI) Implement reciprocal teaching in all ELA classes as a strategy to deepen students' reading comprehension, make comprehension strategies clear, and allow students to practice the thinking habits needed to understand challenging texts. Focus on increasing students' independent reading time during the literacy block and use readers' response journals to engage students in independent practice of reading strategies with a self-selected text. This will increase reading stamina and affinity, as well as deepen students' fund of knowledge through reading. All students Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) in prep in prep in prep All 6th & 7th grade; Sept-June Principal, Programmer 8th grade in AofE All students Sept - June Principal, AP's, Literacy Coach, ELA teacher leader All students Sept - June Principal, AP's, Literacy Coach, ELA teacher leader; Generation Ready Coach. Sept - June ELA Steering Committee: Principal, AP's, Literacy Coach, ELA teacher leader; Generation Ready Coach. Write and produce an ELA handbook that explicitly lays out our school's workshop-oriented approach to reading and writing instruction, so that new and experienced teachers are supported with a common language, vision and rationale for the different parts of literacy teaching. Conduct Year 1 of training and implementation on the school's ELA handbook and the workshop approaches to reading instruction that place students' individual reading and writing efforts at the center of teaching and learning in ELA. Use exam analysis to Identify areas of the ELA exam in which our students under-perform and engage in cycles of inquiry to understand and improve these patterns of achievement. All ELA teachers Sept - June ELA Steering Commitee All ELA teachers Sept - June ELA Steering Commitee All Classes Sept - April ELA Steering Commitee; District Public data consultants. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 18  Share analysis findings with Science and Social Studies departments in order to address and improve in areas of underperformance by taking advantage of cross-disciplinary connections with key ELA skills and expectations. Use formative assessments to understand where progress is achieved and needed prior to the state exam. (DRP, "Testlets" drawn from prior exams, one simulation administered in class. Math: Administer and examine results of common math assessments (both formative, such as exam practice, and summative, such as end-of-unit tests,) to understand and improve students' degree of mastery of grade level concepts. Use cycles of inquiry in grade level teacher teams to refine and improve curriculum maps. All Math teachers All Classes Sept - April All teachers All Classes Oct, Dec, Jan, March All Classes Monthly All ELA teachers; also shared with teachers of other subjects. Math Department; Math Consultant from Generation Ready. Sept-June Math Department; Math Consultant from Generation Ready. See also AIS Section for Vacation School Options in prep in prep in prep 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Families will be provided with information about their children's needs and growth through i-Ready parent-facing reports. The school will plan and conduct workshops that help families to understand grade level expectations, especially in ELA and Math. Additional workshops and experiences will be offered to help families understand how to select a high school with strong academics that will lead to expanded college and career options for their children; science experiences through the Urban Advantage Program to stimulate a love of the sciences, Math Family Game night, Arts HS, College and Career experiences through our Parents as Arts Partners program and others as proposed by the PA, Title I committee, and SLT. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. In order to fulfill the action plan for this section, we will align the following budget and resources with the plan. Human Resources: One FTE teacher center coach; Three Teacher Leaders: (1 GE ELA and two SE, ELA and Math). Scheduling Adjustments: Students will be programmed for up to three additional periods of ELA and math each year, except for 8th grade students preparing for the Regents in Pace. Per Session: Hours to develop curriculum guides, testlets and related resources. OTPS: Test Preparation Materials Consultants: 2 Generation Ready Consultants, (ELA / MA) 1 RAMAPO Consultant (SE) One Data Consultant. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA X P/F Set-aside 21st Century C4E 2018-19 SCEP-FL 19  Title I 1003(a) X Title III PTA Funded SIG Grant School Achievement Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. All students will use the i-Ready platform to participate in diagnostic assessments (fall and winter) and receive targeted computer-based instruction to meet areas of need.(e.g. high frequency vocabulary.) Data from the Winter Assessment should demonstrate that a minimum of 50% of students in each subgroup will have demonstrated two levels' worth of growth. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. iReady computer adaptive assessments. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 20  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. X X X X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? 1. MS 118 has several strengths in this framework area. Our last Quality Review (16-17) recognized our advisory program and the quality of relationships between and among students, staff and families. The 17-18 School Quality Guide reports that measures of quality for classroom behavior, our guidance program, peer support for academic work and the availability of personal attention and support are all statistically even with city averages. College Access for All was initiated, the Parents' Association held an Academic Honors Assembly, and we offered students additional mental health support through our partnership with the Astor Institute and Lehman MSW Counseling Interns. 2. Our priority needs are to improve a) overall school safety and culture and b) the depth and quality of support for students' social and emotional development. Our school's OORS data and school quality data show that we did not succeed as well in these areas in SY 18 as some other schools in our district, underperforming them by 6 and 14 percentage points, respectively. These survey findings were consistent with anecdotal reports and discussions had by our school leadership team throughout the Spring. This area was identified as our most urgent area of focus as a school for the SY 18-19 school year. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 21  3. We are working to review and strengthen several aligned policies, practices, and structures to address our areas of need and support the whole child: a. Partnership with Ramapo for Children and working with the Ramapo "Toolbox" for creating environments that support success. Through using the practices embedded in the toolbox appropriately, the school will respond appropriately to students' behavior while also valuing and teaching the whole child. The partnership includes documents for communicating key concepts, training for teachers and leaders, and a formal assessment of school culture based on a rubric developed by Ramapo. (A baseline was collected in May 2018.) b. Updating several school based policies, practices and structures to make expectations and beliefs about positive behavior clearly understood by students, families and staff. These include our school rules, ladder of referral, advisory program and section sheet programs, expectations for conduct in public spaces, structure of the in-house suspension program, and others. c. Creating and consistently implementing a calendar of activities, rituals and routines for monitoring, correcting and celebrating student behavior that supports success, and that all members of the school community can play a role in. d. Performing a follow up walkthrough assessment in December to measure our interim progress. For that assessment, each item organized under the areas of "walkthrough", "transition" and "classroom" is rated on a Likert scale of 1-7. A range of 1-2 denotes a low rating, a 3-5 a middle rating, and 6-7 a high rating. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools –Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2018, our goal is to improve student survey response scores in the area of safety, improving from 69% to 80% of students who agree or strongly agree that they feel safe in the hallways, bathrooms, locker rooms, and cafeteria at school. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 22  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Publish "the big three" school rules focused on preparation, effort and good character, and refer back to them regularly. All students September - June Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) All school based staff, all titles, plus Parent Association. Administrators, Advisors and Classroom teachers, Deans and Counselors All Staff All Titles Publish a ladder of consequences and referral for all students that is aligned to the Citywide Discipline Code. Use it frequently to make expectations and consequences clear. Publish, model and reinforce student-facing expectations for student behavior in public spaces, including cafeteria, classroom entry, restrooms and hallways. Practice these with adult support in the beginning of the year. Publish, model and reinforce expectations for adult supervision of student behavior in public spaces, including cafeteria, classroom entry, restrooms and hallways. Provide frequent feedback through a quick checklist. Publish expectations for grade level team's use of section sheets for data collection; review of patterns and trends, and initiating problem solving with individuals and groups; use Tuesday extended time to focus on monitoring student progress and communicating with parents as individuals and in groups to meet goals (eg all parents in a class, academy or grade.) Publish a calendar of rituals and routines as well as special events, celebrations and incentives to support and monitor progress, as well as promote and recognize individuals and groups who are meeting and exceeding expectations for positive behavior. Revise and restaff In House Suspension system Initiate a school wide student council to create formal opportunities for students to express their school spirit, strengths, interests, needs and concerns. Revise Advisory Program to make it more action oriented and aligned to support this school culture Action Plan. Add clear success criteria / expectations for Advisors in the form of "look fors". All students Opening Day and September - June All Students September - June All Staff September - June All Administrators 2018-19 SCEP-FL 23  Ongoing PL -- workshops for new staff 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Families are offered a variety of workshops on topics such as child mental health and managing anxiety, anti-bullying and anti-gang information, and parents as individuals are asked to participate in designing behavioral interventions for their own children, as needed and appropriate. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Resources are aligned to provide additional counseling staff and deans as agreed with the SLT and the UFT chapter. In addition, Circular Six Time and Professional Learning Time focuses on expanding behavioral supports for students through the use of the Ramapo toolkit and mediation of student conflict. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. in December 2018, MS 118 will conduct a Ramapo School Climate Walkthrough to measure progress since the May 2018 baseline. Our baseline grand scores were reported as: "Walkthrough" 3.86 of a possible 7; "Transition" 2.88 of a possible 7 and "Classroom" 4.36 of a possible 7. Our progress monitoring goal is to achieve a "Walkthrough" score of 5 or higher from a possible 7; "Transition" score of 4 or higher from a possible 7; and "Classroom" 5.6 of a possible 7. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Ramapo School Climate Walkthrough instrument. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 24  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. SOP(s) Addressed X X 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. X 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In 2017-18, MS 118's greatest need is to build the capacity of teacher teams to use cycles of inquiry to assess the impact of their teaching on all students' ability to learn successfully, in the context of grade level state standards. This need has been highlighted by more than one source. The 16-17 Quality Review identified teacher teams as our school's only area of developing practice, and our annual teacher surveys and internal discussions also indicate that this is a growth area. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2018, Teacher teams in each academic department will engage in 1-3 cycles of collaborative inquiry focused on a “problem of practice” drawn from a common assessment and share findings from each cycle. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 25  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) September / October: Department teams will study the inquiry process in order to establish a common understanding of what inquiry is and how it helps teachers to improve student outcomes. PL Committee Sept / Oct Principal + Departmental AP's October - March Department teams will identify problems of practice from formative assessments and engage in at least one cycle of inquiry. All Teachers Oct - Dec Principal + Departmental AP's PL Committee January - February Teachers will participate in Professional Learning focused on either Differentiation or Team Teaching strategies during Monday PL sessions to develop and share strategies that work for engaging all students Teachers in prep in prep February - March -- Teams within departments will share processes, findings, successes and challenges with their inquiry work. All Teachers January - Feb, March Principal + Departmental AP's March - April Teacher teams will use common assessment data to identify and teach into an area of student need prior to students participation in annual State Testing. A particular emphasis will be placed on ICT SE students and ELL students, as these are focus achievement areas for us as a Local Assistance Plan School. May-June Department Teams will examine documents related to the vertical curricula (6-8th grade progressions) and make revisions to ensure more students have the support they need over their middle school years on track to succeed in high school. All Teachers March - April PL Committee Principal + Departmental AP's PL Committee All Teachers April - May Principal + Departmental AP's PL Committee 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. School Leadership team parents will have opportunities to discuss and understand the work of inquiry teams through participation in SLT meetings and CEP development. Before June, The Parent Coordinator will support the Parent 2018-19 SCEP-FL 26  Association in sharing this information with other parents and providing parents with strategies for advocating for their children's learning needs. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. In order to fulfill the action plan for this section, we will align the following budget and resources with the plan. Human Resources: One FTE teacher center coach; Three Teacher Leaders: (1 GE ELA and two SE, ELA and Math). Scheduling Adjustments: Monday extended Professional Learning time will be focused on attaining this goal. Per Session: Hours to develop curriculum guides, testlets and related resources. Consultants: A District Public Data consulting service will be used to help identify problems of practice. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. The spring PPO visit will allow the Superintendent to review evidence and provide feedback with reference to this goal. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Annual PPO Subscore Rating with reference to the QR Rubric Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 27  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). X x SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to the Framework for Great Schools: "The principal sets the tone for the school, develops a climate of inclusiveness, and inspires staff and students with a clear vision for student achievement. The goal of a strong school leader is to build coherent instructional and social-emotional support that improves student achievement. School leaders support teacher development by consistently offering professional development opportunities and providing meaningful feedback. They seek input through regular meetings with all members of the community." Current strengths in this area include the Principal's active engagement with stakeholders, including elected and individual parents, UFT Consultation Committee, and academic departments. Consistent with Tenet 1, The principal has ensured that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) by highlighting our annual goals in our staff and parent conferences, including the Title I Annual Meeting. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 28  A focus area of need that has been identified is Program Coherence. In the 2017 School Quality Guide, only 68 percent of teachers agreed or strongly agreed on average with the three items relating to program coherence: 64%of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that at their school, once they start a new program, they follow up to make sure that it’s working. (Q8e) 71%of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that at their school it is clear how all of the programs offered are connected to their school's instructional vision. (Q8f) 69%of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that at their school curriculum, instruction, and learning materials are all well coordinated across the different grade levels. (Q8g) Because coherence is so important for successful implementation, this area was selected as our focus. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART– Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2018, MS 118 will close the gap between the school average and the citywide average in terms of the "Program Coherence" subscore of the Effective School Leadership measure of the School Quality Guide. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 29  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) The Principal will share the CEP goals with staff and parents at the beginning of the year at meetings (Including Title I,) and in writing. Staff, Parents. Sept / Oct Principal PPO Visits will be used as an opportunity to communicate with staff about progress in the 5 goal areas. Staff Fall / Spring Principal Departments and Teacher Teams will be responsible for sharing their progress (esp goal 1) with the wider staff. Principal and AP's will use the weekly Instructional Cabinet meeting as the the venue for monitoring and sharing progress data. Walkthroughs, document review, data review and looking at student work will be used and feedback will be published at least three times. Teacher Leaders Teaching Staff Fall / Spring Principal Fall / Winter / Spring Principal, AP's, Teacher teams. in prep 3b – Parent and Family Engagement in prep in prep in prep How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Need input from SLT Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The only resource required is to prioritize Supervisors' time to conduct this work. This will be achieved by calendaring a weekly meeting and keeping agendas, action items and notes. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded X P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other 2018-19 SCEP-FL 30  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. The PPO visit will offer feedback with reference to Quality Review Area 5.1 Progress monitoring; our target is proficient or well-developed. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The"Program Coherence" subscore of the Effective School Leadership measure of the School Quality Guide. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 31  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. X 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to the SY 2017 School Quality Guide, our areas of parent involvement are most satisfied with their experience are as follows; OUTREACH 93% of parents/guardians agreed or strongly agreed that they are greeted warmly when they call or visit the school. (Q1c) 90% of parents/guardians agreed or strongly agreed that they feel well-informed by the communications they receive from their child's school. (Q1e) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 32  96% of parents/guardians agreed or strongly agreed that their child's school communicates with them in a language and in a way that they can understand. (Q1h) PARENT INVOLVEMENT 92% of parents/guardians responded that they are somewhat or very likely to go to a regularly scheduled parent-teacher conference with their child's teacher. (Q6b) 87% of parents/guardians responded that since the beginning of the school year, they have seen their child's projects, artwork, homework, tests or quizzes sometimes or often. (Q4c) Parent-Principal and Parent-Teacher Trust all scored above 90%, although slightly below the district and city averages. The 2016-17 Quality Review also reflected a proficient score in this area. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our priority needs are to deepen trust and further open communications by asking parents to help the school. In an informal survey during Spring 2017 Parent Teacher Conferences, many parents expressed a desire to participate in Community Service activities with their children, and this was an area in the school survey where only 49% of families agreed that they'd had opportunities to support the school. A second area is improve parents' sense of agreement with regard to regular communications about how they can help their children learn -- only 82% of MS 118 parents agreed that this communication was regular. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By the date of the annual school survey administration, MS 118 will close the gap between MS 118 's average rate of favorable response to the Parent Involvement in School item (q4a) on the NYC Annual Parent Survey and the Citywide average (49% vs 64% in 2017) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 33  2018-19 SCEP-FL 34  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Advise all school staff of Parent Involvement Goal / focus area during the opening conference. All staff Sept 5th 2017 Principal Develop a sense of community and connection by encouraging parents to connect socially at Sept back to school night. Include potluck and curriculum highlights. All Parents Sept 2017 Academy AP's; Parent Coordinator, All teachers / staff. Work with new Parent Leaders to identify opportunities aligned with this goal. PA Exec; Title 1 Reps Winter / Spring Principal, Parent Coordinator Hold Honor Roll Reception and ask parents to share their strategies that they use to help their children succeed in school. Feb 2018 Parents of Sem I Honor Roll Students Parent Leaders, Parent Coordinator, AP's Progress Monitoring by School Leadership Team SLT Feb 2018 SLT Communicate with all parents about the impact of parents' help in order to recognize and promote this type of support and leadership among parents. Parent Coordinator, Parent Leaders Spring Parent Coordinator 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Councilmember Richie Torres' Office; PAL ; ACS Fatherhood Initiative; Bronx DA Program; Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Tax Levy funds provide for a full time parent coordinator; Title I and III funds pay for teacher and supervisor per session; Title I SWP and PI 1% pay for materials and resources, copying and refreshments. The PA also plans to raise funds to support parent activities, beginning with a mid-year honor roll reception Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA P/F Set-aside 21st Century C4E 2018-19 SCEP-FL 35  Title I 1003(a) X Title III PTA Funded SIG Grant School Achievement X Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Monthly PCAR reports will provide this data regularly. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2017-18 Annual School Survey Results Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 36  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) AISidentified students, as well as small group and one to one. When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During the instructional day and after school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) State Exam Scores below level 3. Mathematics State Exam Scores below level 3. ) DRPassessments to inform teacher grouping and differentiation; Additional instructional minutes above the state mandates to provide add'l time for guided and independent practice; Extended day programs Lunchtime study groups. Additional instructional minutes above the state mandates to provideadd'ltime for guided and independent practice Extended day programs Lunchtime study groups. AISidentified students, as well as small group and one to one. During the instructional day and after school. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 37 All students. During the instructional day. All students. During the instructional day. one on one as needed for individual circumstances. Science Students in danger of failing as indicated by quarterly grades. Social Studies Students in danger of failing as indicated by quarterly grades. At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Students demonstrating social emotional crisis PL for Science teachers that addresses strategiesfor identifying, engaging and supporting students at risk, as well as the particular needs of ELLsand SWD's. after school support for thosemost at risk. PL for Social Studies Teachers teachers that addresses strategiesfor identifying, engaging and supporting students at risk, as well as the particular needs ofELLsandSWD's. Saturday Academies for students most at risk. Students in crisis are case-managed by members of the Academy Team. Present strengths, weaknesses and resources are inventoried, and individual support plans are developed, using in and out of school resources. , 2018-19 SCEP-FL 38  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 163 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. STH service provision is managed through the Academy teams in SY16-17. The counselor, dean and AP work with advisors to monitor STH students' progress to continually identify students' barriers to educational progress and address them as soon as possible. School supplies, backpacks, school uniforms and other clothing items, transportation support (Metrocards) are provided to students, along with attendance and achievement incentives. Referrals to in-house or outside counseling are also provided through our partnership with the Astor Institute. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 39  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 40  Section 8: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. In order to maintain a staff that is highly qualified, teacher hiring pipelines are maintained at three levels. First, a joint Admin-UFT hiring committee focuses on recruiting and selecting experienced teachers for needed license areas through the NYC Open Market Transfer System. Second, strong relationships with organizations that provide alternate pathways to educational certification are formed and utilized in recruitment. Programs such as the NYC Teaching Fellows and Teach For America provide teacher candidates who are certified to teach in New York State and possess many qualities we look for in new teachers. Our school hosts New Teacher Training annually throught these organizations during the summer which affords us a unique opportunity to observe teachers during an extended student-teaching period and recruit those who possess state certification and demonstrate a high degree of pedagogical sophistication. BEDS surveys are done annually and data is collected and analyzed to ensure that our staff is working within their certification, and changes to programming are made when conflicts arise. All newly hired teachers, including those that have proper teaching experience will be provided with teacher mentors, and professional learning is a focus area of this CEP. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). See section 5C, "collaborative teachers" for details on the SY 16-17 Professional learning plan. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 41  3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers participate in MOSL committees and professional learning work in curriculum includes the development of common assessment items. UFT Consultation occurs monthly between Principal and a representative committee of UFT members led by the Chapter Leaders. Departmental PL groups review data to build teachers' ability to use data for instructional decision making. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (SCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) Section5: a, b, c, d and e Title I Part A (Basic) Federal 1,023,513 x 2018-19 SCEP-FL 42 Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Title II, Part A Federal Federal Federal Title III, Part A Federal Title III, Immigrant Federal Tax Levy (FSF) Local 16,979 0 0 15,566 3,019 7,359473 X N/A N/A X X X Section 5: a, c N/A N/A Section 5 a, e Section 5 a, c and e Section5: a, b, c, d and e 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH). 2018-19 SCEP-FL 43   Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/SCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 44  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Middle School 118, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Middle School 118 will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 45  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 46  ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 47  Middle School 118, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 48  ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 2018-19 SCEP-FL 49  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 50  ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 51  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): K 6 1 7 2 8 3 9 4 10 5 11 12 2018-19 SCEP-FL 52  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: After school Program MS 118's Title III allocation will provide 10 weeks of supplemental instruction for ENL students in grades 6-8 in ELA (one hour) and Math (one hour) twice weekly after school with a school snack offered daily. (Wednesdays and Thursdays in December, January, February and March) The main subgroups being serviced (not exclusively) by Title III are the newly arrived ELLs in the bilingual program as well as the ELLs with disabilities. Quite a few of our SPED ELLs are also long-term ELLs, which has continued to be area of focus for the school as indicated by our achievement data. After looking at the 2017-2018's Nyseslat data result, we have made additional decisions about students that must attend the program. One group of students in particular aside from the targeted sample in the subgroups mentioned above are the five students who regressed in their test results (all five students are students in a self-contained setting). In addition to this, we are interested in focusing on the students who remained stagnant who do not simultaneously fall in one of the aforementioned subgroups. Out of the 135 student on register (as per the EDAT data) close to 50 students (including a large part of the new incoming 6th graders) remained at their same proficiency level. differentiated Teachers in the program will be provided with curricula, trained in appropriate methodologies and will review student data to guide instructional decision making. Content and ENL / Bilingual teachers will work together on backwards design of learning experiences to ensure that each learning experience will support students in moving towards meeting both new language and content area standards. The language of instruction will be English. The plan for Entering ELLs/newly arrived immigrants is to use the National Geographic program as a curricular resource. For the transitioning and expanding ELLs we will also be utilizing The Attanasio's Nyseslat curricular resource as an enrichment reading program as it is differentiated and scaffolded. M.S. 118's bilingual program was reconstituted three years ago during the SY15-16. During the 2017-2018 school year we opened our first 6th grade Special education bilingual class. Next school year 2018-2019 we are opening an additional 6th grade special education class. We are always looking for ways to support our English Language Learners in the different settings. We also reconfigured the ENL instruction taking place in our freestanding ENL program. This Title III program meshes with our overarching goal of further developing our bilingual program and to 2018-19 SCEP-FL 53  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information continue to focus on the growth of our freestanding ENL program at the school, so that our students develop the English language skills they need for success in high school and beyond, while using bilingual and ENL methods to ensure their successful engagement with grade level content. Title III supplements our focus on ensuring that our bilingual classes have all of the resources necessary for success as far as curricular resources and teacher preparation. We plan to use the advance literacy guide as an approach to continuing to develop the quality of instruction in our ENL program. We plan to accomplish this by explicitly establishing connections between daily reading, writing and speaking in ENL instruction (with a particular emphasis on the practicing of social and academic discourse). The teachers participating are all ENL or bilingually certified. There are a total of 2 ENL certified teachers and 2 bilingually certified. (One of our teachers holds a dual bilingual and ENL license.) Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: The teachers receiving the training will be the teachers who serve in the Title III program (also the majority of the teachers who service the bilingual classes, including the BSE class). The teachers who will focus on teaching the Entering and Emerging ELLs will be Ms. Camargo (literacy component) and Ms. Vargas (math component). The curricular resource to be used will be Attanasio Nyseslat program curricular resource for literacy and the Triumph learning New York coach supporting the standards target foundational mathematics. The teachers will receive professional development around this curricular resource with our Entering ELLs. The expectation is that the teachers will receive at least one comprehensive workshop (with ongoing support) for each program. The providers and facilitators will be the respective program coaches/vendors. The professional development will tentatively take place the week before the program begins. There will be two sessions. The first one the teachers will receive their student data and the curricular resources that will take place on November 29th from 2:30PM to 4:30pm. The second session will take place December 3rd from 3:40Pm to 4:40pm and the teachers will receive support around utilizing the curricular resources for planning for their individual students. This way teachers will receive their student’s respective data and utilize it to plan for their respective groups. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 54  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: There will be a meeting for the parents of the students who attend the Tittle III program to visit the school and get receive information about the work that their children are doing during the program. Additionally, the parents will receive an update on their children’s progress in the program (the 5th week in to the program), Thursday January 3 from 3:30pm to 4:30pm as well as their academic and language development in their classes. This meeting will happen at least once during the 10 week span of the program for an hour and a half. Refreshments will be served. There will be another meeting on January Thursday 17th from 3:30pm-4:30pm to model for parents’ ways in which they can support their children at home while learning a new language. The topics to be covered will be the type of academic support students are receiving in the program, ways in which parents can support this kind of work at home, and receiving individual updates on their child’s language development progress. The meeting will be facilitated by the teachers in the program. A school aide will be hired to do parent outreach for an hour and a half for each day of the program. These workshops will be facilitated and planned for by Ms. De La Mota, AP for ENL programs and services. Parents will be informed via back pack letters and reminded over the school phone messenger as mentioned previously. Translation services will be set up by the main office using the translation unit, as needed. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Conceptually Consolidated Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) in prep  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. in prep Conceptually Consolidated 2018-19 SCEP-FL 55 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Conceptually Consolidated Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL inprep in prep in prep in prep in prep Conceptually Consolidated Conceptually Consolidated Conceptually Consolidated Conceptually Consolidated 2018-19 SCEP-FL 56  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 10 School Name William W. Niles Middle School 118 Borough Bronx School Number 118 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Giulia Cox Coach ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Cielo Camargo Teacher/Subject Area Damian Griffin Teacher/Subject Area James Donohue Related-Service Provider Roberta Willow Superintendent Maribel Hulla Assistant Principal Nathalie De La Mota Coach School Counselor Dayana Ventura Parent Parent Coordinator Wanda Montanez Field Support Center Staff Member type Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 2 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification 1 0 Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 2 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 3 0 2 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] D. Student Demographics 2018-19 SCEP-FL 57  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 1154 Total number of ELLs 128 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 11.09% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish If yes, indicate language(s): NO Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 9 10 11 12 Tot # School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) Lang. Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total 621 14 0 0 0 0 635 8 1 Bridge Bridge 720 SC 12:1:1 720 (820) 0 0 0 0 0 0 734 720 -819 0 0 0 0 Part III: Assessment Analysis After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? As a school community, it was decided to opt out of citywide interim assessments and design our own. Each department builds their own assessment, including the ESL/Bilingual Department. These assessments are common core aligned and standard-based. Each department creates a unit test, skill analysis and answer key based on the highest areas of need from the state ELA and Math test. Within the unit test, specific content strands, skills and standards are addressed based on students’ strengths and areas of focus. The students’ strengths and areas of focus are based on baseline assessments. The 2018-19 SCEP-FL 58  troublesome questions from the baseline are then spiraled into the next exam, enabling the teachers to pinpoint specific areas, rather than re-teach broad topics to the entire class. More specifically some of the assessments used in tandem with the MOSL and the teacher created assessments are the baseline assessments from the DRP. Each department has a department lead which has been thoroughly trained in the following areas; Data analysis, Data Interpretation, Direct Application of data results for instruction though professional learning cycles. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Teacher teams work in conjunction with the professional learning that happens departmentally. Teacher teams meet departmentally at least once a week to discuss plans, student work as well as action steps and timelines. In addition to this, teacher teams meet during professional learning cycles (Mondays during professional learning). These departmental meetings and professional learning cycles support the work of looking at data, planning, looking at student work, and making changes to instruction systemically. There are four structured cycles in which teachers get to look at data and use it for unit planning. Part of the other cycles of learning focus on having the teachers teach the unit plan and have inter-visitations where the teachers get to see each other teach the same lessons (part of the co-written unit) and give each other feedback using a protocol to guide the conversation. One of the school’s foci for the next school year is focusing on using an inquiry approach for looking at teacher practice and student work. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? HLA assessmentELL periodic assessmentDoe performance tasksTeacher created baselines, midterms and finalsDRP 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? AIS is the primary structure to address interventions and student needs in instruction. This past school year some teachers had AIS periods built in to their schedules. Part of the plan for this coming school year is to keep some of those AIS periods in some of the teacher programs and also extending the AIS program in additional periods during the instructional day (such as lunch and learns) and after school. Title III is another structure in which teachers focus strictly on the Nyseslat data along with the reading and Math data to address students’ individual areas of need. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] N/A 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Various sources of data are used to make instructional decisions for programing ELL students to specific classes and specific teachers. The primary report used to make instructional decision is the EDAT report as it is very comprehensive in nature and provides a full picture of every student. The data on the EDAT informs the degree of intervention and support needed for every ELL. Students with the higher level of risk as per the EDAT are grouped with the stronger ELL teacher as well as content area teams. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? 2018-19 SCEP-FL 59  The dissemination happens departmentally and electronically (all data is stored and shared electronically through google docs). Several times a year, starting with the beginning of the year teachers receive their specific data for the core subjects for the students they teach. Teachers have the opportunity to look at their students’ performance on specific skills and standards. Along with the core subject data such as the results of the Math and ELA exam, the EDAT report is also shared with teachers so that they may learn about their student strengths and areas of focus in a more comprehensive way. This is data is visited many times during the different cycles of professional learning and used to make adjustments to instruction for individual students and groups of students as well. One of the school’s foci for the next school year is focusing on using an inquiry approach for looking at teacher practice and student work. This focus will push teachers to look to take a more proactive approach in addressing gaps in instruction. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. The goal of MS 118’s Freestanding ESL program is to provide ENL support to ELLs as they transition progress in their language proficiencies. The main goal is to have the ENL provider work with the content area teacher to co-plan and co-deliver instruction in the content areas, in particular ELA and Social Studies. Additionally, Freestanding ENL gives students instruction in the conventions of written English, vocabulary development and support in the development of their listening, speaking and reading skills. Freestanding ENL is provided through English Language Arts content to ELLs at all levels of their proficiency through integrated instruction (push-in). For the entering and emerging ELLs in this program in addition to receiving their instruction through the integrated content approach, they also receive their standalone instruction by an ENL pedagogue. b. TBE program. If applicable. TBE program The goal of MS 118’s TBE program is to transition students into mainstream monolingual classes within three years, while still supporting the development of their home language literacy and content area skills. Students in the TBE classes receive their respective number of mandated minutes of ENL instruction per week; this is a balance of a content integrated approach as well as a standalone ENL approach. They also receive their mandated HLA number of instructional minutes per week. In Math and Science, instruction is allocated according to students’ language ability; therefore, teachers provide direct instruction in the students’ home language, which in this TBE program is Spanish. Literacy and Social Studies are taught in English and using ENL methodology (This is where the students receive their mandated minutes of instruction in ENL through the specific aforementioned content areas). For the entering and emerging ELLs in this program in addition to receiving their instruction through the integrated content approach, they also receive their standalone instruction by an ENL pedagogue. c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? 2018-19 SCEP-FL 60  a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? This year, the 6th, 7th and 8th grade TBE classes are self-contained classes that traveled together as a group. They receive ENL in five, two period blocks per week. All students who are newly arrived in the New York City Department of Education system receive ENL instruction in a small group setting (Stand-alone ENL) in addition to their integrated instruction. The entering and emerging ELLs are pulled out by a certified ENL teacher during the instructional day. These students receive ENL instruction in BICS, preparing them for conversation with peers and teachers at their new school, additionally, they learn about the structure of the English Language. These students also receive multi-cultural infused instruction that is built in to the content. The number of mandated HLA minutes are delivered four times a were In the ENL standalone program the number of mandated instructional minutes are delivered by an ENL pedagogue who pushes in to mainly ELA classes or Social studies (where exceptions have to be made due to the program). 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Content areas The subject area teachers include a variety of practices to support these students. Some of these are: • List (group and label) • Brainstorming • Concept maps • guided reading • Question-answer relationship • Quick writes • Read and retell • Semantic webs • Role-playing • Think-pair-share • Writing process • Graphic organizers • Semantic maps • Visualization • Story telling through pictures and illustrations At MS 118 we are currently on working on having every subject teacher that teacher ELL students to work on having a language objective for their lesson. These language objectives are determined by student work, student performance, teacher observation, informal as well as formal assessment including NYSESLAT data results by modality, Student-Teacher conferencing as well as the language required for students to better understand the content. The assignment of students to cooperative learning groups is taken very seriously when it comes to long term ELLs. The content area student performance and the student language performance are examined, then groups are formed. Cooperative groups give students the opportunity to read, listen, write, and speak for information and understanding, literary response and expression, critical analysis and evaluation, and for social interaction. The ENL team helps the subject-area teacher to place students in groups and assists the teachers in making sure that in every subject area there is a wide variety of materials to support the ELLs. Explicit ENL MS 118’s ENL teachers mainly follow the balanced literacy curriculum with the TBE and free standing ELL classes. Math 2018-19 SCEP-FL 61  instruction is also provided to ensure that students understand mathematical vocabulary in English, which will help them transition into monolingual math classes. ESL teachers employ many different ENL methodologies, depending on the content that they are presenting. For example, as part of the “modified mini-lesson” for balanced literacy, ENL teachers will brainstorm ideas about the topic addressed in the reading, as well as preview vocabulary before a read aloud or shared reading activity, using visuals to support the students’ understanding. Many of the strategies mentioned above are also used to deliver ESL instruction through Social Studies content (particularly in the bilingual program). Teachers especially focus on the use of graphic organizers to make Social Studies content more comprehensible. Students are given support on their understanding of new vocabulary through the use of visuals, maps and globes and by connecting vocabulary terms to real-life situations. ELLS in all grade levels work on a number of projects throughout the year in which they “put themselves in someone’s shoes” to build their understanding of historical events in an engaging way. These projects give them the opportunity to express themselves in writing and practice new vocabulary as well. In sum, all of these strategies are used to support the students with the rigor of complex and demand texts and tasks that the CCLS calls for. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Students in the TBE classes receive their mandated minutes of NLA instruction per week. SIFE students and students with low native language literacy skills as identified from the NYSITELL and ELE tests also receive native language instruction through a pull-out program. In addition to this the school participated in an HLA pilot program last year, which allowed the school to test out this assessment for grade level 6. This year we conducted the fall HLA assessment shared for grades 6, 7 and 8. This was mostly a writing assessment. This academic year the school will continue to use the Santillana’s materials en Español as a curricular resource in the HLA classrooms, in addition to other teacher selected materials and texts. The students are exposed to the same literacy skills in both English classes and their home language classes. This program has a pre and post assessment component which quantifies the students’ vocabulary, grammar and writing mechanics and listening progress. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status At MS 118 the ENL department (specifically the assistant principal who oversees the department) begins by making sure that every child that is registered in our school is taken through the process of identification and scrutiny for ESL services. The Assistant principal along with a designated ENL pedagogue (Mrs. Padilla), looks at the student’s information when students are registered and classify students accordingly. Newly arrived and SIFE In general, parents of new arrivals, including SIFE students, choose to place their children in the Transitional Bilingual Education class (if their home language is Spanish, as that is the only type of bilingual program the school is currently offering at the time). The child is placed in the selected class and the child’s name is provided to every teacher that teaches in that classroom. If child that has been identified as a SIFE student is provided a Native Language proficiency examination in which a student is asked to read, write, speak and listen. This informal assessment is used as a base of data to help us transfer ELL’s language knowledge into English. This informal assessment takes into account multiple situations and contexts making sure the students are able to apply to language skills at the same level in all situations. In addition to this the school is going back to using the LENS as an assessment tool for students who may be flagged as SIFE ELLs. The child is provided their mandated services during the instructional day, but is supported with Tier 1 intervention as 2018-19 SCEP-FL 62  well as Tier 2 interventions. MS 118’s main goal is that the child is given the quality of time that he/she is entitled for ENL. In the ENL classrooms students are placed by language proficiency level and grade level. That means that some of the 6th and 7th graders might be in the same ENL classroom. This information is then utilized for Tier 1 and Tier 2 intervention. Additionally, one more layer of intervention is the implementation of the partial implementation of the SIFE curriculum, particularly the structures and protocols outlined in the program (Ms. Camargo is one of the ENL pedagogues trained with these resources). Classroom activities are based on the following: • Elicit prior knowledge on given topics and check student comprehension often as topics are introduced. • Emphasize life situations and problems that require a higher order of thinking. • Make sure graphic organizer displays information clearly and logically. • Employ drama, role play to enhance communication. We are working on creating a library for the two current bilingual classrooms that contain books in SIFE student’s home language as well as in English that he/she is able to read. In addition to this, this past year a library media specialist was hired to support teachers in accessing books and resources from all the NYC public libraries as a resource. All the content area teachers in the integrated ENL classrooms have access to this resource. Developing There are different literary genres and most importantly there are also non-fiction books at the student’s reading levels that allow subject teachers to recommend students to use support grade levels curriculum in math, social studies, science, and literacy. Students work in groups providing students a greater opportunity to read, write, listen, and speak for information and understanding, literary response and expressions, critical analysis and evaluation and social intervention. Students are also provided with listening activities with books on tape in order to promote comprehension. In this manner students are provided with materials at the students “i + 1” level. This begins to promote rigor, making sure that students are also exposed to reading material out of their “comfort zone” so they continue advancing. The teachers during Tier I intervention pull them out to the conferencing stations and discuss material. After school programs are offered for these specific students from the following selections: • Math in the home language • Parents are offered workshops in order to inform them of their child’s education • Certified ENL teachers provide workshops for parents on topics such as the use of reading logs, reading with your child at night, and other helpful things parents can do at home to help their child success academically Teachers utilize Smart Boards, computers to provide students with more visual aids in interactive activities to promote more learning and understanding of subject matter. These instruments assist teachers for scaffolding instruction by allowing teachers to support through modeling questioning and getting feedback. Assessing progress occurs on an ongoing basis by the teachers and the assistant principal during the pullout session in native language and by the subject teachers in the regular classrooms. Plan for Long Term ELLS' – This has been our greatest challenge at MS 118 - This year we will aggressively address this population through the following: Plan for ELLS' 4-6 Years, long term ELLs - Students that have been ELL'S are serviced in many ways professional development for both monolingual and bilingual teachers on instructional strategies that will develop and accelerate acquisition of language, math and core content knowledge for the teachers who serve this population *Aligning both core- subject instruction to incorporate more reading & writing activities in the core subjects, thus aligning all curricula to updated core standards *Students have access to bilingual dictionaries, books in the native language and support via buddy system * Reading and writing is carried across into all major subject areas *Authentic Instruction is aligned to meet the needs of these students as well as exposure to test sophistication and best 2018-19 SCEP-FL 63  practices *Students are offered the option of participating of Title III Afterschool *homework help after school *AIS during the instructional day *Access to glossaries, bilingual dictionaries, back to back bilingual books, buddy system *Alignment of pacing and curriculum maps through core-standards *Option of participation of Title III Letters and Afterschool Program *Pull-outs/Push-ins for Math and Literacy Interventions *Small class size in ELA and Math classes Former ELLs: As the CRP 154 mandates the commanding ELLs are programed in to classes where they can receive their mandated number of instructional minutes by an ENL pedagogue. Commanding ELLs are grouped with their ELL peers and receive their instructional minutes in ENL though the integrated approach across the content areas. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? At the present time, MS 118 has 14 ELL students in grade 6, 20 in grade 7th & 14 in grade 8th that have been identified as having special needs. The students in the mainstream ENL classes received SETSS services as well as ESL services according to their proficiency level. ENL and SETSS teachers communicate on a regular basis about students’ instructional needs. In addition, the ENL teachers push in to these students’ literacy classes to provide small group and individualized instruction and to ensure that the students do not miss literacy instruction time. The students in the 12:1 and 12:1 classes also receive ENL instruction through the integrated approach. ENL and content area teachers have begun collaborating with the SBST team to access and make sense of specific data for individual students and to use that to make changes to instruction. For the ENL standalone program the school utilizes the curricular resources recommended by the state (CMP3 for Math, Code X for ELA), the approach we use is to scaffold and modify these curricular resources to meet the needs of our different ELL sub groups. Particularly for our ELLs with disabilities concessions and modifications are made around the student's IEP's. In addition to this, starting this year the self- contained special education teachers are working with a consultant to develop a curriculum to meet the needs of the students in 12:1 and 12:1:1 classes. For the next school year (2017-2018) the plan is to assign one ENL teacher by grade level and to ensure each grade level ENL teacher attends the literacy common planning and departmental meetings so they can plan and support the work happening in the content in a more focused and purposeful way. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? All teachers are required to create instructional goals around student’s IEP, which means all teachers must look at each student’s IEP and based on what the IEP says they must create short term goals (for the marking period) and a plan with strategies they plan to use to ensure the student meets their semester goals. When looking at the IEP the teacher also looks at the NYSESLAT data results to create a plan with the language goals and targets as well. When designing the plan the teacher must consider the child’s disabilities as well as their language proficiency. The Special education department and the ENL department co-facilitate workshops throughout the year to support the teachers in helping them address and support this population of learners. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 64  8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Our Ells not only have access to all the instructional and extracurricular programs at the school but all of our ELLs receive their mandated ENL pull outs. Additionally, we make use of out Title III funding (or any additional funding offered for ELLs and immigrant students depending on the fiscal year) to target the language and content needs of our students. The Title III program serves most of our English Language Learners. The program generally runs Wednesdays and Thursdays from 2:30 pm until 4:30pm. Additional support is offered in Math and ELA and the program runs for about ten weeks (contingent upon funding).The Language of instruction will be English. These are some of the additional interventions and services the school offers in English: *Students have access to bilingual dictionaries, books in the native language and support via buddy system *Authentic Instruction is aligned to meet the needs of these students as well as exposure to test sophistication and best practices in reading and writing *Students are pulled out and receive extra support in both Math and ELA *Students are offered the option of participating of Title III Afterschool and/or Saturday Academy (when applicable) *Access to counseling services in English and Spanish during the instructional day and during the Title III program (contingent upon funding) *Access to mentors and advisors in English, Spanish and Arabic Additionally, town halls are held by grade levels that emphasize cultural and educational aspects of students’ academic life via performances, discussions, Ready for College Initiatives, as well as advisories (Enrichment Clubs) where students participate from a wide available menu items such as receiving additional support with learning social and academic behaviors catered to middle schoolers. AIS is also an important structure to address interventions and student need in instruction. This past school year some teachers had AIS periods built in to their schedules. Part of the plan for this coming school year is to keep some of those AIS periods in some of the teacher programs and also extending the AIS program in additional periods during the instructional day (such as lunch and learns) and after school. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? The school will be opening a 12:1 6th grade bilingual class. This has been a high area of need for the school for the past couple of years as the ELL/SWD population continues to grow in the district. The principal is hoping to hire at least one more ENL teacher to ensure students’ needs are met in the different settings. The school has also purchased the National geographic curricular resource to address the needs of entering and emerging ELLs for their standalone instruction. In addition to this the ENL teachers are also planning to incorporate pieces of the AIR curricular resources to address the needs of entering and emerging students as well. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Our ELLs are afforded equal access to all school programs through the implementation of the Title III program. The SIFE program is a program that provides the right balance for our ELLs, especially our SIFE students. This program generally takes place on Saturdays and students usually participate in a reading or writing support class in the first part of the morning and then a sport or social activity in the afternoon portion of the program. It is a program that the students look forward to attending, and that helps the school achieve the goals we have for this particular group of learners. Title III generally happens after school and we offer an array of different support for our ELLs, some of our students need 2018-19 SCEP-FL 65  assistance with homework, so the school provides that. Other students need support with specific reading or writing skills, the school also provides in. Other ELLs need support with test sophistication, and the anxiety that comes with taking a test in a language other than your native one, so a program is built in to support that group of ELLs with that as well. We also provide help for those students across all content areas, math, science, ELA and social studies. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. The following programs are in place (which are mostly web-based): Ciencias fisicas E-learning center, DRP program, to help students with individual reading and writing skills. Some teachers have begun using google classroom as a means of making content more accessible for all students in their classrooms. All of these programs are meant to enhance and support our learners with improving in their specific areas of focus in reading and writing and additionally it provides the school with the data needed to laser in on specific deficiencies or gaps in learning a student may have. Teachers in the school often use News ELA to support with differentiation in reading in English and in Spanish. In addition to next school year the school will fully integrate Engrade as a means of helping the communication between teachers, students and parents. The goal is to have be grades and the meeting of standards be as transparent as possible. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Students in the TBE classes their mandated number of minutes of HLA instruction per week. SIFE students and students with low home language literacy skills as identified from NYSISTEL and the ELE tests also receive home language instruction through a pull-out program. A program named RIGOR is used to build on the native language skill for this SIFE population. The HLA curriculum has also been aligned to the ELA and ESL curricula to ensure that students begin making connections across content. The students are exposed to the same literacy skills in both English classes and their home language classes. The HLA teachers also use the “Santillana en Español” program as an intervention tool and curricular resource. This program has a pre and post assessment component which quantifies the students’ vocabulary, grammar and writing mechanics and listening progress. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. The administrative team ensures the availability of an assortment of “high interest- low leveled” texts for our struggling readers readily available with the purpose of assisting those struggling readers with getting them to pick up a physical book to read. With the emergence of the common core standards and the emphasis of non-fiction texts, we have been able to acquire libraries that are directly related to the interests of our readers, while still challenging them with texts that are at or above their respective complexity for the grade level. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? N/A 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Any student that is registered at M.S. 118 must complete a student profile. This profile is a self-assessment for the students which gives the school information about the students’ interests and academic performance. The school counselor meets with every students and supports them with the completion of the profile. In addition to this the counselor conducts an interview with the student and his or her family and gives the student a tour of the academy, introduces the student and the family to the academy team members such as the advisory teacher, the dean, and the assistant principal. This happens systemically as students get registered to the school in an ongoing basis through the year. For the first time this school year, rising 7th and 8th graders will get to choose their art elective. The school will be offering visual arts, technology, ceramics, theater and dance. This is a new initiative to allow for student choice and to stimulate 2018-19 SCEP-FL 66  creativity in the academic setting. Additionally, the school offers a newcomer’s class which focuses on the specific language needs of this particular group of learners, these classes are taught by a strong ENL pedagogue to ensure students get a strong foundation with the language. The focus of that class is developing basic grammar skills in speaking and writing, developing phonemic awareness and comprehension skills so that students are able to begin navigating the language. For the first time this next academic school year, the ENL teacher will be using National geographic as a curricular resource to help students become immersed in the language while learning academic vocabulary specific to the different disciplines. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? The school offers a mandarin program as a language other than English class. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? The first ELL professional development session will be around offering strategies to meet the needs of ELLs based on their language development needs in the free standing ENL classrooms. This series of professional learning opportunities will be facilitated by Ms. Camargo with the assistance of the newly appointed literacy coach Ms. Petridis. ESL teachers will share their expertise on the strategies for improving students’ vocabulary comprehension through the use of student glossaries, the EXC-ELL (by December) program and the visuals to enhance ELLs comprehension of new vocabulary. This was a very successful training last year for content area teachers. Ms. De La Mota will be facilitate this professional learning opportunity this coming school year again. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. The school offers the type of professional development which assists teachers with supporting the pedagogical needs of ELLs and SWDs across all content areas. For example: trainings such as: “chucking the text”, “The buddy system”, or “how to implement the turn and talk protocol” all support teachers in different ways in helping the students access the complexity and rigor found in the new leveled texts and the demands of the tasks across all content areas. These are the kinds of trainings teachers receive across the content areas throughout the academic year. In addition to this, the school is looking forward to collaborating with the FSC consultant to come to the school this coming 2018-19 SCEP-FL 67  year to support the professional development efforts around targeted professional learning for the ENL teachers and for the content area teachers across the school. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Parents ELL students are sent a parent letter every periodically in their native language (Spanish) and English informing them of school major events. There is a section of the letters in which parents write concerns and questions. Then, the following week a response is sent. Parents are also offered workshops to help them in helping their children in school: • Accessing grades online for all parents (Engrade) • ELL buddy system PD • Bilingual classroom • Mental Health services supports • Ways to help your child in language acquisition Many of these meetings take place during the Title III program. The school benefits from having a very active parent teacher association, so we ensure that we use our parents who are present we work with them to get parents who are out of reach to our doorsteps. We capitalize on the parent’s association involvement to create programs and workshops around the needs of the parents in the community. The workshops are offered in both English and Spanish and translated as well. Parents receive valuable information and introductions to technology and getting themselves and their child for the 21st Century, college and the work force. The Parent Coordinator organizes parental activities that bring parents to school such as: • Cultural celebrations • Fundraisers • Parent volunteers 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. All parents are included and invited to all school meetings, workshops and functions. Communications are sent home in the different languages spoken to the community to ensure the school reaches the most parents. Translation services are secured for all functions. Below are some of the events the school hosts in which ELL parents are invited to attend. Meeting name Month/Date distributed to families How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Back to School Night . Open House for 6th grade Applicants Fall Parent Teacher Conferences Spring Parent Teacher Conferences 2018-19 SCEP-FL 68  May Parent Teacher Conference 6th Grade Orientation meetings for new students and parents Monthly Workshops selected in partnership with the Parent Association High School Application Process for 8th graders and their families After school program (PAL) information session Attendance Teacher/Family worker home visits Title I meetings Title III informational, progress and culmination meetings September October November March May June and September Monthly September and October and now spring time for the rising 8th graders September Weekly Twice a year Biweekly when the program is in session The main office staff and the parent coordinator requests translation services as needed for all the aforementioned meetings. In particular the Title III program meetings and workshops are specifically for ELL parents and in some instances immigrant 2018-19 SCEP-FL 69  families depending on the funding given to the school for the year. The newly hired parent coordinator plans to conduct some trips with parents with the idea of doing cultural enrichment for the parents in the community. Some of the trips that are being planned are to cultural institutions such as Museums, places of interest such as parks, Broadway shows, the Empire state building statue of Liberty, Ellis Island, Staten Island Ferry, NY Hall of Science, Governors Island, and Zoos and any free concerts with cultural themes for families. All trips will have a tour guide and provide information for families to venture out and explore with their children what the city has to offer. Most of the trip locations offer a connection to a classroom learning experience for students. This will also help families new to the country or who speak a language other than English contextualize their children’s learning experience while exposing them to the culture of the city. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 70 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Giulia Cox, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 71  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: William W. Niles MS 118 School DBN: 10x118 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) GIULIA COX Title Principal NATHALIE DE LA MOTA Assistant Principal WANDA MONTANEZ Parent Coordinator CIELO CAMARGO ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent DAMIAN GRIFFIN Teacher/Subject Area James Donohue Teacher/Subject Area N/A N/A Coach Coach DAYANA VENTURA School Counselor MARIBEL HULLA SLING DE LA CRUZ Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member ELL Services Coordin Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 72 2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools School Name: William W. Niles Superintendent: MARIBEL HULLA DBN: 10x118 The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this (*Primary) Nathlie De La Mota AP Nathalie Wanda Kelva De La Mota Montanez Baez Assistant principal parent coordinator school sec'y conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No YES yes Yes YES YES yes no NO * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. When admitting a new family into the school the school's ELL designee, administers the Home Language Identification Survey and conducts a one-to-one interview to determine the home language of the student and that of his/her parents/guardian. In addition, we transfer the language preference oral and written data from the emergency blue card completed by the parent during the registration process into ATS screen "PARU". 2018-19 SCEP-FL 73  For previously enrolled students, the school's pupil accounting secretary will work diligently all year to continue to gather language preference information and to update the ATS PARU and the RCPL screen and work with the AIMS attendance program to gather data through frequent phone call outreach with the families. Regular parent engagement is conducted by teacher-advisors, who work to determine the family's preferred language and communications medium for sharing information about school progress by placing frequent home phone calls that include asking the parent for the preferred language. The school's main office and school safety desk is provided with multilingual signage to help assess the parent's language preference at any given time. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Percent Written Oral 0.44 0.75 6.97 0.06 0.25 0.56 0.19 0.12 0.12 0.06 0.19 0.06 57.77 0.06 31.16 0.31 0.62 0.31 7 12 112 1 4 9 3 2 2 1 3 1 929 1 501 5 10 5 2018-19 SCEP-FL 74  3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. The school has no languages that fit this specific criteria. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Backpacked Family Communications: Monthly Calendar and Newsletter (Monthly) Periodic mailings for key events: Summer mailer about September opening, after school information, uniforms and uniform policy, no school informational flyers, contacts, etc. In the fall In the fall Monthly In the fall In the spring The school does as much translation in house using members of the staff as resources. Whenever a written or oral translation is needed for a low frequency language in the school the translation unit is contacted for support. month/date see table to left Monthly Weekly/monthly In the fall and the spring Electronics (including Cell Phone) policy Monthly/weekly as needed Twice a year Student Discipline Code Monthly 2018-19 SCEP-FL 75  Parent - Student Handbook Saturday Academic Enrichment Programs Information letters and permission slips MS & HS Articulation Communications NYS Exam Schedule Notices Parents' Association Meetings and Elections Notifications Title I meetings Parent Workshops No data No data No data No data No data No data No data No data No data 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? September Back to School Night . October The main office staff and the parent coordinator requests translation services as needed for all the aforementioned meetings. see right See right 2018-19 SCEP-FL 76  Open House for 6th grade Applicants Fall Parent Teacher Conferences Spring Parent Teacher Conferences May Parent Teacher Conference 6th Grade Orientation meetings for new students and parents Monthly Workshops selected in partnership with the Parent Association November March May June and September Monthly September and October and now spring time for the rising 8th graders September weekly biweekly when the program is in session High School Application Process for 8th graders and their families After school program (PAL) information session Attendance Teacher/Family 2018-19 SCEP-FL 77  worker home visits Title III informational, progress and culmination meetings No data No data No data No data No data No data No data No data No data 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. The strategy is to use the translation unit to ensure clear communication with the families, always, whether it is in the case of an emergency or not. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. The school will continue to use the resources available in the Translation & Interpretation Unit website and display signage and provide information brochures to all staff members during the first September academy meetings and via email as requested, including but not limited to Language ID guide, T&I brochure, Language Palm Card Information about how to use the translation unit is shared with teachers on a weekly basis on the weekly communications called E-notes. In addition to this the newly appointed LAC will serve as a tool for building the capacity of the staff members in the school to utilizing the translation services and the tools available to support clear communication between parents and the school. We will also continue to provide this information to all faculty and staff via the advisory website at https://sites.google.com/a/schoolclimate.org/ms-118-advisory-program/home As well as during Academy meetings and via email (with more frequency as we approach Parent Teacher conferences) Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage 2018-19 SCEP-FL 78   Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Members of the school community will continue to do outreach through the translation unit. To continue to support the outreach to ensure parents know their rights about receiving information in their language, the school will utilize the LAC phone script sample. This is a written form that trains staff members on what to say when reaching out to parents to communicate to them the school has the ability to communicate in their home language. In addition to this the staff will continue to use translated signage and flyers with parents and members of the community. Information about parent meetings and parent engagement events will continue to be sent home in parents’ language of choice. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? The school plans to utilize a language translation and interpretation parent survey, which can help the school assess the effectiveness of the translation services offered. It asks questions such as “How satisfied are you with our language services in the following areas: helpful, responsiveness, accessibility and flexibility.” 2018-19 SCEP-FL 79 
