 07X224 School Name: P.S. / I.S. 224 Principal: PATRICIA CATANIA 2018-19 SCEP-FL 1  School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Section 4: SCEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information The Science School for Exploration and Discovery 320700010224 6-8 345 Brook Avenue, Bronx, NY 10454 School Number (DBN): 07X224 718-665-0078 Fax: 718-665-9804 Phone Number: Patricia Catania pcatani@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): Email Address: Patricia Catania AlexPerez Shawn Plant NarfiCaro WaleskaMelendez Lea Duenas JeysonManzillo Bernie Hernandez, Justin Carlisle CBO Representative: District Information Geographical District: 07 RafaelAlvarez Superintendent: 501 Courtlandt Avenue, Bronx, NY 10451 Superintendent’s Office Address: ralvare4@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-742-6500 Phone Number: 718-742-6548 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 3  Bronx FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Jose Ruiz Executive Director: 1230 Zerega Avenue, Bronx, NY 10458 JRUIZ2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: Phone Number: Fax: 718-828-7776/718-741-8895 718-828-6280 2018-19 SCEP-FL 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the SCEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Patricia Catania Patricia Robinson, Secretary ShawnPlant NarfiCaro,Chair WelseskaMelendez Lea Duenas JeysonManzillo Bernie Hernandez Justin Carlisle *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable 2018-19 SCEP-FL 5  Nicole Rivera ChantaleJoseph Ina Conception Jeanette Rodriguez Jose Rivera WaleskaMelendez ManjolaKozi Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/ chair Member/parent Member/ Member/ teacher Member/ parent PTASecretary Member/ parent PTATreasurer Member/ parent Member/ parent Member/ Member/ UFTMember Member/ Member/ 2018-19 SCEP-FL 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) is a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. The process of developing and implementing the SCEP is aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding SCEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and SCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 7  In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement 2018-19 SCEP-FL 8  NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the SCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the SCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for SCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 9   Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 5: Build consensus around activities, strategies and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 6: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 7: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 10  1. What is your school’s mission statement? MS 224 Mission Statement Section 4: SCEP Overview At the Science School of Exploration and Discovery, students are empowered with the scientific and technological background required for academic success in middle school, high school, college and careers. By emphasizing the importance of respect, responsibility and reflection, we foster social emotional development and provide our scholars with the tools necessary to be resilient, well-rounded citizens able to facilitate change within their communities and be successful in life. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. MS 224 is a small school of 336 students. With almost 22% ENL students and 28% SWDs. Our total attendance for the 2017-18 school year was 91% Based on the RNEC report from ATS the students identified as follows: 73% Hispanic, 51% Black, 36% White, 6% Native American or Alaskan, 6% Pacific Islanders, and Asian is less than 1%. Gender ratio 147 females and 179 males. 98% of students receive free lunch. To increase student engagement and use 21st Century skills, we have incorporated technology into every lesson. Google classroom is used in the classes to ensure students are hearing the directions as the teacher explains them as well as seeing them in writing. This helps students focus and ensure they see the task as well as hear it. We have also noticed that students are more willing to review and revise their work when they don't have to rewrite the entire piece leading to a 6% increase of students receiving 3's and 4's on the essays in the NYS E.L.A. exam. We also have a workstation set up for our P.T.A. president alongside our parent coordinator. SMARTboards were installed in every classroom and laptops were purchased for every student to support Google classroom. Additionally, we have a technology coach from Educate working with our teachers once a week. Inquiry is the driving force as he works in 6 week cycles with each department incorporating instructional technology strategies to increase student engagement resulting in high student achievement. We are also using technology to assess student growth more quickly and effectively. English Language Learners with M.S. 224 because we also have a majority of ENL and former ENLs struggling to make significant gains on the ELA and math exams. The ongoing professional development provided around data on the NYSESLAT, EDAT, and other forms of assessment has included analysis by key personnel shared with the entire staff and reviewed periodically to support our understanding of student learning. Teaching best practices will be shared during our PDs. We will focus on co-teaching in ESL and ICT. Addressing specifically, what is the value added of the second teacher in the room? How can we make sure we are meeting the needs of each child? We will watch expert pairs and debrief on how we can incorporate those strategies into our practices to improve student outcomes. In addition, we learn best practices for analyzing student work through a modified consultancy protocol. With the help of our SESIS, we will practice a variety of co-teaching strategies to support student growth. MS 224 is supporting the social emotional development of our students with our four Single Shepherds in addition to our three guidance counselors. Students are engaged in Brain Power exercises and Brain Power Leadership. We had overview training for all staff on Restorative Justice including circles as well as team building activities. We have ongoing training on P.B.I.S. by the district 7 Behavioral Specialist. Students and teachers run the school store. We became a P.B.I.S. School to increase positive interactions among staff and students to improve the climate and culture of the school thereby decreasing class removals and suspensions. A teacher leader is at the forefront of this initiative and we have partnered with the District 7 Behavioral specialist to ensure we use the system with fidelity. Additionally, we embraced Brain Power and taught the students and teachers how to take brain breaks to increase time on task. Five mentor teachers/counselors have been trained extensively in Brain Power and will lead the charge as well visits 2018-19 SCEP-FL 11  from the Brain Power Team. Additionally, 2 students from each homeroom were trained as Brain Power Student Leaders in 2017-18 and will be called a upon to lead the class in brain breaks 2018-19. M.S. 224's special initiatives aim to engage students as well as provide exposure to a wide variety of college and career opportunities. The school includes boys' and girls' mentoring for at risk students, 21st Century after-school programs, robotics, Sea Perch (partnership with the US Navy), and the sports program through CHAMPS. Through PENCIL, 224 works with a leader from Weil Law Firm to support and enrich learning both on and off site. 224 also participates in the Guppy Tank App Challenge, which inspires students to use technology to make a difference in the world while encouraging them to pursue educational opportunities and careers in the IT sector. Students self-select to participate in the Thurgood Marshall Junior Mock trial, competing with other teams across the city. Students gain an understanding of law-related careers and knowledge of the parts of a trial and requisite courtroom skills. We sustained multiple partnerships and cultivated relationships with news partnerships to increase student engagement and foster a college going culture and educationally sound environment. We initiated a partnership with N.Y.U. which will infuse M.S. 224 with several student teachers and give us access to N.Y.U. facilities and professional development activities including the ELL Think Tank, the use of lab space and college visits to promote a college and career minded student body. MS 224 has partnered with Thinking Maps, to help children learn how to think, not what to think. Nineteen teachers and two administrators have been trained. The rest of the staff will be trained during this school year and we will have trainers in the school during the 2017-18 school year to increase the level of engagement with Thinking Maps throughout the school. There a a big kick-off event on 11/7/17 followed by a 16 week roll-out of the program. All staff members will be trained and are expected to use Thinking Maps regularly. Summer 2018, 15 more teachers were trained in Thinking Maps. All teachers are expected to incorporate thinking maps into the lessons as close as possible to daily. We also secure a thinking maps trainer for 10 days during the 2018-19 school year. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Special Education. 28% of our students have IEPs MS 224 offers SETSS, ICT and special classes. Our special education students require multiple access points to learn in each subject area and grade. Using "Thinking Maps" to drive a variety of habits of mind for specifically organizing information, processing information in an effort to analyze their own work. This will help these students in all subject areas. Additionally,the D.R.P. and E.L.A. scores show a need for multi-sensory reading program which will be incorporated into the regular school day and after-school programs. We also have two full time speech teachers to support the needs of the students. ENs; 13 entering , 9 emerging, 9 transitioning , 29 expanding, and 15 commanding for a grand total of 75 ENL 22% of our total population. ENL students need additional support to build vocabulary, particularly academic Tier II words. Targeted MSQI, STARI, school-wide Word Generation and strategic reading periods will support their continued growth in both oral and written expression. Additionally, they are invited to attend after-school activities and Saturday Academy to support their language development. Saturday Academy. Our Single Shepherd program will use restorative circle and conflict resolution practices to provide needed support for students so that each child has a go to person in times of need. In addition, initiatives like Music and Mentoring, Thurgood Marshall Junior Mock Trial, Weil Law Firm Mentoring, Champs, Guppy Tank App Challenge, Sea Perch, Coding, Media Arts and others will encourage students to picture themselves in careers of interest. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 12  My Brother's Keeper grants includes time to work directly with students. Community Schools hosts a Boys Groups and Girls Groups through Creative Connections staff and school counselors to empower leadership. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. A 6.3% increase was gained in ELA due to increased rigor, independent reading and writers workshop and collaborative teaching practices in connection with LPP and beyond. Improved Rigor Collaborative teaching practices led to Instruction becoming more rigorous through focused common planning and professional learning times that target looking at student work to inform next steps in instruction by using the Consultancy Protocol in ELA. These protocols will be infused to all content areas during the 2018-19 school year. Additionally,we will expand and formalize our own internal inter-visitations so teachers can lead their department and/or grade level through the inter-visitation process. Collaborative Teachers Most decisions are made by the teachers with the final approval from the Principal. Teachers collaborate on decisions that will increase coherence and unity across all classrooms. Teachers meet for common planning during and after school at least 2 times a week for 45 to 90 minutes. Teacher leadership is shared and rotated to allow for equal voice and deeper commitment. Most decisions are made by the teachers with the final approval from school leaders. We need to improve our supportive environment. We introduced Brain Power Wellness (2017-18), outdoor education (2017-18)opportunities, PBIS (2017-18), grade level planning, department planning and advisory (2018-19). We need to strengthen these programs so they become an integral part of the school community with buy-in from at least 80% of the staff. Many teachers are on board with these initiatives, but we need more support staff (counselors and paras, etc) to embrace and apply them throughout everyday . 2018-19 SCEP-FL 13  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 07X224 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 358 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual YES Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 36 36 5 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 16 13 8 1 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 98.0% % Attendance Rate 98.0% % Reduced Lunch 22.1% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.3% 71.8% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 1.4% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 1.82 0% 12% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 17.1% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No No Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups Black Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities N/A NO N/A NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A NO N/A YES NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 41 41 89.8% 0.8% 27.1% 26.3% 0.3% 0.3% 2 16% 5.7 2.1% 18% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No Yes NO N/A N/A NO NO NO N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 14  Economically Disadvantaged N/A ALL STUDENTS N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 15  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed x x x x Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths: The principal consistently communicates high expectations to the staff that are connected to the Danielson Framework for Teaching. Increased rigor and differentiated instruction was infused into the ELA curriculum by marrying novels from the expeditionary curriculum and skills and context from engage NY. Independent reading occurred in every ELA class daily with weekly reading logs. (M.S. 224's last Quality Review Report from March 21, 2017) The 6.3% increase was gained in ELA due to improved rigor and collaborative teaching practices. Approximately 30 minutes of focused, independent reading was instituted daily. Teachers conference with the students during this time and recorded data to gain insights into students needs and strengths. MyOn was utilized for only some students to engage in targeted reading skills at specific levels to support all learners. Student Council and the Single Shepherd program together promote a structured, supportive environment for every student. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 16  The principal and staff also communicate expectations for college and career readiness to students and their families, through social studies units, trips and mentoring programs. The principal provides training to teachers for achieving high expectations and communicates college and career readiness expectations to families, along with feedback regarding their students’ progress towards those expectations. Staff is held accountable through coherent observations and instructional walk-through. Teachers provide feedback to students that reflect next steps. This year we are adding AIS - Wilson, REWARDS, STARI areas of growth. Results of ongoing assessments are used to inform effective adjustments to instruction so that classroom practice meets the needs of all students. Priority Needs: Math: Our NYS Math data shows us far below the NYC average and below the district 7 average. In Math we are 16%, 25% and 20% below the city average in 6th, 7th and 8th grades, respectively. Our constructed response accuracy rate is significantly below our multiple choice response rate. Additionally our constructed response rates are 20%, 29% and 23% below the constructed response rate for the city for 6th, 7th, 8th grades respectively. In E.L.A., we are 11%, 14% and 15% below the city-wide average in 6th, 7th, 8th grades respectively. Additionally, our students, in contrast to most other schools, perform better on the writing than the reading portion of the exam. Teacher teams need to focus on assessing student work accurately and effectively. We need to strengthen the assessment feedback cycle. Facilitate PDs on creating and analyzing varied student data to better include better a coherent plan can be developed and consistently updated based on new data to increase improvement in specific teacher pedagogy and planning across disciplines. Based on performance in reading comprehension and extended response in math on 2018 NYS assessment data, the teacher teams have to be expanded to work together to design coherent instruction of best practices in all classrooms, using the instructional focus of increasing student engagement for the school. Danielson data showed that, student engagement was the lowest scored domain based on the MOTP teacher evaluation system. We, therefore, made student engagement our instructional focus for the year. We realized that student engagement goes hand and hand with good planning, an understanding of students needs and strengths (assessment), and a deep understanding of the content area. An inquiry approach to professional collaboration is developing across teams. and needs to be strengthened. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 17  By June 2019, 50% of students in grades 6, 7, and 8 will increase their reading proficiency by 10 points, as measured by spring 2019 DRP reading assessment, compared to the October 2018 baseline DRP reading assessment, which will lead to at least an 8% increase on the and NYS ELA Exam. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 18  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teachers will engage Professional Learning (PL) on how to appropriately use data to drive instruction. Teachers, paraprofessionals and administrators Teachers, consultants and/or school leaders will create more formative assessments for the classroom. Strategies will include Smart Board technology to record students' levels of understanding at various points in a lesson. Administrators and Teachers Teachers will use data and analyze student work to group students purposefully for additional skill building support and challenge in future lessons and units. Teachers and school leaders MyOn will be utilized to ensure students are reading non-fiction leveled texts and complete projects to communicate understanding and the level of growth. Teachers and students Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) 9/18-6/19 Teachers Administrators Educational Consultants 9/18-6/19 All teachers Educational Consultants School leaders Technology Coach Strategic reading. 9/18-6/19 All teachers Educational Consultants School leaders 9/18-6/19 All teachers Educational Consultants Administrators MyOn 2018-19 SCEP-FL 19  Teachers will be trained in the use of Thinking Maps to help students systematically organize their thoughts across all disciplines. Teachers 11/18-6/19 Teachers, administrators, consultants, coaches Teachers, administrators, consultants, coaches Teachers, AP's, technology coach Lesson planning prioritizes including independent work, which may include challenging problems or applications of skills and concepts to real-life situations. Teachers 9/18- 6/19 Students will be taught how to effectively engage in online assessments as well as taught how to peer assess. All Students 10/ 2019 Four math teachers have attended Algebra for All training summer 2017 and 2018, and will have have additional trainings throughout the 2018-19 school year. All Math Teachers 9/18-06/19 Teachers, AP Math, consultants Teachers will attend a series of PDs at the district office to deepen their content knowledge and pedagogical skills. ELA and Math Teachers 9/18-6-19 Teachers, School leaders, District staff and consultants Strategic Reading periods will occur 4 times per week, based students need: 3 teachers are trained in Wilson during 2017-18 Wilson, and 3 teachers were trained in STARI. All students will engage in independent reading. E.L.A. Teachers 11/18- 6/19 Teachers, MSQI coordinator ENL students will attend Saturday BESARS Academy to further engage and support reading strategies, math applications, increase reading stamina, and engage in American cultural activities and trips. E.S.L. E.L.A. and Bilingual Teachers 11/18 - 6/19 E.S.L. E.L.A. Teachers, Administrators 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Quarterly workshops will be facilitated by staff to provide families with information and training on systems useful for supporting rigor including Jupiter Grades, Google classroom and New York State standards. Reminder messages and robo-calls as well as phone calls, calendars, and newsletters will reach out to families so all are updated with school/community programs, upcoming school events and policies. Key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight: Principal and Assistant Principal, teachers, Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselors and Office Staff. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. As a school we will be provide per session opportunities for planning, off-site trainings, consultants. Data from IXL, DRP, NYS ELA, NYS Math, in school benchmarks will be will be analyzed to make informed decisions about the types of workshops that will be provided. Scantrons will be purchased. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 20  X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant X 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will be a 5 point increase in reading proficiency as measured by D.R.P. assessments. We will create a school-wide steering committee. All department and grade levels teams will have a representative in attendance to present drafts of differentiated units for their team for analysis. A constructive feedback loop connecting all departments to the school-wide team will be crucial for growth and clarity. There will be three benchmark assessments. They will be administered in September (Fall), January (Winter), and March (Spring). We will be using the Professional Learning Community Protocol adopted by the Chancellor. Common Planning time will be used to revise these units as informed by assessments and constructive feedback. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. DRP assessments. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 21  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. x x x x SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Strengths  With continued systems in place to meet the social-emotional needs, meet the needs of our most at-risk students with disciplinary records that are not responding to traditional methods of intervention.  PBIS and the Single Shepherd program  We have a system for analyzing discipline data, office referrals, suspensions, attendance, and IEPs of students with discipline issues and those classified as emotionally disturbed or with crisis paras. We will complete FBAS for students with crisis paras on a quarterly basis  new strategies have been put in place to meet the emotional needs of all students including weekly advisory, where counselors and teachers work together to support the students. PBIS lessons are explicitly taught, restorative justice, ● Pupil Personnel Committee will address behavior referrals, which is then translated into an action plan for the student. ● We have a year-long practice of Respect for All activities that are incorporated in the classroom. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 22  ● We have a fully functional PBIS committee with a complete matrix for every area of the school building, a fully functioning school store and we a ticket system to attend all trips, dances, and to "purchase" incentive items at the school store. ● We have an attendance committee which adopts students who have chronic attendance issues and these partnerships are fostered and monitored through the year. All late and absent students receive a phone call home daily. ● We have a mentoring program that has a partnership with our PENCIL partner, Weil Law Firm, as well as the Navy for SeaPerch Robotics, Music and Mentoring, Volleyball and Mentoring programs. Our goal is for every student to have at least one adult that they can come to in a time of crisis. Our Single Shepherds and Guidance staff are conducting home visits at a rate of at least 2 a week to maintain with all families. Priority Needs After analyzing the OORS Data, school survey and staff reports we have determined theses priority needs:  To increase the Social emotional support available to students to reduce the number of students that are referred for disciplinary matters.  More effectively engage families by organizing workshops for the parents with various topics such as social emotional learning, inform them about academics, inform them about the expectations of the state exam, how to access Jupiter Grades, Google Classroom  To encourage and empower families to take a more active role in their child's academic and social-emotional development throughout middle school with workshop held by guidance, parent coordinator and Single Shepherds. These workshops will also be led by experts and in house staff.  Develop specific individualized strategies/ practices/ plans to effectively support students using tier 2 and 3 social emotional supports.  92% attendance  Increase punctuality of students daily (now approximately 78). Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools –Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, We will expand our Social Emotional Learning Programs the average daily attendance will increase by 2% for the period of September 2018 to June 2019, as measured by the June 2019 ATS RYMA repor 2018-19 SCEP-FL 23  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Weekly bulletins to faculty/ staff announcing upcoming events in the school and celebrating faculty/staff accomplishments All staff and consultants Sept 2018-June 2019 School Leaders Weekly attendance meetings with guidance counselors, single shepherds, and school attendance teacher and to address specific student needs and next steps. All students that are late and absent will receive a phone call home by a counselor and a robo call. Students with less than 90% attendance will receive a post card mailed home with dates absent and late monthly. Advisory will be taught weekly with counselors and teachers developing relationships with students. Topics to cover include: Learning styles, vocational inventory, executive functions, restorative justice, HS articulation, college and career readiness. Sept 2018-June 2019 AP Guidance LHMs, PC, Daily, Monthly LHM Counselors and Social Workers (Leaders of Hearts and Minds - LHM) Students with attendance needs Counselors and Teachers Sept 2018-June 2019 AP, LHM Mentoring by guidance counselors, Single Shepherd, and teachers to monitor student progress and behavior, with tiered interventions students Incentives such as school trips, or rewards obtained by the use of PBIS tickets. Teachers, students Sept 2018-June 2019 Sept 2018-June 2019 GCs, Teachers, administrators CBO, PBIS coordinator Establish a Student council Bimonthly fun family events will occur including: Dinner in November, Talent Showcase in December, February- International Love Day, Spring Arts Festival, End of year honor awards . Sept 2018-June 2019 Sept 2018-June 2019 school leaders CBO, School staff CBO, after school staff, music arts teachers CBO afterschool Program MS 224 community, Students, families and staff 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 2018-19 SCEP-FL 24  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Quarterly workshops will be hosted by the Parent Coordinator and counselors to provide families with information and support in how to extend coping strategies from school to home as well as how to access social-emotional health resources. Workshops at PTA meetings include How to Speak to Your Adolescent Child, Paintshop, How to use Jupiter Grades, resume writing, SEL- By Brain Power. Reminders such as text messages and school messenger as well as phone calls, remind.com, and newsletters will ensure families are updated with upcoming school events and information. Parents will be invited to quarterly attendance celebrations to recognize their child's attendance and honor roll recipients. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Per session for PBIS committee for 2 hours per week for up to 8 teachers  Fund the incentive committee for planning student activities including celebrations, community-building trips, and targeting various students for positive behavior and attendance improvement. Funding after-school activities Incentive trips, events and stocking the school store with enticing merchandise   Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, attendance will improve by at least 2% when compared with the previous years attendance rate. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. ATS attendance reports Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 25  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by SOP(s) Addressed x x x x using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths:  Collaborative teacher teams meet 1-3 times weekly to make decisions about curriculum, assessments, pacing calendar, and lesson planning.  Analysis of student work via a modified Consultancy Protocol,  Common planning time and inter-visitations are planned by teachers to share their best practices.  Teacher meetings are written into their schedules to support the development of lessons and share best practices. Priority Needs: Based on the 2018 State Math scores, the school went from 3.4% level 3 and 4 to 4%. The current 7th graders with Disabilities and English Language Learners did not make performance gains. Amongst general education students, 19 students that were at levels 3 and 4 saw a decrease in performance. Our area of relative strength was multiple choice and our greatest area of need was constructed response, especially in the seventh grade, which saw some decline 2018-19 SCEP-FL 26   Marrying the strategies from Algebra for All with the Curriculum from Go Math to develop Blended curriculum maps, units, lessons, pacing guides, teaching practices and creating thinking maps that target meeting the needs of our students as demonstrated by a variety of analyzed data sources. Engage NY will also be utilized to support practice Implementing practices learned in math PD's such as: Number Talks which is the decomposing of numbers, finding strategies to solve a problem and learning how to explain their results.   Creating curriculum maps, units, lessons, pacing guides, teaching practices and creating thinking maps that foster critical thinking skills and independent application of skills and strategies.  Collaboratively creating curriculum maps, units, lessons, pacing guides, teaching practices and creating thinking maps that target moving students towards meeting the school's instructional goal in a cohesive manner.  Creating curriculum maps, units, lessons, pacing guides, teaching practices targeted at decreasing level 1 students by 10%. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, as a result of of all teachers participating in collaborative, teacher-led inter-visitations, PL in Algebra for All at least 65% of teachers will receive end of year MOTP ratings of Effective or Highly Effective in Danielson Framework for Teaching component 3c, Student Engagement. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 27  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Create an inter-visitation schedule. Teachers school leaders and Sept 2018-June 2019 Principal Literacy Coach AP PD Team- Consultants Facilitate PL on inter-visitation protocols (adapted from the NYCDOE professional learning handbook) Teachers November 2018 PD Team, SE Inquiry Team, Develop classroom resources and pedagogical approaches from the Special Education Inquiry Team Teachers 11/18-6/19 SE Inquiry Team Four math teachers have attended Algebra for All training summer 2018, and will have have additional trainings throughout the 2018-19 school year. Teachers/central staff Oct 2018-June 2019 Provide coaching in Literacy and Math and coordinate inter-visitations and lead reflection debriefing sessions. Teachers will engage in lesson studies during learning cycles and have reflection and debriefing session Teachers Lead teachers Sept 2018-June 2019 SESIS School Leaders Principal Lit Coach AP LPP Team Consultants Collaboratively design a digital reflection sheet that provides for glows and grows Teachers Sept 2018 Principal June 2019 Consultants AP Consultants 2018-19 SCEP-FL 28  Collaboratively create an online system for scheduling and recording the inter-visitations Teachers Sept 2018 Collaboratively create an internal survey for teachers to gain an understanding of strengths and needs of the teachers and the culture of the school. Teachers and school leaders Three Benchmarks to monitor progress of data Teachers June 2019 November, January, March, June November, January, March Coaches and School Leaders Teachers and school leaders Teachers, school leaders, coaches and data specialists 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Our parent coordinator has created a welcoming environment in our main office to invite all parents into our school. During grade level meeting teachers will discuss the progress of students at large, but have a focus for those students of concern socially and academically. Parents will be invited in by counselors as needed to discuss student progress and partner to develop an improvement plan. Curriculum nights will be organized in September and January to inform parents of upcoming units of study and expectations for HW and projects. Workshops in PTA meetings facilitated by parents include how to set and use Jupiter grades on your phone. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Coverages, per session for planning team, consultants, trainings Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019 at least 45% of the teachers will have a rating of effective of highly effective in MOTP Domain 3c Student Engagement. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 29  Advance MOTP Ratings Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 30  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). x x x x SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The Principal and APs lead by example in many areas, such as  by modeling how to address student behaviors in a positive supportive manner using the P.B.I.S. motto of Respect, Responsibility and Reflection.  Employing Brain Power methodologies to de-escalate situations  Students are asked to reflect on their actions by completing a multi-flow thinking map, listing the cause and effect of their behavior. Students then set a specific goal with the help of personnel with actionable next steps. leading restorative justice circles and other practices  Consequences are discussed and agreed upon at meetings.   working collaboratively on unit plans  co-planning lessons Areas of strength as per the Q.R. on March, 2017: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 31   The school incorporates various partnerships to meet the social-emotional needs of students. Single Shepherd is a program that allows students to be paired with a counselor or social worker to support their social-emotional growth as they navigate the process of college exploration and preparation, as well as other areas of youth development. Single Shepherds loop with their students over the 3 years. Shepherds do restorative circles where students discuss their concerns and needs with adults. The school has four Shepherds in the building every week. A student stated that he participated in a restorative justice circle that was a round robin discussion on race. This made an impact as Single Shepherds act as mentors to students and through the program, everyone is known on an individual basis. The Single Shepherds also did a session entitled, “Unpacking Racism.” The school community also partners with a law firm to provide career training for students by helping facilitate mock trials and educate students on responsible use of social media.  The Student Council allows for students to have a voice in the building. During an interview, students stated that the Student Council was able to obtain more supplies by speaking to the leadership about re-stocking the school store. Students made a request to fix the broken water fountains in the school, which were subsequently worked on, and asked for morning gym classes, which was worked into the schedule this year. A student-generated newsletter was created. Students also created the school song and started a gaming club because there was an interest among students to go into gaming as a career.  We are a fully functional P.B.I.S. school. There is a P.B.I.S. chart in every area of the school. There is a fully functional Teacher/Student run store. Teachers were trained by Rauri Gribbon, behavioral specialist, to use P.B.I.S. as a tool to promote positive behavior. Areas of priority:  Provide more individualized professional development to meet the needs of all of the teachers.  Consistently monitor and support teacher teams.  although we have not been consistent with the student council for the year 2017-2018, it will be a focus to re- institute an effective student council as an after-school program led the community school director and the principal. Survey data indicates that teachers were interested in playing a greater role in decision making  Areas of need as per the Q.R. in March, 2017:  Teacher teams are engaged in collaborative discussions on student work, however they are only loosely connected to the goals of the school. Teams discuss students that they share and look at assessment data from these students. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART– Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will increase the number of teachers involved in school distributive leadership positions by creating multiple opportunities for teacher leaders as evidenced by an 8% increase in the NYC School Climate Survey Trust Section. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 32  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teacher-led P.B.I.S. committee, and professional development commitee PL Sessions designed to build trust, cohesion and collaboration among school leaders, teachers and all school staff members "Sunshine" Committee Initiated Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) All teachers, students, parents All school leaders, teachers, staff Sept 2018 P.B.I.S. chair June 2019 PD Commitee Members Nov 2018-June 2019 FSC Consultants School Leaders Teachers and Staff Sept 2018 PC Reid June 2019 Identify and support grade level team leaders who will serve on the Instructional Leadership Team that includes administrators, and content area teacher leaders. Teachers and Staff Sept 2018 Administrators June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. September's newsletter will indicate dates of Curriculum Nights, PTA and SLT dates. Opening school newsletter will also feature the vision and mission of MS. 224. Furthermore, the newsletters will indicate the the units of studies that the teachers are currently working on as well as strategies for parents to help their children with their homework. Parent Coordinator coordinates workshops for parents for several programs we offer at M.S. 224. At our September PTA meeting, our technology coordinator will conduct a workshop on Jupiter Grades, MyOn and Google Classroom. In November, we will have our parent teacher conferences as well as a workshop on Power Brain Activities and OMNILearn Science Labs. In December, we will revisit a MyOn PD to encourage reading at home, especially during the winter break. In January, we will have a computer series workshop. In February, we will have a workshop on helping your child succeed in NYS Assessments. In March, we will have Part 2 of OmniLearn Science Labs. In May, we will have an awards assembly and a workshop on how to support your child's continual academic and social growth over the summer. Throughout the year, we will conduct parent-student book clubs, talent shows where parents will be invited to enjoy their children's performances. We will have a Thanksgiving pot luck for parents, students and staff to strengthen community ties. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 33  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Funds will be used to pay per session to the A.P.'s and the teachers for additional professional development around the areas of challenge on ADVANCE- Lesson development, students' intellectual engagement, questioning and discussion techniques as well formative and summative assessment. Principal, AP mentors and other teacher leaders will support improving teacher practice. Principal and AP will monitor all after school instructional committees. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By March 2019, we will increase the number of teachers involved in leadership positions and school committees that will result in at least a 5% increase in the school environmental climate survey administered in March 2019 when compared to baseline November 2019 survey. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. School based survey, data on participation Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 34  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. x x x x SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Data shows that the majority of our parents attend two out of the four parent teacher conferences. There's 70% of parents who attend conferences where report cards are distributed . However, the two parent teacher conferences that are scheduled for Meet and Greet, End of the year, Parent Association meetings as well as our parent workshops are attended less, by less than 20% of parents. Strengths  Tuesday parent engagement meetings and phone conferences provide parents with the opportunity to discuss their child’s progress with their teachers. The parent coordinator coordinates monthly meetings and workshops that are led by administrators and/or teachers.  The administrator has appointed a coordinator who in turn communicates with the grade liaison who in turn communicates with the teachers regarding parent engagement needs, events, and tasks.  The use of Jupiter Grades and School Messenger to have regular communication with the parents.  8 week progress reports are generated and mailed out to parents to keep them informed about their child’s progress. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 35  Needs  Streamlining the connection between parents and community partners by providing opportunities for the parents to be directly connected to Community Based Organizations (ASPIRA, Morris Heights Health Center, and Weil Law Firm) and organizing joint activities that involve students and their families. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2018, we will improve parent involvement and engagement as measured by doubling our average parent participation in school events from 5 to 10. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 36  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Provide more notification to parents about upcoming events via flyers, the school website, K12 robocalls, teacher and staff visitations. Parents Sept 2018 June 2019 Administrators, Teachers Parent Coordinator Provide monthly parent workshops, such as : family/academic game nights, job skills, computer courses, and E.S.L. support. Parents Sept 2018 June 2019 Teachers These meetings will be monitored by attendance sheets, and exit surveys after the workshop is over. School Events Above and beyond the four required parent nights, we will hold other nights such as: Parents Students Sept 2018 June 2019 Administrators Parent Coordinator Service Providers CBO’s Grade Level Teams Administrators Parent Coordinator CBO’s School Science Fair   Thurgood Marshall Junior Mock Trial   MS 224 Family Dinner School Wide Winter Concert These activities will be monitored by attendance, surveys, and observations of the activities. These activities will be reported out at the monthly systems meeting. Family Suggestion Box Parents Fall 2018 A box will be available in the main office for parents to submit any questions, concerns, etc. These items will be reviewed by the S.L.T. P.C. Reid 2018-19 SCEP-FL 37  at their monthly meeting and communicated back to the Parents at the P.A. meeting or correspondence indicated on their form. Parent Survey will determine wants and needs for types of workshops. Potlucks Parents Fall 2018 PBIS Team Parents are invited to celebrate their child: Student of the Month (PBIS initiative where parents are invited to celebrate their child's success. Student that has made the most progress.) Grade Level Teachers Parent Coordinator 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Aspira, 21st Century, Creative Connections, Leadership Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● 150 hours of per session for parent and community involvement ● 1 teacher coordinator to support improving the collaboration between the community, family ties, and the school ● 1 administrator will monitor all parent and community involvement ● 1 guidance counselor will support parent and community involvement ● 1 parent coordinator will support and actively engage in the parent and community activities. ● 4 teachers will be on the parent and community committee and will support this collaboration. SIF funding will be used for money for the Literacy, Science , and Math fairs. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant X 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 38   Sign in sheets for all events. The final count for each event should be maintained in a spreadsheet to monitor increased parental involvement. By February 2019, we will have 30% of parents participate in a school activity.  By the February 28, all artifacts will be collected and placed in a binder for review by the administrative team to evaluate effectiveness. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. We will complete data analysis of the four parent teacher conferences and quarterly Family Workshops to determine which ones had the most participation. We will develop incentives to increase parent participation. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 39  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) students performing below grade level Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Small Group Test Prep Whole Class Enrichment Teacher-student conferences NYSESLATprep book When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) After School , school day, and Saturday Academy reading clubs MyOn Independent Reading Stari Wilson Rewards Thinking Maps Mathematics students performing below grade level Algebra for All strategies Test Prep Enrichment IXL Flip Classroom Small Group Whole Class After School , school day, and Saturday Academy 2018-19 SCEP-FL 40 Science students performing below grade level CMP Thinking Maps Science Test Prep Materials Small Group, after school test prep, After School , school day, and Saturday Academy Brain POP Whole Class Mock Science Exam Social Studies students performing below grade level OmniLearn Thinking Maps NYCDOE Passportcurriculum that all students participate in our part of their regular daily schedule.  Reading Strategies  Thinking Maps Small Group Whole Class During the regular school day in reading support classes. At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Holdovers and over aged students. Students with multiple behavior infractions. Students in temporary housing and students that are currently failing their classes. Guidance Counselor Small group; ● Peer mediation Monthly assemblies After school, school day, and during the school day ● Small group counseling ● Respect for all Family Engagement Brain Power  restorative circles  Thinking Maps 2018-19 SCEP-FL 41  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. 77 students In addition to all the services outlined in the SECP, STH will receive free uniforms, books, and school supplies to ensure that they are fully prepared to learn in the classroom. Furthermore, counseling session will periodically held to help the students with their their emotional aspects of life inside and outside school in order to help them fully immerse in the academic and social life. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). n/a 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 42  n/a 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. n/a 2018-19 SCEP-FL 43  Section 8: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. The school uses various strategies to assist teachers that are not highly qualified. Title 1 funding is available for teachers to enroll in course work and classes that will lead them towards full certification and become highly qualified. Parents are notified via letters sent at home, when a class is taught by staff that is not highly qualified. The Open Market system which allows UFT members to transfer to other schools also allows the school to hire state certified and highly qualified teachers. All teacher recruitment fairs are attended by the school's hiring committee. Interviews and demo lessons are required for all new teachers that are seeking employment. Teachers are given opportunities to modify and adapt their curriculum to meet the needs of students in each class. Consultants, school leaders and partner teachers share information from prior experience to help develop Teachers are given the opportunity to grow as professionals by allowing them to become mentors, lead teachers, model teachers, peer collaborative teachers and master teachers. Teachers are given sent to workshops/ training to grow as professionals Building a community of professionals by going on retreats in order for teachers to collaborate and form a trusting bond not only within the school but outside. At the end of each academic year a Google survey is given to teachers to fill out along with the preference sheet to determine the preference of grade and subject from all teachers and additional support they need instructionally and emotionally. Based on the data collected from Google Survey and Preference sheet as well as Danielson Data a decision is made. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). All classroom teachers will be trained to conduct student-led whole class discussion, differentiate lessons, use "Thinking Maps," and "Brain Power" activities. Additional topics may be added based on needs identified by administration, instructional support staff, and teacher teams. Teachers who qualify for mentoring will be provided 2018-19 SCEP-FL 44  with an on-site NTC mentor for 1-2 years depending on their prior experience. Some professional development will be facilitated by "Thinking Maps," and "Brain Power", IDE-Co-teaching specialist, MyOn liaison as well as MS224 Staff. Collaborative Team teachers will participate in professional learning opportunities around different learning styles, behavior modification and effective strategies to improve reading and math skills. IDE-Co-teaching specialist will facilitate some of these trainings. Teachers were trained by Goldmansour in June 2017 and over the summer. Teachers of English Language Learners will attend trainings focusing on scaffolding instruction, multiple intelligences and successful strategies for second language learners. Other trainings will be provided by Central NYCDOE, Bronx Support Centers, as well as after school training provided by MS 224 administrators, coach and staff. Two teachers participated in Algebra For All over the summer of 2017 and are sharing their knowledge with the other math teachers. Furthermore, three to six ELA teachers will be attending a three day workshop on Educating Powerful Writers during the summer of 2018. Seventeen staff members participated in a five day institute on "Thinking Maps" to become trainers. These trainers will facilitate department meetings throughout the academic year for their colleagues. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). n/a 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 45  The Data Wise protocol will be used by all teachers to analyze data from assessments of various types in collaborative common planning. Based on this, decisions on curriculum, unit planning, lesson planning, best teaching practices, and ultimately assessments will be made. Furthermore, teachers will be trained throughout the year on how to properly use assessment to drive instruction and engage students in purposeful grouping. Teacher teams will collaboratively analyze student work and data to make school wide informed decisions about curriculum and pacing. In June 2019 teachers will assess the effectiveness of their assessment tools/practices. Teacher's reflection on assessment practices will be utilized to plan for 2019-2020 academic year. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (SCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Title I Part A (Basic) Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 362,305 x 70,324 0 0 0 2,887,558 x x x Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) 5a, 5b, 5c,5d, 5e 5a, 5b, 5c, 5d, 5e 5a, 5b, 5c,5d, 5e 5a, 5b, 5c,5d, 5e 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 46  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/SCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 47   Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG or SIF funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 48  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Middle School 224, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Middle School 224 will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 49  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents, to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 2018-19 SCEP-FL 50  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent-Teacher Association and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a grade-specific school newsletter accessible on the school website designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) Middle School 224 , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 2018-19 SCEP-FL 51  improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers; Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 52  ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; I will: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance, ensure that my child arrives to school on time and follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks when necessary; ● discuss what my child is reading each day (a daily minimum of 20 minutes reading); ensure students develop a conceptual understanding for numbers. ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 53  ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this impact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities I will: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. Addendum: Community School Partnerships Directions: The Community School (CS) strategy is directly aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. Community Schools bring schools and community partners together and integrate academics, health, youth development, and 2018-19 SCEP-FL 54  family engagement to provide students with the tools and opportunities they need to succeed. The Core Services in Community Schools are Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness. Part 1 – Community School Partnerships Goal(s) How is the CS strategy integrated into academic instruction at your school, and what impact has it had on student academic outcomes? Our community school partner, Creative Connections, offers two mainstream enrichment programs. One geared toward arts and creative expression and the Teen Entrepreneur Program provides exposure to new and different career paths and allows student ownership of their own business adventures. This supports the Framework as academics are integral in each area and Creative Connections will begin providing academic support for the after school programs. Indicate the summative goal(s) of the Community School for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. By June 2019, based on student surveys, NYS exam results, the DRP and faculty observations, students will receive individual intervention programs based on their needs, leading to an 10 point increase on the DRP from September 2018-June 2019. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Community School Annual Goal(s): How will achieving your Community School Goal(s)--in Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness--support your academic goals for students? Achievement of the Community School goal will increase parental involvement as they will provide additional supports to the school with workshops and parent programs. A more structured after school program including music, art, cooking mentoring, robotics and coding will increase student attendance as these are desirable classes that students look forward to attending. After school programs will also provide academics to support student achievement. The arts and the robotics classes will culminate in a holiday showcase in November and an end of year exhibition in June where students, staff and families will have a chance to celebrate together. Part 2 – Community School Partnerships Core Services Action Plan Part 2a. Identify the Community-based Organization (CBO) partnerships that you will develop in ELT, Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness, their target student population(s), and scope of the services provided. As well as supporting schools’ supportive environment and attendance work, CBOs should be helping to support your school’s instructional focus. CBO Partnership Creative Connections Target Population Whole School Scope of Service SY18-19 SMART Goal By June 2019, all students will engage in dance or music or art classes as evidenced by STARS data. Academic enrichment, experiential learning, social emotional support, college and career readiness 2018-19 SCEP-FL 55  Aspira Whole School Morris Heights Health Clinic Whole school Academic Enrichment experiential learning Health and wellness TLP (Leadership) Whole school College and Career readiness Omni Learn Whole school Robotics Coding up to 20 interested students up to 20 interested students Academic enrichment in science, learning with Laboratory experiments College and Career readiness College and Career readiness By June 2019, 40 students will attend after school or Saturday academic or support classes as measured by attendance sheets. By June 2019, 90% of our students will be registered at the health clinic and will be updated with all immunizations. By June 2019, all students will be exposed to college via trips and or career explorations and learning styles surveys. By June 2019 all students will engage in Omni learn Labs and will improve their perceptions of science as measured by the internal survey. By June 2019 students will build robots to complete specific tasks required by the competition. By June 2019 students will be able to create their own apps and/or computer games. Part 3 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 3a. Indicate resources your Community Partnership will leverage to achieve your summative SMART goal(s) and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Staff salaries, computers, electronic components Part 3b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA P/F Set-aside X 21st Century C4E 2018-19 SCEP-FL 56  Title I 1003(a) Title III PTA Funded SIG Grant School Achievement Other Funding Part 3c. Describe how the school will partner with the Lead CBO to do the following: 1. Community Schools are expected to partner with a community-based partner organization (CBO) and together with members of the School Leadership Team, hire a Community School Director. The Director will lead implementation of the asset and needs assessment process, and other critically important coordinating activities. Indicate how you will leverage this aspect of the work. Community Schools are expected to personalize the needs of all students, through strategic programming and services, as determined by the asset and needs assessment, and must also offer Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and mental health programming. In completing this section, ensure that you think about how: (1) the right services are provided to the right students and families at the right time; and (2) how you will seamlessly coordinate services with instructional programming happening throughout and outside of the school day. Indicate how you will implement this work, and describe other programming you anticipate to be in place to strengthen this initiative. Community Schools are expected to emerge as Partnership Schools, which are places where parents and families feel welcome, actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. Monthly meetings and Community School Forums engaging families and community stakeholders will be a critical part of this family engagement strategy. Describe how you will implement this aspect of the work. Community School Principals are expected to meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. Data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter - and training will be available for schools to use. Indicate how you will implement this aspect of the work. 2. 3. 4. 1. The CSD director, Justin Carlisle, from Creative connections, together with MS 224 SLT, AspiraNY, Omnilearn and The Leadership Program will lead the implementation of collaboratively developed programs for in school and ESD programs. A real world academics and social emotional learning will increase student engagement in academics and the arts. Thus creating a safe-learning environments where students can express themselves with their artistic talents. Partnerships will develop relationships so students will learn to communicate effectively with all members of society while exposing them to new opportunities and leadership. 2. The CSD will survey the wants of needs of the students and families to creative a program designed to enhance the experience of the students and increase attendance during the school day and ESD. Success coaches will conference with students about academics, career goals, art portfolios, dance performances, health and wellness. Coaches will also communicate with families about students progress in all areas. High leverage initiatives and programs will be implemented so the students get real-world experience in what it feels like to perform in a debate, laboratory, chorus or audition. 3. THE SLT will include parents, CSD Justin Carlisle, Aspira NY Director, Bernie Hernandez, and at least 5 staff members to share ideas and develop a plan to actively engage and support all students and community stakeholders. Our parent coordinator's office has become a hub for parent conferences. Workshops to support and engage parents such as brain power, yoga, zumba, college and career workshops, college trips, and the HS application process are offered as a result of parent needs surveys. Monthly parent town hall meetings will give parents and opportunity to voice their concerns, opinions and be part of the decision making process. Parents would be encouraged to share their narratives. We are creating an open forum to generate dialogue with the parents. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 57  4. The CSD is included in Cabinet Meetings as an active participant. These meetings are scheduled every Wednesday from 9:00 am to 9:45 am. The agenda is set by consensus at the previous meeting. All data points and upcoming events are discussed and next steps are planned. Part 4 – Community School Partnerships Oversight Part 4a. Key Staff and Partners 1. Name and describe the scope of involvement of all community partners working in the school (include partners supporting ELT, counseling, enrichment, etc.) 2. Name the members of your Community School Team and how meetings will be organized and structured to engage all stakeholders and be focused on results. 3. Explain data strategies including the use of the data sorter, and steps that the school will take to ensure that the appropriate interventions are provided to the right students Creative connections help us support the Arts Use of the first report cards will be used to target specific students and to develop a comprehensive educational support plan based on the students specific needs. Academic CBOs we are partnered with are OmniLearn, Vision Ed, and Leadership. These agencies offer other avenues to support our students both academically and in the capacity of leadership. Data from these sources will be used to target strategic groupings for extra academic help. Part 4b. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the Community School program. A schedule was created, working with the CSD, to include time during the school day to offer arts programs to students. Creative Connections also has coordinated their after school art, dance, music, and teen business programs with our after school program schedule. The CSD has reached out to other CBOs to find other sources outside their realm that would be able to offer other community and leadership opportunities to students. Materials have been purchased by the CSD to support the proper instruction of the students. Additionally, 21 st community school s grant and ESD provides College and Career readiness classes, Robotics and coding. Part 4c. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. Work began in September 2018 with coordinating school-day scheduling and after school scheduling. The work is on-going during the school year to make adjustments as needed until June 2019. The after-school program began in October and will continue until May 2019. Part 4d. Mental Health Work Plan Separate from this S/CEP, schools will complete a Mental Health Work Plan that will become an addendum to this document. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 58  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): K 6 1 7 2 8 3 9 4 10 5 11 12 60 2018-19 SCEP-FL 59  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: At MS 224, there are total of 81 ELL's out of 368 students. In grades 6-8, we have 38 beginners (entering); 16emerging; 8 transitioning; 42 expanding; 20 are commanding. We have 19 students that have 6 or more years of service. There are also 19 SIFE students, and there are 27 students that have 4 -5 years of service, and 60 students that have 0-3 years of service. With 60 out of the 104 students have 0-3 years of service, it is vital for the school to offer additional academic supports outside of the regular school day. Our English Language Learners will participate in the BESARS Saturday Academy under Title III LEP. My school 07X224 will be using this Title III LEP funding to enhance this existing program. In this program, students who are in all proficiency identified grouping (i.e. beginners) , including SIFE and long term, will be serviced as follows; one hour of ESL and NYSESLAT test preparation, one hour of ELA and one hour of MATH. The program will be offered to all ELLS in grades 6-8. There will be a total of 4 groups of 10-15 students in each grade 6-8. Certified ESL/BL & content area teachers will instruct the students. The program will run from October 6, 2018 to May 18, 2019 (excluding holiday weekends and vacations) which is approx. 25 sessions at three hours per session.The school will use other funding sources to complement the cost of the program. The focus of the program is ELA, Math and NYSESLAT test prep. Students will rotate to each class for one hour each day. Students will work in small groups in order to be able to focus on their individual needs based on ELL data. Title III will purchase materials to support this program such as: • NYSESLAT Practice materials( Atanasio) • Math Supplementary materials in IXL and Go Math with real life problems. • Leveled Libraries • Spanish Language Libraries • Content Specific Libraries • Bilingual Translation Dictionaries Supplies – notebooks, chart tablets, paper, folders, post-its, etc. The ENL and the content area teachers will plan together on a designated time during extended day, once a week after school, and time will be built into the Saturday program for teacher collaboration and planning. The ENL teacher will co teach with the content area teacher during the regular school day, as per the push in schedule. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 60  Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Professional development opportunities will be offered to all teachers of ELLs. All teachers will receive the mandated chancellor’s professional development. In addition, classroom teachers will receive site-based professional development throughout the course of the year 2018-2019. Focused Professional Development will be provided by an outside presenter knowledgeable in the area of instructional needs for English Language Learners. The consultants are at no cost to Title III. The Consultants three professional development workshops will be on instructional known needs areas for ELLs such as: • Scaffolding, ESL methodology • NYS Standards • Data driven instruction for ELLs. Create, Revise modify curriculum maps and pacing calendars in all content areas for the school year 2018-2019 to meet the needs of ENL students. PDs will be held to support all teachers of ENLs during Monday PDs by the literacy coach and assistant principals, Fay Pallen each session will be held on 10 Mondays or Tuesday PD time. • September: Revise the all Curriculum Maps incorporating "Thinking Maps": ELA, Go Math with Algebra for All and CMP3. Develop Social Studies and Science pacing calendars. Literacy coach who is certified in English Language Arts will support curriculum mapping. • October-November : Modify the maps ensuring that the standards are incorporated. Use the unit assessments in ELA and Math. (PLC & analyzing data) as a basis for modification supported by Literacy Coach, Fay Pallen and Special Education IEP teacher. • December: ELLS and Differentiated Instruction in all content areas in PLC • January : Assessment of data and new student goals. (data analysis and action plan created in PLC Providers: Assistant Principal Structured inter-visitation through the LPP partnership program.. • November-May Scaffolding strategies and classroom activities for ELLs and PLC Providers and MS 224 teachers whom are all certified teachers in various license. • September-June ESL Methodologies and Strategies (common planning activities) • October-May Using Data to Drive Instruction Inquiry protocol. (common planning activities and modified consultancy protocol. protocol providers: MS 224 teachers and Assistant Principals • February-May NYSESLAT and ELA Assessment (data analysis working in a PLC) Providers: • September-May Placement of ELLs Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration  topics to be covered 2018-19 SCEP-FL 61  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities  name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities Begin description here: The partnership between the home and school is vital to the success of students. Parent Engagement time is incorporated into the weekly for weekly schedule where parents are invited to come into the school and engage with their child's teacher. In addition, MS 224's SCEP goal for parent involvement is to provide meaningful workshops for parents in order for them to be able to academically and emotionally help their child. MS 224's has a large population of ENL's that are serviced in this building. It is vital that the school also assist parents who often times are only proficient in their native language, the tools they would need to to impact higher achievement for the ELL child. In preparing our bilingual parents to aid and assist their children meeting their curriculum goals, parents will be invited to attend a ongoing computer class using state of the art Apple computers and will take an online course in American English using MyOn and IXL. The providers will be the teachers of MS 224 whom are certified in ESL, Technology, and English Language Arts. According to the schools SCEP plan, monthly year long workshops will be offered to parents on an array of topics including curriculum and homework help, How to use Jupiter Grades, MyOn, Omni Learn- Science Labs, Brain Power -Social Emotional Supports, and ESL classes. Parents will be notified through phone calls, PA meeting agenda, back pack letters, and school messenger of all upcoming parent workshops for students of ELL's. Computer supports for students and their families. IXL, Brain Pop are used to support understanding by watching, listening, and responding to discussion prompts and questions orally and in the written format. Family Game Nights and Movie Nights to foster an understanding of American culture and learning. This will help parents support their child academically by gaining a deeper understanding of what their child is learning in school, develop a connection and relationship to the school and their child's teacher, and understand how to assist their child at night with homework and studying for a test even if it is only asking their child what they learned or asking them to explain what they learned in school when reviewing notebooks. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) 12,398  Per session  Per diem Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Saturday BESARS Academy for 3 teachers and one supervisor 2018-19 SCEP-FL 62  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 2018-19 SCEP-FL 63  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 07 School Name The Science School for Exploration and D Borough Bronx School Number 224 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Patricia Catania Coach Fay Pallen ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Manjola Kozi-ENL Teacher/Subject Area Consorcia De Los Santos -Math Teacher/Subject Area Francesca Burns Related-Service Provider Edward Lopez Superintendent Rafael Alvarez Assistant Principal Larry Thornton Coach N/A School Counselor Miosotis Reilly Parent Shawn Plant Parent Coordinator Brenda Reid Field Support Center Staff Member Jose Ruiz Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 1 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 1 0 2 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 2018-19 SCEP-FL 64  D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 336 Total number of ELLs 65 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 19.35% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 3 4 2 Lang. Spanish Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 1 7 1 8 1 9 10 11 12 0 1 1 1 0 0 0 0 Tot # 3 0 0 0 0 0 3 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? The assessment tool used by MS 224 to assess the early literacy skills of our ENLs are the DRP, Fountas and Pinnell running records, the San Diego Quick Assessment, as well the NYSESLAT. The insight that the data provides is that many of our ENLs need help with their vocabulary and reading comprehension. This data helps inform our school instructional plan because we modify our curriculum map to meet the needs of all students. In addition, I-Ready reading assessments will be administered periodically to monitor student growth. The DPR will be administered 3 times during the year to monitor for growth. Furthermore, the NYSESLAT is administered every May to determine the English proficiency level. Select student will use 2018-19 SCEP-FL 65 STARI an MSQI Reading and writing development program. All students will engage Word Generation in all of the content subject areas. Students will also use MyON, a leveled reading program. Additionally, strategic reading periods are incorporated into the ELA/ESL classes. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Word Generation is used one day in each content area class, Monday ELA, Tuesday Math, Wed science, Thursday SS and Friday Tech or Spanish. The Second week, ELA does a wrap up too ensure the words are being utilized enough to support transference into long term memory. Throughout the core classes, technology is embedded in instruction. In addition, when students go to technology class, IReady and MyON are utilized. Interim assessments are administered to all students. Thinking Maps is our new initiative for the 2017-18 school year. We are using the maps to help students organize their ideas and help student learn to think independently. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The summative assessments used by our schools to determine progress and areas of need are NYS assessments, pre and post unit assessments, DRP. NYS State Test scores have remained steady over the past two years. Looking at our NYSESLAT and NYS data item skills analysis, we determine how we are progressing; our areas of growth; and our areas of need and concern. Listening and speaking is a relative strength. Reading is right behind the listening and writing is half to one third the reading. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? To address the interventions once the summative data has been gathered we have the following in place: modification of curriculum maps, differentiation of lesson plans during common planning. We also provide small group instruction both in and out of the classroom, as well as individual student conferences. Each ESL/ELA class has two teachers to reduce student teacher ratio. Saturdays BESARS Academy helps in creating templates for writing well developed sentences, paragraphs, and essays depending on their levels. Our reading specialist will evaluate and support students not making progress and the data will be reviewed and included in the upcoming intervention plan. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Our school uses data to guide instruction through periodic data meetings (after each report card and after each MOSL), teachers meet with administration to determine deficiencies in the ENL population. Teachers use this to inform instruction and modify curriculum maps and guide next steps in tailoring individual needs of our ELL students. Furthermore, during bi-weekly departmental meetings teachers analyze student work and use the analysis to to plan and meet the needs of all our ELL students. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The data patterns that are revealed by the NYSESLAT indicate that ELL students are not reaching the level of proficiency in reading and writing. However many of them are scoring advanced for listening and speaking portions of the test. On the NYSESLAT a greater percentage of our students have reached the Expanding level. Those numbers are as follows: 9 students in grade 6, 9 students in grade 7, and 15 students in grade 8. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? In order to make adjustments to the programs that our school has in place the data is reviewed by key stake holders during Monday and Tuesday PD time. Modification of curriculum maps and lesson plans are discussed during common planning time. Data analysis is conducted during teacher team meetings. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 66  Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Students receive 3 periods a week of Home Language Arts and 8 periods a week in ELA/ESL instruction co taught by an ELA and TESOL licensed teachers. The organizational model is departmentalized for all classes. The program models are double periods for ELA and single periods for native language arts. The 6th ,7th, and 8th ENL classes travel together as a group by grade as do all of our other classes. All students regardless of age are placed in their designated grade. There are two teachers in a class during ENL/ELA instruction and one teacher for Math, science and social studies. Students are grouped by grade level and further grouped within the class strategically depending on the topic, skill being taught as well as individual needs. b. TBE program. If applicable. Entering and emerging level students receive 180 minutes of instruction in their home language. Transitioning and Expanding students receive at least 90 minutes of native language instruction. Students also receive an average of 3 periods a week of Home Language Arts and 8 periods a week in ELA/ENL instruction co taught by an ELA and ESL licensed teachers. The organizational model is departmentalized for all classes. The program models are double periods for ELA and single periods for native language arts. The 6th ,7th, and 8th ENL classes travel together as a group by grade as do all of our other classes. All students regardless of age are placed in their designated grade. There are two teachers in a class during ENL/ELA instruction and one teacher for Math, Science and Social Studies. Students are grouped by grade level and further grouped within the class strategically depending on the topic, or skill being taught. c. DL program. If applicable. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? In order to ensure that the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model our school also provide Push In ENL services for ELLs in classes other than the TBE classes. All ELL students at MS 224 receive the required amount of minutes according to proficiency levels as required by the CR-Part 154. In addition, students in the transitional bilingual class (TBE) receive Native Language Arts in Spanish according to the CR-Part 154 requirements. Students in the Entering, Emerging, and Transitional levels of English proficiency receive daily 60% (190 minutes) of instruction in their native language and 40% (126 minutes) in English instruction. Students in low level of English proficiency receive 50% (158 minutes) of instruction in Spanish and 50% (158 minutes) of instruction in English. Students also receive four periods of Home Language Arts and 8 periods a week of of English Language Arts.The school’s transition plan for transitional bilingual students who reach Expanding and Commanding on the NYSESLAT and are transferred to monolingual classes is to provide an additional one to two years of ESL support services. In addition, they participate in MS 224’s Academic Intervention Program to ensure that they reach the highest academic achievement. The same is applicable to the special education ENL students respectively. Bilingual and ELA teachers at MS 224 work collaboratively. There are scheduled common preparation periods and grade conferences during which they plan collaboratively. Additionally, all teachers partake in inter-visitations, learning walks and plan for future professional development according to the school needs assessment. ENL bilingual teachers at MS 224 hold either a TESOL or content area credentials with bilingual extensions. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 67  3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. In every classroom at MS 224, you will find differentiated instruction in the core content areas in order to meet the varied needs of the ENL population. Instruction is provided in English and Spanish as needed. Visual displays are also used in content area instruction as we have languages other than Spanish. Teaching strategies used to meet the different needs of our ELL students are: modeling, contextualization, meta-cognition, total physical response, repetition, hands on instruction, manipulatives, small group instruction, individual instruction and pairing. All students have access to laptop computers which are incorporated into classroom practice. All ELLs take part in MyON and I-Ready programs. Furthermore, during the academic year, our school provides ongoing, small group instruction for all of our students. Our ELLs actively participate in the BESARS Saturday Academy under Title III. In this program, students are supported in Math and ELA integrating ENL strategies, by bilingual or ENL licensed teachers. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? All NYS Math and Science assessments are provided in the students' native languages, when available. If not available, the school arranges for a translator to come to administer the assessment. Furthermore, the teachers prepare exams and quizzes that are translated in the students' home languages when applicable. Also, our teachers hold bi-weekly conferences with ELL students in order to inform our ELLs of their academic progress. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status SIFE-Students with interrupted formal education at MS 224 receive scaffolded instruction using ENL methodologies which focus on acquisition of Academic vocabulary. Additionally they utilize a number of interventions such as I-Ready, MyON, and small group instruction (AIS). They are also encouraged to participate in the mentoring program which provides opportunities for the students to engage in small group or individual mentoring. SIFE students are also included in our AIS program where they are pulled out for small group instructions. Newcomers -The implication for Language Allocation Policy and instruction at MS 224 are for all ELL students, especially our newly arrived ELL students, to be encouraged to speak though task-oriented situations in order to interact and communicate with peers and adults. Listening activities (note taking, following spoken instruction), and sources such as videos and audios (books on tape), will continue to be utilized. Reading and writing strategies for developing and improving English proficiency levels include guided, shared, and independent reading and writing (small group, peer grouping, student-teacher conferencing) in order to develop and enhance language proficiency. ELLS 4-6 - In an effort to develop the language skills and fluency of our ELL population at MS 224, we use the Workshop Model which follows all the research-based, balanced literacy components, such as read aloud, shared reading/writing, independent reading/writing, and guided reading/writing. In addition to the model we incorporate audio/visuals, listening centers, big books, charts, differentiated graphic organizers, and manipulatives. The content areas in the bilingual classes are taught using ESL strategies, as well as the Danielson Framework for teaching. Long term ELLs with 6 years of service- For our Long Term ELLs Instruction is focused on developing Academic Language and writing skills. Focus books are used to concentrate on specific reading skills, CARS books focus on reading comprehension skills in various genres, and functional documents are utilized. Teachers track reading comprehension and student mastery, using Fountas & Pinnell running records. Students are flexibly grouped for guided practice. Students write differentiated reading responses and use test prep materials that focus specifically on areas of strength and weakness. Students use differentiated graphic organizers to scaffold writing. Former ELL's-- when placed in monolingual classes, these students are still provided with the ELL modifications during all formative and summative exams. They are also included in all test prep that is centered around ELL's. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 68  6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Some instructional strategies that teachers use to accelerate the English Language development as well as academic content are as follows: Purposeful grouping which allows students to learn from each other and utilize language. Through scaffolding the teachers help students who are struggling to master the content and language by ensuring that they meet the individual needs of students and their learning styles. Moreover, programs such as MyOn are utilized to help students with academic vocabulary, content as well as the English Language Development. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? In order to help our ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goal and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment our ENL teachers in consultation with the SWD teachers adhere to the goals and objectives of individual IEPs. As a result Curriculum is modified to include the four modalities of English acquisition-Listening, reading, speaking and writing as well as SWD instructional strategies, such as small group instruction, bridging and scaffolding, as well as thoughtful planning. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Our school used the EDAT tool to target our at risk ENL population in science, Social Studies and Math. After the analysis of the EDAT teachers collaboratively plan in order to ensure that our ENL populations succeed in ELA, Math and other core subjects. Some interventions are AIS (Academic Intervention System), small group instruction, they are involved in literacy and math activities. Furthermore, our ELLs are targeted during our BESARS Saturday Program and Native Language (Spanish) is used to support content objectives. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Our teachers are receiving professional development in best practices for our ELL population. This includes workshops, model lessons, and inter-visitations. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? We would iike to discontinue our TBE program at this time and change it to an ESL program because we have students that speak, Walof, Arabic and French in the TBE. The math class is taught by a licensed bilingual math teacher and she will use Spanish to get the point across. Science is taught by a Science licensed teacher who is a native Spanish speaker. She uses Spanish to support concept development. Because there are several languages spoken in the classroom everything is introduced in English and Spanish is used sparingly for addressing the whole group. AS teachers support group work, they will speak Spanish as needed. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All students are encouraged to attend extracurricular activities such as band, test prep, science clubs, Dance, Drumming, etc. Whenever possible, native language support is available. ENL students are included in all aspects of the programs. They share the same benefits as the native English speaking students. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Content area subjects are taught in in their native language (when possible), as well as in English. Materials are provided in Spanish, whenever possible, audio and visual technology tools are used for translating when necessary. Content teachers translate documents. ELA/ESL teachers used leveled text to support language acquisition. We also use I-Ready phonetic awareness for beginners. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 69  13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Home language is assessed by talking to the students. This is also how we determine true SIFE status. Spanish speakers receive native language to support them in our transitional classes during content area lessons. We also have a teacher who speaks French and helps with translations as needed. At this time our French speaking students are expanding or commanding. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Students receive ESL services according to their grade level. Because we have 91 ENL students, we have a 6th, 7th and 8th grade ESL class. Some of the students that are ELLs also receive special education services. In these instances, students are placed in SETSS, ICT or SC per their IEP. ESL teachers push into those classes for the appropriate number of minutes weekly based on the students' English proficiency level as determined by the NYSESLAT exam. In order to ensure students are receiving grade appropriate materials, we use the NYS Common Core Learning standards. We use the Expeditionary Learning curriculum to ensure that the text is age and grade appropriate. We used leveled texts from Newsela, iReady and other sources. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Each school has been allotted scheduled time to use the cafeteria, gym, and auditorium. We schedule pull-out instruction and related service sessions during our scheduled time. We have bilingual Spanish Counselors to address the needs of of Spanish speaking students. Since we share the building with an international HS where over 20 languages are spoken, we have partnered with them to support our students who speak Arabic and Walof. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Students receive orientation in native languages of Spanish and French to help them make the adjustment to Middle School. We have two Spanish bilingual counselors, 9 teachers, 2 school aides, 1 secretary and the parent coordinator that speak Spanish. We also have one French speaking teacher. We partner with the HS for some low frequency languages such as Walof and Arabic. We utilize the DOE translation department to translate written documents and to interpret verbally on the phone as needed. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? We are offering Spanish in school and French as an after-school club. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? NA Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? 2018-19 SCEP-FL 70  Professional Development opportunities are offered to all teachers of ELLs. All teachers received the mandated Chancellor’s professional development. In addition, classroom teachers will receive site-based professional development throughout the course of the year 2017-2018. The professional development will be on known areas of instructional need for ENLs, such as scaffolding, ESL methodology, Common Core Learning/ NYS standards, Vocabulary development and data driven instruction. The professional development will be provided by staff members, and outside consultants who are knowledgeable in areas of instructional needs for English Language Learners. The following topics will be covered in the school year 2017-2018 by the school bilingual coordinator, literacy coach, ENL coach and assistant principals. • September Workshop Model – Danielson Framework for Teaching, Data assessment NYSESLAT, NYS math and ELA Exams, MOSLs October – November CCLS/ Expeditionary Learning Curriculum/Connect 3 Math Curriculum • December data analysis Assessment ELLS • January Mid Year Assessments (cont'd) • November – May Scaffolding strategies and classroom activities for ELLs, LAP Study groups • September – June ESL Methodologies & Strategies • October – May Using Data to Drive Instruction • February – May NYSESLAT & ELA Assessment • October – May Study Groups – using “Scaffolding Language to Scaffolding Learning” by Pauline Gibbons • September – May Placement of ENLs 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Staff transitioning students to high school are given the opportunity through release time to take the graduating ENL students to visit ELL specific high schools, and likewise to accompany students to high school fairs. The support that staff receives for our incoming students is PD around ELL strategies, as well as specific mentoring. These strategies are used to help new students feel comfortable in the school. All ELL teachers are offered a professional development around ELL, NYSESLAT, TBE, and ENL strategies. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? We bring our students to the next level of understanding. By September 2017, our parents will receive a parent orientation informing them of the various programs we have available for our ELL students. Parents are also invited to “Meet and Greet”, a monthly conference for parents to come and speak with teachers and administrators about any questions regarding the school curriculum and their child’s progress report. ELL parents are also welcome to attend the BESARS Saturday Academy. This program will provide parents with ENL and Literacy classes. Furthermore, our Parent Coordinator in conjunction with the Parent Teacher Association offers numerous workshops throughout the year including training to build our parents’ leadership skills by providing leadership workshops such as: High School Orientation Open House; Parent Participation in the School Leadership Team; Fund raising, informing parents of citywide educational forums on 2018-19 SCEP-FL 71  ENL issues, etc. Also, parents will be able to participate with their children in our school Game Nights that will rotate between literacy, math and science jeopardy. The majority of the parents of our ELL students need both written and oral interpretation in Spanish. These findings are assessed in the following settings and reported by teachers, coordinators and other staff at the school.Middle School 224 agrees to implement the following statutory requirements:• The school will put into operation programs, activities, and procedures for the involvement of parents, that is consistent with Domain 4 of the Danielson framework and College and Career readiness of all students . Those programs, activities, and procedures will be planned and operated with meaningful consultation with parents of participating children.• The school will incorporate this parental involvement policy into the School's SCEP plan.• In carrying out the Title I, Part A parental involvement policy requirements, to the extent practical, the school will provide full opportunities for the participation of parents with limited English proficiency, parents with disabilities, and parents of migratory children.• The school will involve the parents of children served in Title I, Part A programs in decisions about how the 1 percent of Title I, Part A funds reserved for parental involvement is spent.• The school will be governed by the following statutory definition of parental involvement, and will carry out programs, activities, and procedures in accordance with this definition:Parental involvement means the participation of parents in regular, two-way, and meaningful communication involving student academic learning and other school activities, including • That parents play an integral role in assisting their child’s learning• That parents are encouraged to be actively involved in their child’s education at school• That parents are full partners in their child’s education and will be provided with opportunities to participate in their child's education, including being assisted with using IO and Pupil Path parent link.• The school will inform parents and parental organizations of the purpose and existence of the Parental Information and Resource Center in the State. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Middle School 224 will take the following actions to involve parents in the joint development of its school parental involvement: • Middle School 224 and the Parent Teacher Association will join in the development of the school parental involvement plan. • The Parent Association and other interested parents and children will form an ad-hoc committee to have meaningful consultation in the development of the school parental involvement plan. Translation services will be provided at all meetings. Middle School 224 will take the following actions to involve parents in the process of school review and improvement: • Parents will be invited to participate in the Quality Review of the school. • Parents will be made available for any questions from the reviewer. • Parents will be briefed on the exit report by the reviewer. • Parents will be invited to be part of the SLT. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 72 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Patricia Catania, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 73  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: The Science School for Explora School DBN: 07X224 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Patricia Catania Title Principal Gerald France Assistant Principal Brenda Reid Parent Coordinator Christina Ziotis ENL/Bilingual Teacher Barbara Alvarez Parent Lisette Sanjurjo/ELA Teacher/Subject Area Elizette Estrella/ELA Teacher/Subject Area Shane Purse Fay Pallen Coach Coach Miotosis Reilly School Counselor Elisa Alvarez Jose Ruiz Edward Lopez TBD TBD Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Jose Ruiz Other Related Service SETSS Other tbd Other tbd Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 2018-19 SCEP-FL 74  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 07x224 School Name: 224 Superintendent: Elisa Alvarez The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Brenda Lisette Reid Sanjurjo Parent Coordinator Teacher Y N Y Y * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Based on ATS reports, student emergency cards, and surveys, we translate all information into Spanish for parent meetings. We translate letters to the parents inviting them to the meetings. We assess our success rate by the number of Spanish speaking parents that attend meetings in relationship to the English speaking parents. In addition, we provide calendars that are translated, informing parents of upcoming events, and we assess by the number of parents that participate in the workshops provided. When written correspondence goes home with a response requested, we analyze how many of the papers are returned signed by the parent. We also make sure that all meetings are translated and any questions that need to be asked are answered in the appropriate language. Periodically we will run the RLER ATS report which indicates the student's first language and asked parents if their language preference has changed. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 75  The major findings of our schools' written translation and oral interpretation needs is that all correspondences must be in Spanish because the 50% of the parents speak and read in Spanish. In addition, brochures and DOE correspondence is provided to parents who speak Arabic and French. Our bilingual French speaking teacher that translate for our 2 students' families that prefer French. We have partnered with the International HS and they will call our # Arabic speaking families and one Wolof speaking family as needed. have them We utilize the DOE interpretation services when needed. Our PTA president and parent coordinator is bilingual and translates during parent meetings. We again partner parent meetings, many of the conferences are translated in Spanish due to the majority of the parents being Spanish speaking. Based on our home language surveys, we have a large percentage of our parent body that is primarily Spanish speaking. For assistance with languages we do not speak we first utilize the International HS staff located in our building. Otherwise we call the DOE language services number 718 935 2013 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral SPANISH French Arabic Fulani Wolof 200 Spanish 3 2 1 0 50% 0.75% 0.5% 0.3% 0 200 3 2 1 1 50% 0.75% 0.5% 0.3 0.3 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. there are no languages that are more than 10% except Spanish. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 2018-19 SCEP-FL 76  1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Monthly Calendar of events each month welcome letter 9/2017 Fund raising Chocolate 10/2017 PTA reminders The first week of each month Parent teacher conference reminders 9/17, 11 /17, 3/17, 5/17 Medicaid forms health clinic form testing reminder 9/17 9/17 2/18 8th grade activity letter 10/17 end of year activities 4/17 Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Spanish and French are translated in house. Arabic is translated by a teacher from the campus HS Spanish and French are translated in house. Arabic is translated by a teacher from the campus HS Spanish and French are translated in house. Arabic is translated by a teacher from the campus HS Spanish and French are translated in house. Arabic is translated by a teacher from the campus HS Spanish and French are translated in house. Arabic is translated by a teacher from the campus HS translated by doe translated by clinic Spanish and French are translated in house. Arabic is translated by a teacher from the campus HS Spanish and French are translated in house. Arabic is translated by a teacher from the campus HS. Spanish and French are translated in house. Arabic is translated by a teacher from the campus HS. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to Formal face-to-face meetings are: Parent-teacher conferences, Parent engagement, Parent Association and School Leadership Team meetings, and various school events. These meetings September, November March May provide interpretation service(s)? Spanish is provided by teachers, paras, and school aides. French is provided by a teacher. Arabic, and Fulani is provided 2018-19 SCEP-FL 77  occur monthly, usually after the school session has let out after 2:20pm. Informal interactions are unscheduled dean/teacher/parent meetings to discuss behavior or incidents. Meetings with related service providers and parents to discuss students in crisis. Parent/Principal meetings to discuss any other concerns. Parent Teacher conferences November and March IEP meetings ongoing Behavior meetings ongoing through the DOE call center. Wolof we use a translator from ICHS upstairs. In addition to our staff, we use the bilingual HS students to interpret. We will use the DOE interpretation number if a family member speaking a different language is in attendance. We use our bilingual SE teachers, paras, school psychologist, and family worker for Spanish. For other languages we will use the DOE interpretation number. We use our bilingual dean, parent coordinator, paras, school aides for Spanish. For other languages we will use the DOE interpretation number. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. We use the school messenger that automatically translates into the home language. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Our LAC and ESL Bilingual Coordinator who have gone to district and borough meeting will turn-key the information during staff meetings. The language access line number will be given to each staff member and reviewed by the principal. The SLT team will review the CEP regularly during our monthly meetings. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services 2018-19 SCEP-FL 78  Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) We have the Official NYCDOE Parent's Guide to Language Access on display in the Main Office. Under Chancellor's Regs A-663, MS 224 is providing all correspondences in Spanish and English. Parents are supplied with translated documents pertaining to school specifically, as well as DOE documents such as code of conduct. Parents are provided with Spanish/English admittance forms, as well as an interpretor to assist with the filling out of school documents. All meetings are held in both Spanish and English. Whenever needed, teachers utilize the translated phone system to call the homes of students that parents only speak Spanish. Information from the parent language survey is also located in the ATS and available as needed. At all parent meetings, they are informed of the translated services that the school provides them, in order to keep them informed of the progress of the child, and important events at the school. Families who prefer correspondence in Arabic or French are given the chancellors discipline code, lunch forms, any letter sent from the DOE, etc in their preferred language. If at any time a new language is preferred we will utilize the DOE interpretation and translation system and download the appropriate materials in the native language. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? The mechanisms our school use are parent surveys, and evaluation forms after all parent workshops in native languages. The parent coordinator and PTA president will develop a Google survey which can be translated into all languages. All parents who enter the school to pick up their child, see a teacher, request letters will be asked to take the survey. The survey will be available on our website. Data will be analyzed by SLT team and used to determine best methods of communicating with families. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 79 
