 School Name: 07X277 P.S. 277 Principal: NATASHA BRACEY-FERGUSON 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 1  School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Section 4: SCEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Section 7: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 8: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 9: Title I Program Information Section 10: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information PS 277 320700010277 3K-5 School Number (DBN): 07X277 519 St. Ann’s Avenue Bronx, NY 10455 718-292-3594 718-292-3630 Phone Number: Fax: Natasha Bracey-Ferguson nbraceyferguson@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Natasha Bracey-Ferguson Email Address: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Jennifer Villacis Sandra Marin Leigh Ercole Alejandra Salas Gregory Knight District Information Geographical District: 07 Rafael Alvarez Superintendent: 501 Courtlandt Avenue Bronx, NY 10451 Superintendent’s Office Address: ralvare4@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-742-6500 Phone Number: 718-742-6548 Fax: FSC: Bronx Field Support Center (FSC) Executive Director: Jose Ruiz 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 3  Executive Director’s Office Address: 1230 Zerega Avenue Bronx, NY 10462 – 1 Fordham Plaza Jruiz2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-828-7776 Phone Number: 718-828-6280 Fax: 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the SCEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Natasha Bracey-Ferguson Jennifer Villacis Sandra Marin Maybelline Suarez lejandra Salas Gregory Knight Leigh Ercole Samantha Titus Sandra Seda-Rivera Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Cara Matina Maybelline Suarez Jasmine Vasquez Beborlin Santos Katiria Rivera Estela Esquea Roberta Thomas Member/ Teacher Member/ DC 37 Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) is a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. The process of developing and implementing the SCEP is aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding SCEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and SCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 7  comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 8  Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the SCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the SCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for SCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: New this year, instead of self-rating, in Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 9  major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 5: Build consensus around activities, strategies and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 6: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 7: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 10  Section 4: SCEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Our mission is to provide a robust, holistic educational experience that will empower scholars to become future leaders. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. PS 277 is located in the heart of the South Bronx. We serve a rich and diverse community with students that come from Puerto Rico, Mali, Senegal, Ecuador, Dominican Republic and a host of other nations. The school remains in good standing for the past last few years, and we continue experiencing a transformation as we are on a mission to greatness. Last year we were selected to participate in the 3K for All Mayoral Incentive, and in September opened our doors to two 3K classes changing the composition to 3K to 5th grade. This year we are added two additional 3K classes bringing our total to four 3K classes and a newly formed dual language Pre-K class. As a community, we value the work of nurturing the students’ minds, souls and spirits. As a school, we understand that our students and teachers’ vitality lies within our ability to provide them a caring, trusting environment while providing the space to intellectually challenge, explore, discover and delight in learning. We have created a "supportive environment", as defined in the Framework for Great Schools, by creating and maintaining extensive partnerships to meet the diverse needs of our community. Our partnership with Wediko offers social-emotional support through counseling, side-by-side classroom projects, working with families and providing after-school programming to support the needs of students. Programming includes partnerships with Enact, RoboFun and homework helpers. Our long standing partnership with Change for Kids provides access to additional programs that provides resources such as Third Street Music, City Parks and Gardens, School Beautification projects, New York Historical Society, Graduating to Greatness and Urban Golf. Change for Kids has also assisted in creating relationships with private corporations that have invested in our scholars. Programming includes: reading to scholars, career days, holiday help etc. Brooklyn Arts Council assists us with integrating technology by providing Digital Media to the fifth graders. All of these partnerships provide academic enrichment through various art forms such as visual arts, drama, dance, and music. Additionally this year we will be incorporating daily Morning Meetings to provide students with the opportunity to express themselves, while working on building relationships with peers. There will also be a monthly "habit" from The 7 Habits of Happy Kids to teach character development In addition, we provide an array of school led activities such as basketball, choir, student council, peer mediation, drumming, and dance classes. The variety of choices and our P.B.I.S. programming has helped to create a learning environment where the children can take risks, explore new opportunities and dream of new possibilities. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. We have a population that serves 18% Second Language Learners and 23% Special Education students. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 11  4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. During the last Quality Review in 2014-2015, we received a "well developed" in 4.2 Structured Professional Collaborations on teams. Since that time, there continues to be tremendous work and effort to build upon "teacher collaboration." Currently, teacher team meetings are conducted once a week and follow a set protocol for looking at data. Action plans are created and revisited throughout the year to ensure that goals are met. As we continue to grow, this year administration is establishing a vision for improvement that includes promoting higher academic and social expectations as evidenced through a shared culture for learning. Through the lens of school improvement, there is an intentional focus around high academic expectations, instructional practice and college and career readiness. This is supported through collaboration, intervisitations. looking at student work and teacher development during team meetings. This year we will be implementing monthly vertical teams to create grade alignment, an interdisciplinary approach and a seamless transition between grades. PS 277 ensures "rigorous instruction" takes place throughout the day through the continual revision of our curriculum maps. These maps have been developed and updated based on strengths and weaknesses noted on the State item analysis. More time has been allotted for those standards where the school did not perform as well. All maps are standards-based and include differentiated performance tasks on our Atlas Rubicon website. Prototypes for instruction have been updated based on best practices. Students are provided assessment criteria along with rubrics and checklists in order to self and peer assess work. In effort to propel rigor within instruction, this year we will continue using TC writing, however we are changing the reading curriculum as follows: TCRWP (K-2) and Expeditionary Learning (3-5). Additionally Pre-K and third grade will begin using Fundations. Grades 4 and 5 will use Just Words. The Math curriculum has been changed to the exclusive use of Engage NY. A review of the 2018 June Instructional Report indicates that we are below the City average in having students articulate and explain point of view, main idea, understanding the central message, and reasoning. To that end, we received four - three year grants to assist with our reading initiative as assessment practices: Learning Partners, Collaborative Action Research Project (C.A.R.P.), Early Reading Matters and Wow (World of Words). Our focus for Learning Partners is assessment. This year an instructional foci is formative assessment and through the lens of equity, we will be studying various forms of assessment. Through C.A.R.P. we will be analyzing the sub-groups that are not reading and/or comprehending on grade level. Early Reading Matters will begin with Kindergarten and grade 1 this year through norming F&P assessments, norming shared and guided reading and writing practices. Wow will work on vocabulary development and early reading strategies through interesting science content. In order to nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff through "effective school leadership", the professional development committee meets bi-monthly to plan and prepare high quality data-driven workshops aligned to the 2018-2019 school-wide goals. Teachers also engaged in surveys and will meet in differentiated groups based upon interest and administration observations. Utilizing this structure, teachers provide feedback and an implementation plan following each workshop. The focus of our Monday Professional Learning sessions is to use an inquiry-based approach to analyze data, create a plan of action, examine student work, and provide actionable next steps that will impact student achievement outcomes. During our Other Professional Work Times, staff members meet in Professional Learning Communities (PLCs) to use the inquiry approach by sub-groups: Special Education and ENL students. Other PLCs consists of curriculum revision, book studies focusing on problems of practice, P.B.I.S and the Social-Emotional learning committee (SEL). Additionally, this year administration will conduct five week cycles that consist of "glows and grows", snapshots, observations and continuous feedback designed to improve pedagogical practice. Moreover, administration is working towards moving teacher practice from Effective to Highly Effective using research, Danielson, the Quality Review rubric, and the Instructional Shifts as reference and as a guide. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 12  P.S. 277 continues to develop "strong family-community ties" by opening the school to parents regularly through Family Fridays (first Friday of every month), and monthly Chew and Chats with the Principal. During Family Fridays, parents may visit classrooms, be involved in instruction and assist in learning activities with their child (ren). During Chew and Chat, parents discuss their feelings and beliefs about the instruction at P.S. 277x. In addition, we are planning to have Family Math and Literacy Nights where families can once again be involved in instructional activities as well as participate in several dances and cultural celebrations. Last year we are added a Wellness Fair and a Spring Fling for the community to enhance health, wellness and fun. Additionally, families have an opportunity to engage in workshops provided by consultants from a range of topics from reading comprehension to test taking tips. Through our partnership with Wediko, families can request counseling for their child or entire family at school. Finally, parents requested an after-school program to assist scholars with homework help and to provide additional academic support. We will continue honoring the request and beginning October 1, 2018 through June 7, 2019 we have included a three hour after school program Monday through Friday that includes instruction, test sophistication, tutoring from High School 223 and enrichment activities. In order to re-build a "trust" at PS 277, we have re-designed and implemented the P.B.I.S. program and received professional development from members of the Division of Specialized Instruction and Student Support. This new system will be school-wide and highlight positive behaviors. We will also begin Morning Meetings to provide students with an emotionally safe environment, as well as the 7 Habits of Happy Kids to teach character traits. Scholars and teachers are rewarded for positive behaviors and all staff have been trained to implement the system as well as recognize scholars beyond their own classrooms. Teachers that are observed doing exceptional work in and out of the classrooms are recognized through shout-outs on the P.S. 277 Weekly and the exceptional practice is also highlighted on the Teacher Brag Board. In addition, teachers receive " Snapshots" and "Glows and Grows" that provide commendations and recommendations, separate from mandated visitations to memorialize promising practices. This year we are beginning "Transformation Tuesdays" where teachers open their classroom to share a new best prace with colleagues. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 13  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 07X277 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 488 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 1 1 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 25 18 9 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 92.0% % Attendance Rate 89.1% % Reduced Lunch 15.0% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 2.0% 73.6% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 0.4% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 1.35 3% 29% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 32.6% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 59% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES N/A NO YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A YES YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A NO N/A N/A NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Yes N/A 79 74 89.4% 2.5% 19.3% 22.7% 1.0% 2.3% 4 9% 5.1 37.3% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES N/A N/A N/A YES YES N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 14  2018-19 SCEP-SIG 15  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed X X X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. As a school, one of our strengths has been the development of Common Core aligned curricula and units in all content areas through collaborative teacher team meetings. Our scholars are provided with rigorous opportunities for learning where they were able to articulate their thinking as well as problem-solve with peers and work independently to write reflective pieces. We have also shifted our practice around data collection and analysis. During team meetings, and once monthly during PD assistant principals and teachers work collaboratively to support the revisions of current units using protocols, and data such as the June Instructional Report and the Item Skills Analysis for 2018. One priority need for the school year 2018-2019 SY is to have more students reading on grade level. To that end, we have partnered with Early Reading Matters and Wow to assist with implementing our initiative of grade level reading.Through the action research approach of C.A.R.P., we will be able to determine underlying factors concerning our lowest performers in various sub-groups. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 16 By June 2019, 70% of students in each grade will increase three or more reading levels demonstrating growth as per Fountas & Pinnell. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 17  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Implementing new curriculum: a. Expeditionary Learning for grades 3 through 5 b. Fundations Pre-K to grade 3 c. Just Words grades 4 and 5 Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) All classroom teachers 9/5 – 6/21 Administrators, classroom teachers, Peer Collaborative Teacher d. Modify TCRWP and Expeditionary Learning units to provide multiple entry points, scaffolding and differentiation Professional development workshops will take place that provide teachers with the knowledge and skills to scaffold, create differentiated tasks and modify instruction. All classroom teachers 9/5 – 6/21 Administrators, Trained teachers, Peer Collaborative Teacher, Teacher Leaders, members of PD Committee Early Reading Matters will work weekly with Kindergarten and first teachers on shared reading, guided reading and writing practices Literacy Support Consultant Group to provide weekly coaching and differentiated support to ELA and Writing teachers Kindergarten 9/24 - 5/30 Early Reading First grade Third grade fourth grade fifth grade Matters Coach, Assistant Principal and teachers 10/9 - 4/26 ELA Instructional Coach, Assistant Principal and teachers Wow (World of Words) Kindergarten 9/24 - 5/30 Wow Coach, Principal, teachers Three times weekly intervention period with two adults per room to provide targeted instruction as per data (adults will use double does Fundations, LLI, Reading Rescue, i-Ready, guided reading and Just Words) First Grade Second Grade All teachers, Paraprofessionals, Aides 9/5 – 6/21 Administrators, Peer Collaborative Teachers, Teacher Leaders 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 18  Reading Rescue is provided for grades 1 and 2 for students that are reading significantly below grade level. Monthly Family Friday activities, parent conferences and parent newsletters will support the families with the sharing of activities that can be done at home to support with reading comprehension and fluency. Monthly Parent Newsletters will provide parents with additional activities. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement All classroom teachers 9/5 - 6/21 Classroom teachers, mentors, assistant principals How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Teachers and Parent Coordinate will create parent newsletters, family engagement nights, Family Fridays, and curriculum nights. Administrators, consultants and Parent Coordinator will create parent workshops. Through these outlets and including homework, families will understand and be able to support the goal. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Principal, Assistant Principal, Teachers, Literacy coaches Weekly common planning time Professional learning time Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, students will have increased one proficiency level since the September 2018 baseline. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. formative assessments   data chats  baseline and benchmark data   conference notes F&P data Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 19  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. X X X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? One of our strengths in this area is the expectation that student’s must persevere in their learning by engaging in student-led discussions and projects related to topics studied in their particular classrooms. Self and peer feedback has contributed to the scholars’ reflection on their own learning and the impact this has on their performance. A major finding discovered during the administrative walk-throughs was the practice of engaging in self and peer feedback formally through their writing and math portfolio pieces. Teachers hold scholars accountable to lesson outcomes leading to purposeful conversations on how this learning contributes to their personal growth, continued perseverance, and what it means for their future. According to the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide, 47% of teachers say that adults at their school recognize disruptive behavior as social-emotional learning opportunities. Based on other qualitative data, other teachers feel that there are pockets of irregularities with scholars that exhibit extremely defiant behavior and outbursts, leaving this year's work to surround the need for implementation of higher standards. This is necessary for scholars to understand and internalize the necessity to maintain and encourage positive behavior. This will be achieved maintaining the Wedieko five day per week schedule, scheduling regular meetings with the SEL and P.B.I.S. committees to collaboratively research and plan 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 20  celebrations, create Morning Meeting topics that are used daily in every classroom, lessons and activities using the 7 Habits of Happy Children to teach monthly character traits/development and creating a discipline policy.. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools –Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teachers will engage students in reflective questioning regarding social and emotional skills through Morning Meetings and the 7 Habits of Happy Kids, to increase social and emotional support for students resulting in a 15% decrease in teacher referrals and OORS reports. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 21  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) The P.B.I.S. Committee will consist of an Assistant Principal, Guidance Counselor, SAPIS worker, teachers, and a school aide and Wedieko staff member. Teachers 9/5 – 6/21 P.B.I.S. Committee Students Principal SEL Committee Assistant Principals Wedieko Change for Kids Staff members  Committee members will meet bi-monthly to plan and execute celebrations, analyze challenging behaviors, determine and implement strategies to address behavioral concerns.  Each Tier 3 child will be matched to an adult and be supported with daily check-in and check-out meetings.  Committee members will provide professional development training to colleagues monthly.  Progress will be measured monthly via the methods above.  Selected members will attend citywide P.B.I.S and other forms of culture and discipline workshops.  The P.B.I.S. Committee will provide monthly Professional Learning to the staff.  P.BI.S monthly celebrations The SEL Committee is comprised of the Principal, teachers, school-aide and Wedieko Children's Services.  The SEL Committee will provide Professional Learning on practices to create a positive environment, protocols and practices concerning reflective questioning and discussion  Meet weekly to support P.B.I.S. and create lessons and activities for The 7 Habits of Happy Kids  Create and select Morning Meeting topics Teachers will create and host * parent newsletters * bulletin boards to celebrate progress * bi-monthly parent engagement meetings 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 22  Administration * monthly parent meetings (chew & chats) * parent workshops 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Through parent newsletters, monthly parents meetings, parent workshops, on-going meetings, P.B.I.S. celebrations, bulletin boards to celebrate progress, contact with guidance counselors and Administration. The teachers are primarily responsible for contact, followed by the Assistant Principals. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Principal Assistant Principals Teachers Wediko Student Council P.B.I.S Committee SEL Committee Outside P.D. on Behavior Management Daily P.B.I.S. lessons taught to students Peer Mediation Conflict Resolution with Guidance Counselor and/or Social Worker Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded X P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 23  By February 2019, there will be at least a 10% decrease in OORS reports as compared to last year's average. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. OORS Reports, teacher and parent responses on the School Quality Guide. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 24  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. SOP(s) Addressed X X 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. A strength that we possess is the teacher-led collaborative meetings that embody trust and where instructional empowerment guides discussions concerning student learning, and how to address the gaps that adversely impact academic achievement. During the meetings teachers share inferences, determine how to integrate needed skills for student achievement and delve into implications for their practice. This year teachers will focus on analysis of student work and intervisitations to observe best practices. As a result of the 2017-2018 MOTP ratings for Danielson component 3D (Assessment in Instruction) and the survey data, there is an need for teachers to be engaged in collaborative study where they will learn best practices both with and from colleagues in Domain 3 (the heart of instruction), specifically 3D. Assessing during instruction will lead to greater student achievement as teachers determine comprehension, misconceptions and errors quickly and more frequently. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 25  By June 2019, every grade team will engage in monthly cycles of learning using intervisitations to showcase researched based best practices with formative assessment as evidenced by an average of at least 60% of students moving up three Fountas and Pinnell reading levels. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 26  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Activities/Strategies Develop-ing teachers 9/5 – 6/21 Principal  Administrators, peer collaborative and model teacher, PD committee members will lead various cycles of professional learning sessions to support teachers in their development.  Administrators will conduct weekly informal walk-throughs (glows and grows, snapshots) and formal observations and provide immediate next steps. Effective teachers Assistant Principals PD committee Teachers  Administrators will identify teachers to peer collaborative and model teachers to support with next steps provided for each six week instructional cycle.  Administrators and peer collaborative teachers will participate in inter-visitation cycles monthly with developing teachers.  Teachers` will identify and create an on-going "buddy system" with colleagues to visit and share best practices throughout the school year.  Teachers will participate in inter-visitation cycles monthly.  ELA coach will work strategically with upper grade ELA and writing teachers focusing on best practices for reading and writing weekly.  Early Reading Matters will focus on Kindergarten and first grade teachers by provided a weekly coach to build teacher practice with reading development.  Principals and Parent Coordinator will host five yearly workshops to increase parent understanding of this goal and ways in which they can support their child with reading comprehension strategies. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 27  The Parent coordinator and Administration will provide workshops to increase parents understanding of how they should support the work at home. Teachers will engage parents and students in on-going meetings about reading comprehension, fluency and the writing process. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Principal Assistant Principal Teachers TDEC Monday professional learning time Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, every grade team will engage in monthly cycles of learning using intervisitations to showcase researched based best practices with formative assessment as evidenced by an average of at least 60% of students moving up two Fountas and Pinnell reading levels. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. MOTP ratings, logs, teacher reflections from inter-visitations Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 28  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). X X X X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Last year the Professional Development Committee was developed and continued to be strengthened using a collaborative approach. The PD Committee is comprised of Administration, Peer Collaborative Teachers, grade team leaders, and teachers who expressed interest. The committee uses Advance data, surveys, 2018 ELA and Mathematics results, walk through data and feedback from Administration to determine school-wide professional development needs. After conducting an analysis of the 2017-2018 MOTP ratings, and based on additional qualitative and quantitative data, there is an identified need to provide differentiated professional development to address the various learning styles and needs of the teaching staff. Therefore, teachers will receive professional learning aimed at developing their practice overall but more specifically in Danielson component 3D. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART– Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 29  By June 2019, school administrators will engage all teachers in a book study and differentiated cycles of PD focused on assessment in instruction, that will result in 20% improvement in teacher ratings for Danielson Framework component 3D composite score. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 30  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Teachers 10/15 – 6/14 Assistant Principals  Once monthly vertical teacher team will conduct intervisitations to observe best practices around formative assessment.  Once monthly teachers will engage with a data protocol to analyze Fountas and Pinnell data and create action plans for student achievement.  The PD Committee will complete differentiated cycles of learning for four weeks three times per year highlighting formative assessment researched best practices.  Administration will meet with the PD committee to oversee the creation of differentiated formative assessment PDs. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Peer Collaborative Teacher Teacher Leaders PD Committee How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The principals will host monthly parent meetings, chews and chats where the goals of increasing teacher practice will be discussed. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Principal Assistant Principals All teachers Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA P/F Set-aside 21st Century C4E 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 31  Title I 1003(a) Title III PTA Funded SIG Grant School Achievement Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, school administrators will engage all teachers in a book study and differentiated cycles of PD focused on assessment in instruction, that will result in 10% improvement in teacher ratings for Danielson Framework component 3D composite score. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Feedback logs, checklists, written low-inference observation notes, Advance data Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 32  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment  Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. X X X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Last year students began articulating their future aspirations to a variety of professions due to the awareness created through school activities. Through the College and Career Fair, students realized the connection between school and career and now have a deeper sense of commitment and understanding concerning the importance of education and where it can take them. Parents are also attentive and support the school-wide expectations as partners by following through at home. This year we continue to deepen our focus concerning college and career readiness through targeted instruction and with the support of our partnerships. Utilizing feedback from monthly discussion and surveys, parents have requested more involvement with the curriculum, specifically what their children learn daily. Providing families with strategies to support with reading comprehension and fluency as well as strategies to implement high order thinking questions and discussion techniques at home will increase the level of interaction and student cognition. Based on the NYC School Survey and parent meetings with the school leader, the priority need is to provide more communication to families in relation to academic progress and needs of scholars. Part 2 – Annual Goal 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 33  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the school leader in collaboration with teachers will establish an effective system of reciprocal communication to families that will result in a 3% increase in positive responses in the Outreach to Parents section of NYC School Survey. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 34 Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) 10/4-6/6 Parents, teachers, and students Principal, Assistant Principal, Teachers, Parent Coordinator, Community Based Organizations Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Team Leaders on each grade as well as the Parent Coordinator, PA president and the Supervising Assistant Principal will meet with the Principal to discuss ways to launch this goal, the steps for achievement, resources, participants, etc.  Parent Coordinator will work with the Parents' Association to sponsor workshops that provide parents with additional information, resources and strategies to help their child.  Translators will participate in each session in order to support parents who need to understand the session in Spanish.  Parent Coordinator will include discussion strategies and  tips that align to the curriculum within the monthly newsletter. Free books and materials will be distributed at each monthly principal meeting in order to encourage parents to continue the activities that teacher's have identified at home.  Teachers will provide parents questioning and discussion strategies during family engagement time.  Principal will meet with Parents and conduct surveys and focus group to ensure that the goal is being met. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Change for Kids Wedieko Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Change for Kids 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 35  Wedieko Administration Teachers Parents & their children Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded X P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will at least a 2% increase in positive responses to questions regarding Outreach to Parents on a survey aligned to the NYC School Survey. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Sign-in sheets from family engagement Tuesdays, monthly workshops and meetings, support logs from Parent Coordinator, data from the parent suggestion box, parental surveys will be administered and analyzed. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 36  Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Program Description Directions: Expanded Learning Time activities are directly aligned to the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, Rigorous Instruction, Supportive Environment, and Strong Family and Community Ties. ELT provides enriching educational experiences that happen outside of the traditional school day and blend skill acquisition, relationship-building and fun to foster academic and social-emotional growth. Summer learning, afterschool programming, and extended-day ELT models, when well-implemented, play a critical role in supporting students in all grades and ensuring that they graduate from high school, college and career ready. SED requires that Priority schools offer a minimum of 200 additional student contact hours as Expanded Learning Time in addition to the current mandated length of 900 hours of instruction per year (25 hours per week) in grades K-6 and 990 hours of instruction per year (27.5 hours per week) in grades 7-12. Effective ELT models will blend school staff with community partners, and will provide a balanced curriculum that can include ELA, Math, STEM, arts, physical activity, and leadership development. Complete the sections on this page to demonstrate how the school will meet these requirements. Part 1 – ELT Program Goal(s) Describe the summative goal(s) of the ELT program for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. Beginning October 2018 through June 2019, Grades 3-5 students who scored a level 2 on the 2018 NYS ELA & Math exams will receive after school academic support three days a week in order to help them reach proficiency on the 2019 NYS ELA exams. Students in first and second grade will also receive academic support three days per week with a reading and math computation focus. Part 2 – ELT Program Type Is the ELT program voluntary or compulsory? X Voluntary Compulsory If the ELT program is voluntary, indicate how you will actively encourage the participation of all students, with the goal of serving at least 50% of students. We will actively advertise the programmatic schedule of our Extended Learning Time through letters that are backpacked, phone messenger and informational meetings. Our Saturday programming and attendance advertisements have been successful in having 50% of our students in grades 1-5 attend. A school aide will be responsible for calling family members to ensure attendance. Finally, student attendance and consistent participation will be highlighted and celebrated as well as documented on a daily basis. Part 3 – ELT Program Description Target Population: The ELT program will be offered to all students in the school, with the goal of serving a minimum of fifty percent of students. Describe how the school will meet the following SED requirements for an ELT program in a Priority School:  Integrate academics, enrichment, and skill development through hands-on experiences that make learning relevant and engaging.  Offer a range of activities that capture student interest and strengthen student engagement in learning so as to promote higher attendance, reduce risk for retention or drop out, and increase the likelihood of graduation.  Actively address the unique learning needs and interests of all types of students, especially those who may benefit from approaches and experiences not offered in the traditional classroom setting.  Contain components designed to improve student academic, social, and emotional outcomes, including opportunities for enrichment programs such as in music and art.  Ensure instruction in any core academic subject offered in the program will be delivered under the supervision of a teacher who is NYS certified in that particular content area.  Engage in outreach activities made to families. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 37  We will have two programs for ELT: After-school and Saturday Academy. Our After School Extended Learning Program will take place five days a week for three hours a day. One hour of programming will be focused on assisting students with homework and the second hour of the program will have ELA and Math instruction. Three days a week grades 1-5 will focus on academic instruction based on ELA and Math benchmarks and simulation data. Grades 1-5 academics will begin in October 2018. Enrichment programs for grades 1-5 will also begin in October 2018. NYS certified teachers will provide this instruction. We will partner with Wedieko through the 21st Century grant to receive services such as Sports and Arts Foundation, Studio in School, the Brooklyn Arts Council, as well as provide dance, chorus, theater, and basketball. The Saturday Academy is popular amongst the students and parents. Students are invited to the exclusive Saturday events, which creates buzz and excitement and increases our attendance. In the past, we have had 50% of the students in grades 3-5 attend Saturday Academy. As incentives for attending, students work on Arts and Craft activities, prizes are given away, and each Saturday concludes with a dance party. Part 4 – ELT Program Implementation and Oversight Part 4a. Who will implement the ELT program? Who will oversee the program? 1. Indicate the key personnel that will be responsible for implementing and overseeing the ELT program, including school-based staff and any high-quality community partners that will be involved. If applicable, describe the scope of involvement of all community partners and how the joint ELT program is structured. 2. 3. Explain how you will evaluate the program to assess impact on student achievement. The Principal and an Assistant Principals will implement and oversee the program. Attendance sheets, student work and ELA and Math assessments will be used to evaluate the success of the program. Part 4b. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. Saturday Academy – 1/04-5/11 After School Programming – 10/1-6/7 Part 5 – ELT Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the ELT program. - Administration - Brooklyn Arts - Studio in School - Leveled Literacy Intervention / Fundations / NYReady/Finish Line - Per session for PS 277 teachers, schools aides, and supervisors Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support the ELT Program. Note: If the program is funded by 21st Century Community Center Learning Funds, it must be offered in conjunction with a high quality, high capacity community partner. X 21st Century Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA P/F Set-aside C4E 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 38  Title I 1003(a) Title III PTA Funded X SIG Grant School X Achievement Other Funding Part 6 – ELT Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, student surveys, teacher surveys, CBO feedback, student work products, teacher assessments and feedback will be analyzed and assessed. Part 6b. Indicate the instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. surveys, feedback forms, formative assessments Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 39  Section 7: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) ● Students that have been identified through our Child Study Team ● Holdovers ● English Language Learners Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) ● Guided Reading Group using Leveled Literacy Intervention for identified struggling students for K, 1st, 2nd,3rd and 4th graders. ●Small group Instruction (with a maximum of 4 students per group) where push in and pull out models are followed. ● Fundations and Wilson * One-to-one tutoring * Teacher recommen- When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) The AIS services take place during the school day outside of the literacy block Mathematics Science dation ● Students that have been identified through our Child Study Team ● English Language Learners ● Holdovers ● English Language Learners * Teacher recommen- dation ● Students that have been identified through our Child Study Team ●structured Basic Math Facts practice for students in Grades 2-5 ● Use of Exemplars with multi-entry opportunities ● Small group Instruction (with a maximum of 4-15 students per group) where push in and pull out models are followed. The AIS services take place during the school day and after-school ● Remedial and Enrichment supports from GoMath and NY Engage ● Use of Rek-n-Rek and Abakids Math Guides Non-fiction Guided Reading Groups (see above) Small group instruction The AIS services take place during the school day outside of the literacy block 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 40  ● Holdovers ● English Language Learners * Teacher recommendations ● Students that have been identified through our Child Study Team ● Holdovers ●English Language Learners ● Students that have been identified through our Child Study Team ● Holdovers Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Non-fiction Guided Reading Groups (see above) Small group instruction The AIS services take place during the school day outside of the literacy block ● Character Education through Read Aloud Small group, individual meetings, parent/child meetings and push in During the school day ● Reinforcement of PBIS lesson plans ● Parent Request ● Peer mediation * counseling 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 41  Section 8: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 84 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. The school will purchase items such as school uniforms and book bags, supplies, specialty items as per needed for educational purposes. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 42  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 43  Section 9: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. ● PS 277 strives to retain highly qualified staff by offering leadership opportunities and involving them in decision-making. For example staff members were invited to participate in our P.B.I.S. initiative to make decisions and execute critical initiatives aligned with school’s mission and vision statements. We also have a core teacher group, which serves as a think tank for improving our school instruction and community. ● All teaching candidates must complete an interview packet, which includes writing a parent letter, solving a math exemplar, and analysis of student writing. All teaching candidates are interviewed by the school's hiring committee. ● Buddy Teachers and special emphasis on classroom inter-visitations ● A program schedule that builds on common planning time, and professional development opportunities that are grouped horizontally and vertically. ● Provide ongoing Professional Development for teachers and staff to ensure effective use of strategies, rubrics, curriculum maps, unit planning and data analysis. ● All staff participate in a goal-setting program to provide a structure to discuss goals and progress aligned with Danielson's Framework. ● Attend teacher fair to recruit teachers or other pedagogues. ● Network with other Principals and Assistant Principals with the focus of recruiting teachers of staff members. ● Mentorship by both the Literacy and Math coach is provided to both new and veteran teachers on a weekly basis. ● Purchased services from highly regarded Staff Developers to provide quality Professional Development in school as well as workshops outside of school where the teachers have an opportunity to collaborate with other NYCDOE teachers. ● Staff is assigned based on license areas and interests. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 44  2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Weekly Professional Development will consist of two categories: Professional Learning Communities and Monday PDs. All teachers and paraprofessionals are divided across teams: Special Education, Curriculum Maps, ENL, P.B.I.S. and SEL. During our Monday PDs, teachers and paraprofessionals receive differentiated PD based ability level, and/or interest level. PD cycles are based on school's instructional focus, Quality Review indicators (using the QR rubric for school-wide improvement), Danielson components etc. During PLCs time, staff uses the Inquiry Approach to address the needs of our students. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). ● Joint Professional Development is provided to the 3K and Pre-k staff. ● Pre-k teachers are involved in school-wide inter- visitations ● Monthly parent workshops are held to promote parent involvement and understanding of the child’s developmental milestones at this age. ● At the end of the year, the pre k students have the opportunity to visit the kindergarten classroom and spend an one to two periods engaging in “kindergarten activities” with their future teacher. ● Provide families with summer packets (created by the Kindergarten team) on activities and assignments that are Pre-k and kindergarten age appropriate. ● Books are sent home with the Pre-k students during the summer. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 45  Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. ● Teachers are provided professional development workshops on the selection of the MOSL assessment. ● Teachers are provided with per session to create units of study that include the differentiated tasks as well as performance ● One professional period a month focuses on using a protocol to review assessments results and plan small group instruction. ● Due to feedback from teachers, we have substituted our TC Running Records with the Fountas and Pinnell Benchmark Assessments. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (SCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Title I Part A (Basic) Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 374,483.00 69,732.00 11,200.00 0 2,564,941.00 X X X X Column B Section Reference(s) 5E and 6 5D 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 46  State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/SCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 47  funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 48  Section 10: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. P.S. 277, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. P.S. 277X will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 49  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA//State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 50  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Template School-Parent Compact (SPC) P.S. 277X , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 51  improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 52  ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 53  II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 54  ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 55  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 56  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: At PS 277 we have 77 ELLs in K-5. At this time we have only ENL services. Title III support will supplement our ongoing services with 2 after-school programs, one program on Wednesdays for 22 third and fourth grade ELLs and one program on Fridays for 19 fourth and fifth grade ELLs, NYSESLAT levels Entering to Commanding. Our two certified ENL teachers will be conducting these after-school programs with third, fourth and fifth grade ELLs, 2 days per week for 2 hours a day from November 18 through March 18 on Wednesdays and Thursdays from 2:40 p.m. to 4:40 p.m. The programs will be conducted in English. The focus for Wednesday's group will be skills practice based on The Common Core Learning Standards using the textbook The Finish Line from Continental Press. Units will cover speaking, listening, reading and writing around a common theme. This will be offered to 19 fourth and fifth graders, NYSESLAT levels Entering through Commanding. Grade appropriate content is embedded. This program will be in English with Native Language support through use of google translator and Spanish speaking teachers. On Thursdays students will build content knowledge through a computer program called Success Maker from Pearson, utilizing technology to make instruction and learning more accessible for every student. Students experience personalized learning in either literacy or mathematics. Assessment and data are built in. Thursdays program will be offered to 22 third and fourth graders, NYSESLAT levels Entering through Commanding. In addition ELLS will participate in the program "Project Cook" that we have had at P.S. 277 for 13 years where we use the culinary arts to contextualize curriculum. The theme this year will be "Communities Around the World". We will continue our format of listening and speaking about our theme, reading and writing, before cooking to reinforce the language learned. We will explore "Communities Around the World" through context embedded, content based instruction. We will use songs, poems, games, and technology to further enhance language acquisition through content. This program will be in English with native language supports through bilingual dictionaries, google translator, Spanish speaking teachers, an emphasis on cognates and the translation of key academic vocabulary. In regards to materials, teachers will need to purchase the necessary ingredients for the various cooking projects. The classroom already has the necessary cooking/baking tools (i.e. oven, measuring cups, bowls, pans) 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 57  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: We will offer a PD for our teachers of ELLs. A total of 15 classroom teachers, cluster teachers, and support staff (e.g. speech, paraprofessionals) will participate in a book study, facilitated by our 2 ENL teachers. We will read and discuss "The Vocabulary Book: Learning & Instruction" by Michael F. Graves which was highly recommended at an ENL PD attended by the ENL teacher, Ms. Caputi, for ELL vocabulary development. This book will provide educators with models of exemplary vocabulary instruction and offer them a toolbox of accessible research-based strategies. The text's main areas of focus are rich and varied language experiences, teaching individual words, teaching word learning strategies and fostering word consciousness. This PD program has been designed to help our teachers bolster students' literacy and content knowledge through vocabulary development, which is the main ENL focus for the 2017-2018 school year. These sessions will be on Tuesdays from 4:00-5:00, running for 7 weeks beginning December 6, 2016 through January 24, 2017. Our culminating project will be to have the teachers facilitate a vocabulary PD for the entire faculty. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: The Parental Engagement Activities at P.S. 277 include Family Friday once a month (8:20 a.m. to 9:00 a.m.) when parents have the opportunity to interact within the students' classroom and learn strategies that they can apply at home with their child. This program is translated to enable parents of ELLs to participate. Monthly, Café Con Libros is a workshop led by our principal addressing parents needs in order to impact higher achievement for ELLs. Café con Libros also provides parents with an opportunity to learn about the Common Core Standards and Workshops on parent selected topics. Additionally, we have monthly 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 58  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities parent workshops that provide parents with information and strategies for content area. For example, we have Family Math Night, Literacy Night, SPED Info Sessions etc. To conclude our after school program, Project Cook, parents will be invited to our final celebration that will present food and activities from the program, illustrating students academic and linguistic development and success. Parents are notified through the school messenger system and hard copies of newsletters about these activities. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 59  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 7 School Name PS 277x Borough Bronx School Number 277 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Natasha Bracey-Ferguson Coach Alexis Boucher ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Nancy Caputi Teacher/Subject Area Claritiza Zambrana Teacher/Subject Area Related-Service Provider Superintendent Assistant Principal Adele Cammarata Coach School Counselor Parent Ganael Chacon Parent Coordinator Field Support Center Staff Member Maria Guerrero Other (Name and Title) Yvette Mejia (AP) Laura Schel C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 2 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 415 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 60 Total number of ELLs 83 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 20.00%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 2 K 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 3 0 4 0 5 0 6 0 7 0 8 0 9 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? We use the Fountas and Pinnell benchmark assessments to determine 100% of our students’ independent readinglevels which in turn inform teachers’ instructional plans throughout the year. The data collected from these assessments informs student groupings and helps us identify which students should be selected to receive additional support; Leveled Literacy Intervention (LLI) or Reading Rescue. Both of these services are provided by trained staff at P.S. 277x in addition to classroom instruction. In addition to Fountas and Pinnell benchmark assessments, teachers also create baseline assessments. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? In order to support this effort we have an AIS team which includes an array of literacy instructors that work with the students in small group/1:1 settings. In addition the ENL and classroom teachers work collaboratively with this team of instructors to address the needs, create plans/goals and monitor student progress. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 61  3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The following summative assessments and baseline/benchmark assessments are used at P.S. 277x to identify baseline, progress and areas of needs; Fountas and Pinnell Literacy Benchmark Assessment System, ECAM - Early Childhood Assessment for Mathematics, Fry Word Assessments, Concepts of Print/ Letter Sound Identification Assessments, NYCDOE Math baseline, READY simulations in ELA and Math, ELA and Math NYC DOE benchmark and Writing and Math end-of- unit performance tasks. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Summative data is collected and submitted to Ms. Cammarata and Ms. Mejia, the Assistant Principals, for further analysis. If the data reveals that a particular student requires additional services and/or support then they are then referred to the Child Study Team. The Child Study team reviews the information,meets with the ENL, subject area and other members of the various teams (i.e. LLI instructors, Reading Rescue Instructor) to create and provide research based interventions to support and strengthen the struggling students academically 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] To provide a supportive RTI infrastructure, we have a three-tiered system that focuses on strong core instruction, intensive targeted intervention and progress monitoring. Our Academic Intervention Services (AIS) team of specialists work in coordination with the English as a New Language (ENL) team to meet each students' needs. Together, they share data and best practices to accommodate the needs of each individual ELL. Specialists also attend professional learning opportunities in which they share data, plan instruction, and collaborate to produce high-quality research-based instruction. Additionally, the ENL team meets weekly with teachers from each grade level in order to co- plan and address the needs of students. Struggling students are referred to the Child Study Team, and further analysis and intervention plans are developed such as Leveled Literacy Intervention or Reading Rescue (a large percentage of our ELL populations receive these interventions). In response to ELL data and within the RTI framework, RTI support is also evidenced with increased visuals (pictures, videos and graphic organizers) and increased vocabulary instruction. Our Spanish speaking ELLs are grouped with a Spanish speaking teacher when possible to provide translation if necessary and native language support when it will serve academic progress. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The outcome assessments that we used to evaluate and inform our ELL programs included NYSESLAT data, and ELA and Math standardized exams from previous years. We find the results of these exams on ATS reports. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? The ENL team and Assistant Principals look at the outcome assessment data together to determine where ELLS need more support and how to adjust the services provided to them to better address their academic needs. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. ENL instruction is delivered through Integrated and Stand-alone ENL services as per CR Part 154.2. The ENL teachers work with classroom teachers of ELLs to create appropriate schedules of Integrated co-teaching and Stand-alone. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 62  ELLs who scored Entering or Emerging receive 360 minutes of ENL instruction weekly. 180 minutes of that time is Integrated ENL instruction with a certified ENL teacher and a K-6 certified elementary school teacher in a co-taught classroom. The other 180 minutes is delivered in a stand-alone ENL classroom in homogeneous groups as per NYSITELL/NYSESLAT scores. These homogeneous stand-alone groups might span two contiguous grades and proficiency levels if deemed appropriate. ELLs who scored Transitioning and Expanding receive 180 minutes of ENL instruction weekly. The Transitioning students may receive half of that time in a stand-alone ENL classroom, while the remaining ENL instructional time is delivered in an integrated, co-taught classroom. Expanding students receive all of their 180 minutes in the Integrated, co-taught classroom. ELLs who scored Commanding receive 90 minutes of ENL instruction weekly in an Integrated, co-taught classroom. This service continues for two years after receiving a Commanding score on the NYSESLAT b. TBE program. If applicable. n/a c. DL program. If applicable. n/a 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? In accordance with CR Part 154.2 our school ensures that all ELLS receive the mandated ENL instructional minutes as determined by their proficiency levels. In order to do this the ENL team starts the school year by ensuring that all new arrivals and transfer students that have been flagged as potential ELLs are tested (when necessary) and proficiency levels are determined. One ENL teacher is assigned to deliver instruction to the K-2 classrooms, while the other is assigned to the 3-5 classrooms. After all ELLs have been identified and tested the ENL teachers develop their respective schedules by taking into account classroom schedules, proficiency levels, required minutes and the type of mandated services (Integrated or Stand-alone). Once ENL schedules have been drafted by the team they are then submitted to the Assistant Principals to approve, at which point they also ensure that the number of mandated ENL minutes is provided to each ELL according to their proficiency level. Assistant Principals can ask the ENL team to revise their schedules if it is determined that an ELL is not receiving their mandated instructional minutes. If an ELL is admitted after the start date, the ENL team and Assistant Principals follow the same procedures to ensure they are placed in the appropriate classroom and are provided the mandated number of instructional minutes. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. At P.S. 277x Core Content is delivered in English by the classroom teachers and the ENL teachers. The student’s home language is used when it ensures comprehension of content. However, it is more common to see teachers using strategies such as TPR, visual and written aids, small group instruction and differentiated instruction which not only makes content comprehensible but also fosters language acquisition. To meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards in integrated ENL classrooms, language goals are included in the co-teaching model. The ENL teachers collaborate with the classroom teachers to provide vocabulary acquisition strategies and support for content comprehension. In stand-alone ENL classrooms ENL teachers also design appropriate language goals and support academic vocabulary acquisition along with the use of cognates,visuals, TPR, graphic organizers and translation when appropriate. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Following registration at our school the Spanish LAB is administered to ELLs whose home language is Spanish and have not previously taken it. The results of this exam inform ENL and classroom teachers about the student’s literacy level in their home 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 63  language, and therefore the extent to which it will foster their acquisition of the English language. The Spanish speaking ELLs are then grouped with Spanish speaking classroom teachers which is imperative for parent engagement, but also serves as a language support during classroom instruction. Spanish and English versions of the State tests are provided for our Spanish speaking ELLs along with word-to-word dictionaries. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status A. We currently do not have any classified SIFE students, however if we were to have SIFE students, we would create a standards based curriculum concentrating on knowledge and skills. They would receive intensive English language development instruction and intensive literacy development that teaches social and academic language in a small-group setting. If their Home Language Survey identified them as a Spanish speaker they would be placed with a Spanish-speaking teacher and have access to multi-modal/multi-sensorial technology to support their learning. B. Newcomer ELLs who reported Spanish as their home language are placed with a Spanish-speaking teacher. Integrated ENL instruction includes the use of multimodal/multi- sensorial technology, visual supports, TPR, scaffolding (i.e. graphic organizers that include sentence stems) and peer support through the intentional grouping of students (i.e. home language, English proficiency level, etc). Stand-Alone ENL instruction has a much smaller student-to-teacher ratio and focuses on developing reading and writing skills with a strong focus on phonics. Additionally, they may be placed in a TBE classroom if available. C: Developing ELLs all receive much of the same differentiation as SIFE and Newcomers. They will receive targeted instruction to support English grammar, speaking, reading, listening and writing. Graphic organizers that include sentence stems will still be available to them if necessary. As they acquire more language, the ENL teacher will incorporate more opportunities for role playing activities and readers theater in the classroom. D: Long-term ELLs will continue to receive appropriate scaffolding to ensure comprehension of content areas and academic language acquisition. This includes the use of visuals, graphic organizers, sentence frames, role-play and small group instruction. E: Former ELLs receive 90 minutes of integrated ENL instruction for two years as per the C.R. Part 154.2. Through ENL and classroom teacher co-planning, language goals are set and scaffolding implemented as needed. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? ENL strategies we employ for our ELL-SWDs include visual, auditory, kinesthetic, interpersonal and intrapersonal scaffolds. Instructional materials that are currently being used by teachers of ELL-SWDS include: a program called myON which is a personalized, online literacy program that matches student’s interests and their reading level in an enhanced digital library, Level Literacy Intervention by Fountas and Pinnell ( LLI), and a technology program called Success Maker. Strategies used emphasize content vocabulary and academic language. These programs, which accommodate all grades and ages, are aligned with content-area subjects including social studies, science, and math. All proficiency levels, learning styles and abilities benefit from these programs since they span the full range of language acquisition stages (entering through commanding). 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 64  ENL teachers coordinate with general and special education teachers to assist with the development of writing skills as well as content. ELL students identified as having IEPs are placed in ICT classrooms which provide individualized supports to help students achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment. ELL-SWDs are served as per IEP. ENL teachers provide the required minutes of Integrated or Stand-alone ENL instruction. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Through the integrated ENL minutes, as per C.R. 154, Entering, Emerging, Transitioning and Expanding ELLS will receive support in core content areas. Based on performance, ELLS who struggle in ELA are eligible to receive the following targeted interventions offered at our school; Leveled Literacy Intervention (LLI), Reading Recovery, and push-in and pull-out small group instruction provided by our literacy coaches and SETSS teacher, in English. Likewise, ELLS who show difficulty in Math are eligible to receive the following targeted intervention offered at our school; SETSS pull-out and push-in, which is offered in English and Spanish as determined by the needs of the students. Science is taught through a hands-on approach using visuals and TPR to provide additional support. The science teacher and the ENL team collaborate in planning and teaching the content material, and therefore both take responsibility to provide targeted interventions when deemed necessary. Translated articles are available for Entering and Emerging ELLS to use in Science class. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Data and trends show that our ELLs need additional support in writing as scores are low across all grade levels. Due to this finding we will look at the writing curriculum used at the school and make appropriate adjustments where needed. We will also look into having an afterschool club that focuses specifically on writing skills - in addition to the normal homework help, ELA and Math test prep offered at P.S. 277. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? n/a 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLS with IEPs are given the same access to all the programs offered in the building. The ELLS are given enrichment and remedial classes during the after school program provided by Wediko Children’s Services and staff at P.S. 277. ELLs are also invited to our Saturday programming where students are offered homework help and test prep. An after school cooking class has also been designed for ELLS as a fun, enjoyable way for them progress their English language acquisition. It also serves as an opportunity for them to come together and discuss different cultures and traditions. The structure of this class is adapted to the strengths and needs of the ELLS who attend it. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Instructional materials include Smart Boards, Promethean Boards, iPads, and visual support for all vocabulary. For Entering ELLs we have content area textbooks with Spanish translations when needed. For Science, the Full Option Science System (FOSS) provides ELLs with various opportunities to develop their language through active investigations, engaging discussions and written reflections on their observations and experiences, and meaningful concrete experiences that provide a shared context for developing comprehension. We have a program called Success Maker which allows students to work in content areas at their learning levels across the grades. We provide a program called myON which is a personalized, online literacy program that matches student’s interests and their reading level in an enhanced digital library. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? The transitional bilingual education program at P.S. 277 provides ELLs with instruction in their home language, as well as in English. As English proficiency increases, the certified bilingual teacher reduces the percentage of instruction in the home language and increases the percentage of instruction in English. ENL home language support is delivered to students in the following ways: providing new arrivals with a student mentor who 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 65  speaks the same home language, grouping ELL students with a Spanish-speaking teacher providing students with bilingual dictionaries and iTranslate on the iPad, emphasizing cognates, etc. All home language support is provided in relation to a students’ English proficiency level (Entering, Emerging, Transitioning, Expanding, and Commanding) so that these supports are removed as the student’s English proficiency level increases. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Students are supported in their language development in each grade using strategies and methods appropriate for their language acquisition level, age and grade. The programs and services we use to provide support to ELLs are Fundations, LLI, Success Maker and myON. Through these programs, students are able to work at an individualized pace that correspond to their ages and grade levels. For SWDs, these services are modified according to students’ IEPs. Students also receive counseling and speech services as appropriate. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? We share the building with a District 75 school. Schedules are carefully arranged so that we operate separately despite sharing the same cafeteria, restrooms, hallway, etc. Since there is no overlap there is no effect on meeting ELL needs. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). There is a curriculum orientation night that highlights what students will be learning at the beginning of the year, as well as on-going meetings throughout the year to gauge progress. The parent coordinator speaks with all parents and provides an overview of our school’s offerings, activities and upcoming events. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? n/a 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? n/a Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? At P.S. 277 teachers have developed a growth mindset and see themselves as students too. In order to support them in this process, the administrative staff have scheduled weekly professional development opportunities for all teachers of ELLS and non-pedagogical staff on Monday and Tuesdays (alternate with parent engagement). Various ENL support staff from the DOE District Office are invited to our school to lead some of these sessions. Additionally, the P.S. 277 ENL team takes it upon themselves to attend an array PDS hosted by the UFT and DOE around the city. Upon their return to the school they impart any new, valuable information they have learned with their fellow staff members by volunteering to lead one of these weekly sessions. As a new ENL instructor at P.S. 277, Ms. Schelble attends various Saturday courses about ENL compliance and instruction held at the DOE District Office. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 66  2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Our school meets the professional development requirements through PDs created by our ENL teachers as well as district ELL Specialists. ENL teachers are sent out to PDs pertaining to ELL needs, as are classroom teachers. 50% of total hours for our ENLs teacher are directly related to language acquisition. A sign-in sheet, agenda, and feedback from teachers is kept for each PD in the main office. Agendas and sign-in sheets for in-house ENL PDs are also kept in the ELL Binder. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Our school provides annual individual meetings at the beginning of the school year during parent engagement time that takes place on Tuesdays at 2:50. Parents are invited to come and speak with the ENL team to discuss goals of the program, language development progress if the student was enrolled the previous school year, NYSESLAT/NYSITELL scores and language development needs in appropriate content area. After the completion of these annual individual meetings, the ENL team continues to be available to meet with parents and content area teachers when appropriate. However, these must be scheduled ahead of time. All meetings are translated into Spanish and all documents distributed are translated into Spanish. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. The principal, Ms. Bracey-Ferguson, plans to host workshops for parents every other month and of course, ELL families will be encouraged to attend. Family Friday, a day when families are invited into their children’s classrooms, is also another access point for parents to have greater opportunities to engage in school academics. As the grade level teachers of ELLS speak Spanish they are able to communicate with the parents effortlessly. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. n/a 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 67 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Natasha Bracey-Ferguson, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 68  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: P.S. .277x School DBN: 07x227 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Title Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) Natasha Bracey-Ferguson Principal Adele Cammarata Assistant Principal n/a Parent Coordinator Nancy Caputi ENL/Bilingual Teacher n/a Parent Claritza Zambrana Teacher/Subject Area n/a Teacher/Subject Area Alexis Boucher n/a n/a n/a Maria Guerrero Yvette Mejia Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Assistant Principal Laura Schelble Other ENL Teacher n/a Other n/a 10/02/17 10/02/17 10/02/17 10/02/17 10/02/17 10/02/17 10/02/17 10/02/17 10/02/17 10/02/17 10/02/17 10/02/17 10/02/17 10/02/17 10/02/17 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 69  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 07x277 School Name: PS 277 Superintendent: Elisa Alvarez The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Nancy Laura Caputi Schelble ENL teacher ENL teacher no no yes yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. All parents are required to fill out a Home Language Questionnaire (HLQ) at registration. They are provided with translation services at registration if requested or when necessary. The HLQ is provided in several languages, as needed. Additionally, at registration the parent completes a language preference sheet. This provides the school with the parent’s choice of preferred language for information sent home, for oral and written communication with the school. With this information the administration and teachers are able to provide the parents with communication in the parent’s preferred language. Additionally we use the data from the Language Aggregate Report (RHLA) in ATS, to chronicle the languages other than English spoken by our students at home. The language preference form is included in the students’ cumulative folders. For students who have been in the system prior to the new forms, the old HLIS is in cumulative folders and indicates parents’ language preferences. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 70  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Spanish English Afrikaans Fulani Ndebele Soninke Urdu 106 338 1 1 3 1 1 23.5% 74.94% .22% .22% .67% .22% .22% 107 338 1 1 3 0 1 23.73% 74.94% .22% .22% .67% 0 .22% 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families P.S. 277 Parent Handbook September, 2017 Welcome Back Letter August, 2017 Monthly Newsletters Start of each month Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. As many of our teachers are bilingual, we work together to create professional, accurate translations of all documents. As many of our teachers are bilingual, we work together to create professional, accurate translations of all documents. As many of our teachers are bilingual, we work together to create professional, accurate translations of all documents. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 71  Monthly Calendars Start of each month Child Reports When needed Flyers When needed Afterschool Program Information September, 2017 All documents related to ENL services September, 2017 PTA information When needed As many of our teachers are bilingual, we work together to create professional, accurate translations of all documents. As many of our teachers are bilingual, we work together to create professional, accurate translations of all documents. As many of our teachers are bilingual, we work together to create professional, accurate translations of all documents. As many of our teachers are bilingual, we work together to create professional, accurate translations of all documents. As many of our teachers are bilingual, we work together to create professional, accurate translations of all documents. As many of our teachers are bilingual, we work together to create professional, accurate translations of all documents. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Curriculum Night September, 2017 ELL Parent Orientation September, 2017 Meet the Principal September, 2017 Parent-Teacher Conferences Quarterly Weekly Parent Engagement Weekly interpretation service(s)? The Parent Coordinator, Ms. Vega, provides interpretation services. We also have one Spanish speaking teachers on each grade level to support with translations. The Parent Coordinator, Ms. Vega, provides interpretation services. The Parent Coordinator, Ms. Vega, provides interpretation services. The Parent Coordinator, Ms. Vega, provides interpretation services. We also have one Spanish speaking teachers on each grade level to support with translations. The Parent Coordinator, Ms. Vega, provides interpretation services. We 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 72  Family Friday Monthly also have one Spanish speaking teachers on each grade level to support with translations. The Parent Coordinator, Ms. Vega, provides interpretation services. We also have one Spanish speaking teachers on each grade level to support with translations. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In the event of a school emergency, the majority of the office staff at P.S. 277 is bilingual and can communicate with parents if their preferred oral language is Spanish. Teachers also have student emergency phone numbers on blue cards and as most are Spanish speaking they can also communicate with the limited-English proficient families in their language of preference if an emergency arises. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. In September, during the initial staff development days, it is stressed that in accordance with C.R. A-663 all Limited English Speaking Parents are provided with a meaningful opportunity to participate in and have access to educational programs and services for their children. The ENL team ensures that all staff members not only understand the importance of translation services, but their legal obligation to ensure parents receive it. Later on in the school year, during a follow-up session during our faculty PD, the ENL team will check-in with the teachers to ensure that this is still taking place. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) The parent coordinator, Ms. Vega, provides parents with a translated version of the Parents Bill of Rights at the beginning of the school year during PTA meetings. Parents learn which staff members at P.S. 277 are bilingual, and what to do if they feel like they cannot communicate with their child’s teacher and/or partake in school events. They are provided with Information about the policies and the translation services offered by the DOE. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 73  Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Our parent coordinator, Ms. Vega, informally gathers feedback from parents with regard to quality and availability of services. A survey form is completed at parent orientation meetings for parents of ELLs. Parents complete a language preference form and this information is used by the staff at P.S. 277. The ENL team reviews the surveys and language preference forms before informing all teachers of ELLS this preference. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 74 
