 08X282 School Name: WOMEN'S ACADEMY OF EXCELLENCE Principal: ARNETTE CROCKER 2018-19 SCEP-FL 1  School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Section 4: SCEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Women’s Academy of Excellence 320800011282 9 – 12 School Number (DBN): 08X282 456 White Plains Road, 3 rd Floor, Bronx, NY 10473 718-542-0740 718-542-0841 Phone Number: Arnette F. Crocker Fax: Email Address: acrocke@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 08 Superintendent’s Office Address:  Arnette F. Crocker Marilyn Ambrose De Costa CatherineVargas Marilyn Ambrose De Costa TBD DarrianaLake ShavashaFurman N/A District Information Carron Staple Superintendent: 1 Fordham Plaza, Bronx, NY 10458 cstaple@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-741-5834 Phone Number: 718-741-7098 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 3  2 FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Jose Ruiz Executive Director: 1 Fordham Plaza, Bronx, NY 10458 JRUIZ2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-828-7776 Phone Number: 718-828-6280 Fax: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the SCEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Arnette F. Crocker *Principal or Designee Marilyn Ambrose DeCosta CatherineVargas/LeslieGeorge Meserete Newman TBD DarrianaLake ShavashaFurman N/A Petek Tyler KatherineTroche Anna Colon Tracy Smith *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Teacher 2018-19 SCEP-FL 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) JoelComendador Anthony Grant Member/Teacher Member/Teacher Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 SCEP-FL 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) is a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. The process of developing and implementing the SCEP is aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding SCEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and SCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 7  In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement 2018-19 SCEP-FL 8  NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the SCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the SCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for SCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 9   Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 5: Build consensus around activities, strategies and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 6: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 7: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 10  1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: SCEP Overview The Women’s Academy of Excellence opened in 2004 as a uniform school single gender learning environment with a private school feeling. Affectionately called, The WAE, the mission of the WOMEN'S ACADEMY OF EXCELLENCE is to create a community of lifelong learners, where students' intellectual curiosity and creativity is nurtured, and their developmental needs as teens and preteens are met to their individual satisfaction. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. The WAE school community which is comprised of scholars, teachers, administrators, parents and community leaders offers a dynamic, interdisciplinary learning environment exposing scholars to a rigorous college preparatory curriculum. As a result, the scholars experience great success on many levels, as they specialize in the fields of Math, Science and Social Change. The WAE scholars are also required to complete 200 hours of community service prior to graduation. The goal of the school is to provide a quality education for young women. The school provides targeted academic intervention for students that are in need of additional instructional support, including lunchtime tutoring and PM School. It also offers a committed youth development team. The teachers support one another through Professional Learning Communities, Common Planning with Special Education staff, and Staff Development Team. The WAE incorporates leadership classes, which meet regularly for 45 minutes, using the Overcoming Obstacles Curriculum, and allows for team building activities, discussions of personal/social issues that concern the scholars, college education and women empowerment. The leadership teachers serve as mentors, advocates, and cheerleaders. The Leadership teachers provide a home base for building positive social relationships and also serve as a means connecting with the greater school community. Through a strong partnership with parents, caretakers and guardians, the school organizes and initiates collaborative projects to in still values, ethical principles of behavior and sound judgment in each and every scholar. In this way, it is ensured that scholars excel scholastically, socially and emotionally; and are able to achieve success throughout high school and when they enter college. Our expectation is that the scholars will be leaders in school and in their communities as well. The WAE offers scholars the opportunity to participate in student government, empowerment initiatives, music, PSAL sports, and community service projects. The WAE believes that community service is a foundation for great leaders. It builds character, self-esteem, and instills a sense of civic responsibility. The WAE is proud to be affiliated with and supported by the following organizations. The NY Coalition of One Hundred Black Women, L’Oreal: Zeta Phi Beta Sorority Inc. (AAOZ chapter), Montefiore Hospital, Lehman College, Monroe College, Mercy College, the Agency for Children Services North Bronx Office, and the PitcchIn Foundation. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. The school currently serves a population of 278 students from various cultural backgrounds. The population consists of students from Mexico, Central America, Pakistan, India, and West Africa. The student population is approximately 11% Asian, 46% Black, and 40% Hispanic. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 11  In addition, there are 57 Students with Disabilities. Of this number 4 are provided with Special Education Teacher Support Services, ranging between 2 to 5 times per week; 42 students need to be placed in an Integrated Co-Teaching Services ranging between 5 to 20 times per week, 8 students need both - SETSS and Integrated Co-Teaching Services and 1 student needs to be in 15:1 setting for 4 times per week. Lastly, the school currently has 73 or 26% are English Language Learners. Languages include Arabic, Bengali, Urdu, Spanish. In addition, one ESL student speaks Wolof and another one speaks French. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. The 2016-2017 Quality Review showed that the school made the most progress in Rigorous Instruction, more specifically in 1.2 (Pedagogy) and 2.2 (Assessment) as having moved from Developing to Proficient in both areas. Both areas were areas of focus in 2015-2016. For the past years, teachers designed data-driven instructions that led to lessons that are student centered and use of instructional strategies that consistently emphasize rigorous habits. The school through teacher initiatives have designed and use a detailed lesson plans and unit plan templates that aligned curricula to CCLS and content standards and are integrating instructional shifts. An observation that was made by the Deputy Superintendent visit during the Fall 2017 semester is that, “teachers are thoughtfully and thoroughly planning units, daily lessons, and daily tasks that are comprehensive (i.e. they include essential questions, aims, objectives, accommodations for students, the role of the general education teacher and special education teacher, etc.)”. By creating a coherent plan of action (unit plans and daily lesson plans), teachers are ensuring that their students are understanding the content of the curricula (SSR, 2018). In response to the result of our school based student survey during the Fall of 2017, more intentional Youth Development initiatives were implemented. The positive impact of the YD initiatives is captured by the Deputy Superintendent’s Fall 2017 semester visit. The Deputy Superintendents stated “there is a celebratory and supportive environment (as evidenced in both the classrooms and the hallways) where students are well-known and where their voice is welcomed and valued. Student leadership opportunities include student council, the Ambassador program, the “See Something, Say Something (anti-bullying) initiative, and the Principal’s Listening Tour.” (SSR, 2018). This positive observation is affirmed by the increase of percentage of students’ positive response in personal attention and support from 47% in 2016-2017 to 53% in 2017-2018. These initiatives allowed WAE to build a positive community where all students feel included and heard. (SSR 2018). The area of focus for this school year is the framework on Strong Family Ties as indicated by the Quality Review result rating of “developing” for "HIgh Expectations" The school received a "developing" rating in the area of “high expectations” on the 2015-2016 Quality Review based on the lack of parent involvement Another area of of focus for this year is the low passing percentage in Global and US History Regent Exams and the decline of the percentage of students passing the ELA Regents for school year 2016-2018 from 72% in 2015-2016 to 54% in 2016-2017 (NYSED School Report Card). 2018-19 SCEP-FL 12  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 08X282 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 281 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 4 4 5 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 31 20 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 93.0% % Attendance Rate 88.6% % Reduced Lunch 21.0% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 2.1% 33.1% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 11.7% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 14.25 0% 4% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 73% 55% 67.2% 4.5% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No No Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups ED Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A YSH Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A YSH Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient N/A YES N/A N/A No N/A 71 68 15 77.2% 4.3% 18.5% 40.9% 10.7% 3.6% 2 16% 8 N/A N/A 64% 70% 72.4% 11% N/A No Yes N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A YSH N/A N/A N/A N/A YSH YES N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 13  Economically Disadvantaged YES ALL STUDENTS NO 2018-19 SCEP-FL 14  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed x x x x Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths of the School According to data, the strengths of the school relative to this Framework element are as follows: 1. Quality Review conducted for School Year 2016-2017 reported an increase from developing to proficient in the following components: pedagogy and assessment. 2. The school made progress on its 4 year graduation rate in 2016-2017. It increased to 70% in 2016-2017 from 60% in 2015-2016 (School Quality Snapshot). 3. The Student Perception Survey for school year 2017-2018 reported that 64% of the students affirmed that their 4. teachers hold them to rigorous expectations as compared to 63% in 2016-2017. Increasing the Global History Regents passing rate is one of the top priorities for the school. During the 2016-2017 school year, the percentage of students passing the Global History regents increased to 38% from 27%. (SSR, 2018). 5. The percentage of ELL students passing the Global History Regents examination increased from 12% in 2015-2017 to 29% in 2016-2017 (NYSED School Report Card). 2018-19 SCEP-FL 15  Areas of Weaknesses  While there was an increase of 9% of students who passed the regents in 2016-2017 as compared in 2015-2016, of the 5 major Regents examinations, the Global History regents has had the lowest passing percentage.  The percentage of students passing US History regents decreased to 54% from 60%, and the percentage of ELL students passing US History regents in 2016-2017 decreased to 13% from 57% in 2015-2016. (SSR, 2018)  Based from the item analysis conducted by teachers, the weakness of the students is in the area of writing. The weakness in the writing component includes the following: (a) Acquiring and maintaining subject area content, (b) understanding the stem of multiple choice questions and (c)he conceptual understanding needed for writing the essay.. Item analysis conducted by the Social Studies department from various Regents examination results revealed that the students specific areas of needs included but not limited to the following: the ability to build content vocabulary, on how to summarize information read, and understanding how to reach, unpack and answer multiple choice questions using effective test taking strategies.  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. As a result of teacher inquiry work, by June 2019, the percentage of students passing the Global and US History Regents will increase by at 5% (from 38% to 40% on the Global and from 54% to 57% on the US)... 2018-19 SCEP-FL 16  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Intentional literacy skill acquisitions to targeted subgroups (e.g. Language acquisition literacy skills to improve reading comprehension skills for ELLs, specific literacy strategies to address reading and vocabulary deficiency of SWDs). (e.g. use of sentence frames or sentence starters for ELLs and also to SWDs). Literacy strategies implemented should be clearly explained to the target audience. Annotations will be used to build content knowledge by having ALL students including ELLs and SWDs cite and extract content knowledge from the text. Students will interpret important primary source documents.. The use of a uniform annotation strategy to ALL content area to address content specific demands of the curriculum will be implemented. Expanding the use of Frayer model to farther increase vocabulary and conceptual understanding of different themes and topics in Global and U.S. History to using it as a graphic organizer to develop well meaningful essays in ALL content areas and more specifically use it to answer thematic and document based essays. Teachers will improve consistency in the use of data analysis to drive instruction. Teachers conduct an item analysis of the January and June 2018 Regents exam and use results to write unit and lesson plans based on identified strengths and weaknesses of CCLS content skills and standards. This is done trough the teacher team's inquiry work. Strengthen the use of Summative assessments (Thematic and/or DBQ Global and US History regents essay) at the end of each marking period. Teachers track progress of students and results of this summative assessments of the identified focus group and results will be used for department's collaborative inquiry research. A deeper data analysis will include but not limited to looking at student’s work during the departmental PLC meetings. Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) All Students with emphasis on ELLs and SWDs All Students with emphasis on ELLs and SWDs All Students September 2018 - June 2019 Assistant Principal / PCT Asst. Principal September 2018 - June 2019 September 2018 - June 2019 Team Leaders and Asst. Principal Teachers September 2018 - June 2019 Asst. Principal/ Data S Teachers and students September 2018 - June 2019 Asst. Principal, Team Leaders, Data Specialist History Department will do simulated Global and US History Regents at the end of the First and Second semester of 2018-2019. Results of the First Semester simulated Regents Examination will be used to adjust curriculum and unit plans and design review materials for the Students who are taking the Regents exam in January 2019 - June 2019 Team Leader, Asst. Principal 2018-19 SCEP-FL 17  June 2019 Regents examination. The implementation of an integrated system of assessment through various checking for understand strategies that will enhance teaching and students understanding will be visible in all classes. More specifically, a unified rubric to score all summative assessments/essays (end of marking period assessments and simulated Regents Examinations) Create a Professional Development plan through the School Development Committee (SDC) that will address areas of improvement based on the teachers ADVANCE rating for 2017-2018, their needs and around instructional focus more specifically helping teachers gain an in-depth understanding of how to generate high levels of students’ attention and engagement. Offer academic intervention services such as lunch and learn, after school Regents Prep classes. Part of the program is to teach students explicit instructions for written response on Regents Examinations. January 2019 and June 2019 Teachers September 2018 - June 2019 SDC Chair, Asst. Principal, Team Leader Asst. Principal / After School Coordinator/ Guidance Counselor Students who are taking the January and June 2019 Regents November 2018 - January 2019 April 2019 - June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight.  Parents will be informed of their children’s progress through Skedula. – September to June 2019.  Team meetings newsletter highlighting sample students’ work will be sent at least once every semester (Fall Term and Spring Term)  Design and implement Parent Engagement activities to all parents of ELL students through Parent Engagement (October 2018 March 2019). This include celebration of students' culture of the students country of origin through cultural night/ day to deepen their understanding of what is learned inside the classroom. Grade teams are responsible for its implementation. Identify one grade team leader that will be required to attend an SLT team meeting to update the team with the academic status of the school. Share results of the data analysis to parents during the Parent Night..   Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. Assistant Principal as Overall Chair. Assistant Principal or Overall Grade Team Coordinator will provide team leaders with specific weekly agenda for team meetings. 2. SDC Chair take an active role in the supervision of the creation of the Professional Development Program. The SDC team will also maintain records of professional development offered and conducts survey of the same. Monthly meeting of the SDC team 3. Weekly Tuesday PD meetings (1 hour and 5 minutes a week). 4. Grade Team leaders keep record of the meetings at least once a week. 5. Support from the Data Specialist for data analysis. 6. Coverage for teachers who will attend PD outside the school and turn key information to school staff. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 18  7. Special schedule for simulated Regents exam. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal.  Thematic and/or DBQ essay assessments will be given by the History Department during the last marking period of the Fall Semester (January 2019) and one in the Spring Semester (April 2019). Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. School wide grading rubric will be used to enforce uniformity of standards.  Regents based baseline assessment should be given to all students by September 2018.   End of Unit assessments must indicate a 10% increase as compared to baseline assessment results.  Danielson Rubric for teacher evaluation (specifically component 3B)  Thematic and DBQ essays will be graded using the Regents rubric and a 10% increase of students' scores in April 2018 from the Fall semester (January 2018) benchmark will indicate adequate progress towards the annual goal. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 19  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. x x x x SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Strengths of the School 1. One area of celebration for the school is the Youth Development (YD) initiatives. In response to the result of the school based survey, more youth development initiatives are being implemented, resulting in an increase of the percentage of students’ positive response in personal attention and support from 47% in 2016-2017 to 53% in 2017-2018. The positive impact of the YD initiatives is captured by the Deputy Superintendent’s Fall 2017 semester visit. The Deputy Superintendents stated “there is a celebratory and supportive environment (as evidenced in both the classrooms and the hallways) where students are well-known and where their voice is welcomed and valued. Student leadership opportunities include student council, the Ambassador program, the “See Something, Say Something (anti-bullying) initiative, and the Principal’s Listening Tour.” These initiatives allowed WAE to build a positive community where all students feel included and heard (SSR, 2018). 2018-19 SCEP-FL 20  2. More than 3 quarters of the students surveyed during the 2018 school survey indicated a positive response when asked about their safety in traveling between home and school (76%) and their safety inside the classrooms (78%) 3. The school has a functional student body that provides students with school-based youth development programs. 4. Students are offered Leadership classes 5 times a day to develop the students’ social, emotional and personality components Needs of the School Data The priority of the school for 2018-2019 is to increase the percentage of positive responses by the students for classroom behavior and academic support by at least 5%. According to the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide, (only) 48% of the students population surveyed (236 students) affirmed positive classroom behavior of their fellow students. The 2017-2018 percentage is consistent with the 2016-2017 percentage. In addition, 56% positively confirmed that peer support for academic work is evident in the classroom; this is a decrease of 1% as compared to the 2015-2016 school survey. The 2015-2016 School Quality Snapshot revealed that the credit accumulation metrics of the 9th and 10th grade were also below the district targets. The belief is that there is a correlation between positive classroom behavior and peer support for academic work, with the students credit accumulation metrics (those earning 10 credits or more); and that a higher score will result in an increase in credit accumulation (SSR, 2018). Providing students with the social and emotional assistance they need, addressed one of the areas identified by the student survey, in terms of student behavior being a concern in student achievement.(SSR, 2018). Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools –Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. As a result of strategic programming in order to provide additional supports for students, by June 2019, the percentage of students earning 10+ credits will increase by 5% (9th grade from 47% to 51%; 10th grade from 64% to 68%; 11th grade from 72% to 75%). 2018-19 SCEP-FL 21  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  • Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, community and family outreach, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Provide PD to all staff on identifying needs, intervention strategies that will address social-emotional developmental needs of students through the Office of the NYC Department of Health and Mental Hygiene. Teachers Students Continue to address students' needs in the area of social emotional health, and using the data obtained through the leadership classes to improve the Leadership program implemented during the current school year. Leadership Teachers Students To implement more youth development activities and empowerment programs for the students such as the Girls Who Code Club, and the College Our WAE club in addition to existing clubs. Expand WAE days to include curriculum/ activities for those students who are excluded (e.g. workshop for consequences, etc) Students September 2018 - June 2019 September 2018 - June 2019 School Development Committee Chair Asst. Principal, PCT YD College Access for All Coordinator September 2018 - June 2019 Guidance Counselor YD Grade Team leaders Identify students who have the highest social-emotional needs and assign a teacher advisor through the Grade Team initiative and if necessary refer to the newly implemented Mental Health office that will be a part of the Montefiore School Based Clinic. Students September 2018 - June 2019 Guidance Counselor Grade Team Leaders Assign advisors (12th grade teachers) to the seniors to assist them with constructing meaningful educational plans and to assist with the preparation for the college transition. This initiative would be a support to seniors in helping them to become self-reliant, motivated, and responsible decision-maker, and to complete the academic requirements necessary to graduate on time. Graduating Seniors or Graduating Juniors September 2018 - June 2019 College Access for All Initiatives will convene during the summer to plan and create course outline using the Overcoming Obstacles curriculum to be provided to all leadership teachers. Conduct evaluative observations in the leadership classes. Leadership teachers Students August 2018 - September 2019 Asst. Principal Guidance Counselors Grade Team Leaders Senior Parent Liaison Asst. Principal College for All Coordinator Guidance Counselor YD Asst. Principal 2018-19 SCEP-FL 22  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Identify a 12th grade Parent Liaison that will collaborate with Senior Teachers i(September 2018 to June 2019)   Phone conferences through the weekly parent engagement.  Student Government Newsletter will be sent home to each family (0ne for the first Semester and one for the Spring Semester) Invite parents to come during student presentations/ activities.   Require parents to come for a student-teacher-parent conference to discuss intervention plans. (on need basis) Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Teachers will have regular time for parent outreach on Mondays as per the new UFT contract.  Grade team meeting will be provided for teachers to discuss and agree on the behavior intervention plan for students identified as "at-risk".  Meeting with all leadership teachers for at least once a week to create uniformity and accountable.  Meeting with leadership teachers by grades to create monthly BBC for leadership classes.  Copies of the Overcoming Obstacles curriculum to be distributed to all Leadership Teachers. This will be under the close monitoring of the Assistant Principal.  Weekly Meeting of Student Government  Minutes of meeting of the Student Government, Leadership Classes and Leadership Teachers.  Student Government survey assessment. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal.  Youth Development will collaborate with School Development Committee (SDC) to administer student satisfaction survey in October 2018. There will be two mid-point benchmarks that will indicate school progress towards meeting our school. These include the January 2019 student government survey and the credit accumulation metrics of the Fall Semester 2018-2019. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 23  Student Satisfaction survey will be the instrument to be used to assess progress. The items included in the Student Satisfaction Survey will be based from the NYC School survey in supportive environment. The percentage of students' positive responses on the initial survey administered in October 2017 will be analyzed and compared with the mid-year survey conducted in January 2018. An increase of at least 5% will indicate adequate progress towards the goal. A final Student Satisfaction Survey will be conducted in May 2018 to determine overall progress towards meeting the annual goal. The second instrument that will be used to assess progress is the students' individual report card. The data specialist will determine the percentage of students who will earn 5 credits or more (5 credits or more because the data is just for the first semester.. The result will be analyzed and compared wit the percentage of students earning 10 credits or more for school year 2017-2018. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 24  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. SOP(s) Addressed x x x 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. x 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Data for the School's Strengths * According to the Quality Review report, Teacher Teams and Leadership Development is an area of celebration for the school and has been rated proficient for the past three Quality Reviews. This also indicates room for growth. According to the Quality Review, it reported that teacher teams reinforce instructional practices that result in improved pedagogy and progress toward goals for students.  Teachers are required to complete a needs assessment for Professional Development each year through a school-based PD survey. The plan is compiled by the SDC (Staff Development Committee). Teachers, through their Department PLC, conduct use the inquiry process to determine the impact of researched based strategies that will improve instruction and impact student achievement. Teachers in different areas of discipline have used various literacy strategies addressing the growing demand of not just ELLs and SWDs but all other students. For example, the 9th and 10th grade teachers who has the most number of new ELL students are using sentence starters, sentence frames and other vocabulary strategies. The 11th grade team teachers found through an inquiry process that the 4A literacy protocol is effective in improving both the writing and speaking skills of the 11th grade students. All these strategies were introduced and discussed in details during the school based PD through the collaboration of the BFSC team. This is evident in the high percentage of teachers (96%) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 25  who answered positively that the professional development experiences for 2017-2018 have been sustained and coherently focused. This is an increase of 13% as compared from the 2015-2017 school survey.  According to the 2017-2018 School Survey 92% of the teachers stated that curriculum, instruction, and learning materials are well coordinated across different grade levels in WAE (School Quality Guide , 2017-2018). Data for the School's Needs: The Statewide results on the National Assessment of Educational Progress (NAEP) 2014-2015), only 27% of the students of the students are proficient and 9% are advanced in reading; while 30% are proficient and 9 percent are advance in Math. For the 2016-2017 school year, the school met the New York State Annual Yearly Performance (AYP) for All Accountability Groups in English and Mathematics. However, according to Regents results in English, Algebra 1, Living Environment, US History and Global, there is a need to give the utmost priority to improve literacy through the collaborative process (vertical and horizontal alignment) of the grade and department teams. The goal is to improve student literacy skills in reading, writing and speaking, so that it will improve their Regents Scores across the content areas and subsequently improve the school’s graduation rate. (SSR, 2018). The priority for 2018-19 is to improve the graduation rate for all students. For the 2017-2018 school year, the School Quality Guide reported an overall score of 3.47 as compared to 3.28 for 2015-2016 school. This is an increase of .19 points. However, the NYSED school report card indicated that the school did not meet AYP for graduation across all accountability groups. Hence, it will be one of the priorities for the school to provide professional development sessions that will assist with building overall capacity within the school in addressing the needs of those students who are “at risk”in a timely fashion. (SSR, 2018). The various data shows that more than 70% of our students enter the school performing at level 1 and 2 in the ELA eighth grade standardized assessment. Since many of our students have low literacy levels, this is impacting their performance in content area classes. The needs of the school are most evident in the area of literacy. The belief, across the content areas, is that when the literacy levels of the scholars are target and improved to proficiency levels, they excel. Therefore, the instructional focus of the school is that “Students will develop the literacy skills necessary to develop communication and collaborative skills that support college and career readiness through the use of research, textual evidence, discussion, writing and productive struggle”. This is aligned with the feedback from the Superintendent’s Fall 2017 visit. The recommendation was “for teachers to focus on increasing accountability for active engagement from all students that will increase student independence to support productive struggle in the classroom. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. As a result of teacher inquiry, with ENL students as the target population, by June 2019, the increase in the proficiency skills in reading, writing, speaking and listening of the students will lead to a 10% increase (from 39 % to 43%) in the passing rate on the ELA Regents examination. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 26  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Uniform annotation system in the department for fiction and non-fiction text. In addition a uniform annotation system will also be established for non-language classes. SWDs, bottom third of the school and ELLs. September 2018 - June 2019 TEam Leaders PCT Students will use textual evidence to respond to journals, on-demand writing exercises and Regents essays. Students Monthly unit plans will include literacy strategies that best suits the need of the different subgroups. Teachers Cross curricular performance tasks that align the annotation strategy with /Literacy Instructional Shift 2: Reading and writing grounded in evidence from text Use the Work Cycle Protocol in Department Team's Inquiry Cycle (PLC) to research the effectiveness of another research based collaborative teaching strategy or literacy strategy that can be added to the existing school-wide literacy strategies - the Annotation and the Frayer Model. Determine effectiveness of various literacy strategies that were investigated in school year 2017-2018 (e.g. 4A Protocol, sentence starters, etc). Language Teachers will continue to utilize the Collections Curriculum for grades 9-11. Professional development to support the implementation will be provided to new incoming teachers. Require all teachers who will attend outside professional development to turnkey training to all staff especially on areas that will address the literacy needs of all ELL populations. Analyze identified assessment to determine the impact of instruction and effectiveness by looking at student data through the use of various forms of formative and summative assessments; and to reflect on those results to create actionable and measurable next steps. A unified scoring rubric designed and implemented across the departments to determine the impact of strategies used will be one Students Teacher Teams Students Teachers Teachers/ ESL teachers Asst. Principal English Department Team Leader Asst. Principal Team Leaders Asst. Principal Team leaders Asst. Principal PCT Data Specialist Asst. Principal September 2018 - June 2019 September 2018 - June 2019 September 2018 - June 2019 September 2018 - June 2019 September 2018 - June 2019 September 2018 - June 2019 SDC AP Teachers/ Students September 2018 - June 2019 Data Specialist PCT 2018-19 SCEP-FL 27  of the priorities of the Grade team Professional learning communities Conduct observations that focus on areas of 3.b (questioning and discussion techniques) and 3.c (engaging students in learning) and provide teachers with one-on-one feedback from peers, as well as admin, to support improvement in those areas. Teachers To increase the number of classroom inter-visitation opportunities, and emphasize the use of the “learning walk” protocol implemented. Teacher Teams To be more intentional with the use of informal classroom observations, such that they are with greater intention to inform the professional development offered to greater support teachers in improving instructional practices, which would lead to high levels of student achievement. Teachers Increase accountability of all teacher especially to all team leaders in making sure that teacher team is effectively used to increase commitment to lesson preparation, feedback, data analysis and practice. Teachers September 2018 - June 2019 September 2018 - June 2019 September 2018 - June 2019 Team Leaders School Administrators Team Leaders PCT School Administrators PCT September 2018 - June 2019 Data Specialist Asst. Principal 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Student's progress report will be sent two weeks before the end of every marking period. Translated versions of the progress report will be sent to parents who are non English speakers using their own native language. This is one of the major functions of the Data Specialist and that the parent coordinator is the person directly responsible for the mailing of the reports. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Coverage for teachers during learning walk/ inter-visitation  Grade team meeting one period per week  Department Team meeting one period per week (for Inquiry Research and Work Cycle Protocol)  Collaborative Meeting with Special Ed and General Ed teachers one period per week  One Tuesday for PD of the Work Cycle Protocol  Monthly meeting of the Department team leaders Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring 2018-19 SCEP-FL 28  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal.  An argumentative essay assessment will be administered by the 10th, 11th, and 12th grade ELA teachers by January 2019 to determine progress.  To regularly track and monitor progress, a writing summative assessment will be administered to ALL students at the end of every marking period. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The argumentative essay assessment will be graded using the ELA State rubric and an increase of at least 20% increase of students' scores from the baseline assessment in September 2017 will show adequate progress towards the goal. Pre and post Unit Assessments will be conducted regularly at the end of each unit. Simulated Regents Examination of the ELA Department May 2019 to those students who are taking the June 2019 Regents Examination. Data from MyOn and MyAccess will also be analyzed to determine and track progress.. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 29  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). x x x x SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths  According to the 2017-2018 School Survey, school survey measures such as iinstructional leadership program coherence and teacher influence were at least 5 percent higher than the borough and city average in tems of positive response rate.  The overall score on the framework of Effective leadership increase to 3.47 in 2017-2018 from 3.28 in 2016-2017 as te result of the school survey.  Quality Review reported that "school leadership employs teacher experience and expertise to make informed decisions regarding assignments" (QR Report, October 2016). The Need  The same QR reported that "teacher teams and staff communicate high expectations for all students; however, it is not consistently reflected in documents or articulated", and that "there is little evidence of a system of 2018-19 SCEP-FL 30  accountability for these expectations (QR Indicator 3.4 - High Expectations). In addition, there is no follow up when professional development is conducted to hold teachers accountable." (QR Report, October, 2016). Low number of instructional walkthroughs being conducted for school year 2016-2017 (Quality Review Report, Oct 2016).   The 2017-2018 school survey reported that the percentage of positive response on inclusive leadership is less than the borough and city average by at least 8 percent.  Although the school has experienced some success in this area along inclusive leadership, the success could be greater if not for the loss of staff and the need to compensate for the loss. The impact of the loss of staff has prevented offering the staff greater opportunities for outside professional development. It has also limited the ability to develop the capacity of teacher leaders and promoting the school outside of the classroom (SSR, 2018).  During the school year 2017-2018, there was a very limited number of students who are assigned to one teacher advisor who can provide them close monitoring with their social-emotional and academic needs.  Although the school's graduation rate increase by 10%, the school did not meet the NYS AYP in terms of graduation metric for 2016-2017. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART– Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. As a result of the implementation of a comprehensive Regents preparation program, by June 2019, the 4-year graduation rate will increase by 7% points increase (from 60% to 67%). 2018-19 SCEP-FL 31  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). 100% of the students who are academically "at risk" will be assigned to at least one teacher ad visor. All teachers will be provided with with a formal professional development and training on how to address social, emotional health development of the students in addition to addressing the academic needs of the students (SSR, 2018). Department teams meet during the Summer of 2018 to conduct item analysis of the Regents examination results and implement curriculum changes. Teachers Students who are "at risk" based on their academic performance Teachers Conduct item analysis for the past 3 years and design Regents review materials to support Regents prep classes (after school, lunch and learn, or Saturday school) Students Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) September 2018 - June 2019 Asst. Principal Guidance Counselor Team Leaders August 2018 - June 2019 Asst. Principal September 2018 - June 2019 Team Leaders PCT Asst Principal Scholarship meetings will be conducted to discuss students academic performance and create individual student action plans through Grade team meetings that shows action steps of students highest priority needs. Teachers, Students and Parents September 2018 - June 2019 Implement a systematic tracking system to improve system of accountability for all staff and require Team leaders to submit monthly reports of team meetings/ student conference, etc. Principal meets with her AP and department team leaders to review teacher performance based on classroom observations, identify growth and weaknesses based on the Danielson Framework. Review school goals regularly with the instructional cabinet and request feedback. Use result of feedback to identify areas of focus for the learning walk and upcoming professional development Teachers Teachers September 2018 - June 2019 September 2018 - June 2019 Department Team Leaders Guidance counselors Team Leaders Data Specialist Asst. Principal Team Leaders Asst Principal Data Specialist PCT Conduct individual staff conferences at least three times a year: Beginning of Year (BOY) , Mid-Year Conference and End of Year (EOY) Conference to discuss and track data driven SMART Goals. Teachers September 2018 - June 2019 School Administrators 2018-19 SCEP-FL 32  Identify students who have the highest social-emotional needs and assign a teacher advisor through the Grade Team initiative and if necessary refer to the newly implemented Mental Health office that will be a part of the Montefiore School Based Clinic/ appropriate staff to meet urgent needs of the students (academic such as regents prep, social, emotional, etc). Students September 2018 - June 2019 Grade Team Leaders Create intensive Regents intervention program to graduating seniors and current juniors who are behind any Regents examination requirements by placing them in a Regents bound classes and offering after school Regents prep classes as early as November, 2018. Seniors and Juniors who are "at risk" of graduating on time September 2018 - June 2019 Assistant Principal Guidance Counselors Department Team leaders 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight.  A Monthly Parent Newsletter will be sent to parents.  Discuss school goals and vision during SLT meetings. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Circular 6 for Common planning and grade/ department team meetings.  Coverage for teachers during the inter-visitation or learning walks/ for team leaders' meeting with the principal. Each team will be conducting at least two learning walks for each semester. Learning walks will be designed so that only one teacher will need a coverage for each team conducting the learning walk. There are four teams in each PLC (Grade and Department). This means:  4 (teams) x 4 (learning walks for both first and second semester) x 1 (# of teacher who needs coverage per team doing learning walk) = 16 coverage for the whole year.  To support the workshop Model, teachers are creating interactive lessons and need the following technology: o At least one laptop in every classroom o One Smart Board or Promethean Board in each classroom o Laptop carts (with 30 laptops inside) for each department described as follows: * Each Math classroom will have one laptop cart with 30 laptops each cart; * Language Department will have two laptop carts * Science Department will have one laptop car * Social Studies Department will have two laptop carts  There are 80 licenses for Read 180 program to supplement the non-fiction literature  One instructional consultant is hired to report to school two times a week. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 33  X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal.  Progress of students who are identified to be at risk based on their individual action plan will be he benchmark to determine progress of this goal. The Assistant Principal will closely monitor progress of students by looking at the students' individual action plan and reports from each identified teacher advisor. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress.  Percentage of students earning 5 credits or more at the end of January 2019 should be 50% compliance of the school target for 2017-2018 (school target for this year is not available in the School Quality Guide website)  Team leaders will submit agenda, minutes of meeting and data collected during team meetings weekly to the data specialist for monitoring of progress.  Data tracker of students credit metrics in green, yellow, and red will be monitored every end of marking period. Students progress report and grade team monthly report to determine impact of initiative. Learning walk protocol template.  Weekly update of teachers in Skedula should be at 100% compliance rate.    Teacher evaluation report from Danielson  Midyear teacher conference results. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 34  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. x x x x SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths of the School 1. The percentage of parents who participated in the school survey in 2017-2018 increased to 65% from 60% in 2016-2017. 2. Strong family-community ties scored higher for 2017-2018( 1.82) as compared to 2016-2017 (1.19). 3. Percentage of positive response in outreach to parents increased to 83% in 2017-2018 from 75% in 2016-2017, while parent involvement increased to 71% during 2017-2018 from 57% in 2016-2017. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 35  One of the schools strength is 74% of parents feel that the principal works to create a sense of community in the school. Parents response rate in 2016-2017 school survey is 55% compared to 38% in 2015-2016. Needs of the School. The school received a “Developing” rating from the 2015-2016 Quality Review in “culture of learning that communicates and supports high expectations” based on the lack of parent engagement. The 2017-2018 school year, survey results yield an increase in the percentage of parents who responded positively on the various outreach initiatives of the school community; it increased to 83% from 75% in 2016-2017. Parent involvement at the school is positively confirmed by 71% of the parents (2017-2018 school year) as compared to 57% of the parents who completed the survey in 2016-2017. It is therefore one of the priorities of the school for the 2018-19 school year that 100% of the teaching and non-teaching staff will be consistent and held accountable in conducting parental engagement through the use of the various media communications available (Pupilpath, Kinvolved, G-suite, mails, calls, and the interactive school website). (SSR, 2018).. The needs of the school is to increase parent involvement to support the academic needs of the students. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the school will offer an increased number of opportunities for parents to participate in school activities, resulting in a 10% increase (from 60% to 66%) in parent response rates on the NYC School Survey. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 36  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Parent Academy/Grade Team All parents Sept 2018 through June 2019 Parent Coordinator, and Grade Team Leaders. Parents are called during Parent Engagement time to address attendance and the impact on student’s academic achievement. These parents are in turn are invited to meet with the teachers and other pertinent staff on the next parent engagement date to address the issues and thereby, staff can determine what support can be offered to assist students. Parent will be invited be part of the Parent Grade Team. Each grade will have a parent grade representative that will attend grade team meeting with teachers. This parent grade team representative will be the liaison for the SLT. Grade teams should plan at least one parent engagement activity per semester (e.g. showcasing student’s best work, or parent engagement workshops tailored to specific needs of an identified parent group). Professional Development for Parents All parents We will be offering parent workshops to increase parent involvement in the school. Workshops that we will be offering will be parenting class, college and career readiness courses for senior parents, parent orientation for 9th grade, workshops on academic policy, ESL courses for parents, Pupil Path training. Coordinate with the Office of Family Engagement and ENL office to schedule professional development for family and staff. Coordinate with NYC Department of Health and Mental Hygiene to schedule workshops for parents to equip them on how to cope with their child’s social-emotional issues. Social Events for Parents Parent Coordinator and Grade Team Leaders, and all Teachers. Planning: Summer 2018 Sept 2018- June 2019 All parents Sept 2017 - June 2018 Parent Coordinator, Parent Association, Parent Grade Team 2018-19 SCEP-FL 37  Events will be organized so parents can get to know other parents in the school and to encourage parents to identify the school as a resource. Provide at least one fun after school activity designed for parents and families (e.g. ice cream socials, multi-cultural night/presentations, etc. All parent outreach should be documented through the SKEDULA’s anecdotal logs on a weekly basis and closely monitored by SKEDULA Administrator. Teachers Require Parent Coordinator, in coordination with the SLT, to design a comprehensive Parent Professional Development Plan based on the results of the parent interest survey. Develop a PC committee to be a greater support to parents. Parents Provide translator (at least one language) during parent engagement activities, or as the need arise. Parents and students September 2018 - June 2019 September 2018 - June 2019 September 2018- September 2019 Skedula Administrator Asst. Principal Parent Coordinator SLT Data Specialist Parent Coordinator Grade Team leaders 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. The NY Coalition of One Hundred Black Women, The Agency for Children Services North Bronx Office, L'Oreal. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Resources that will be put in place will include incentives and acknowledgement of the parents who attend and are active participants in meetings. The parent coordinator and the Parent Grade Team will take the lead in inviting parents, by making phone calls or sending invitations to parent events and parent association meeting /SLT meetings. This initiative will include the following resources: one laptop for each teacher to record parent call through Skedula; phones to make phone calls.  Art crafts for student made parent invites and letters to encourage parents to come during parent teacher night.  One team leader for each grade team to monitor progress of phone conferences and grade team initiative - a total of 4 grade team leaders.  Budget for food and materials that are needed for meetings.  Design and implement Parent Engagement activities to all parents of ELL students through Parent Engagement afternoon every Monday (October 2017, March 2018). Grade teams are responsible for its implementation. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA P/F Set-aside 21st Century C4E 2018-19 SCEP-FL 38  Title I 1003(a) Title III PTA Funded SIG Grant School Achievement Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. One hundred percent of identified students who are "at risk" should be reached out by teachers by January 2018 by for no less than two times. One hundred percent of the teachers must have updated Skedula on a weekly basis. Progress reports that includes translated version of the parents home language must be sent every six weeks and that by the end of January 2019, there must be 3 progress reports sent to parents. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Attendance will be taken at every meeting and will be cross reference with the previous months attendance whereby we can determine an increase or decrease in attendance. Agenda and minutes of meeting of grade team parent engagement. Anecdotal logs available at Skedula. Data of parent outreach (Kinvolved messages, phone call logs, emails and etc). Survey will be given at the end of every activity to measure success. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 39  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Progress Reports Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Regents Preparation Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small Group Instruction Thursday-Friday5th Period Academic Support Sessions Tutoring Transcripts Attendance Transcripts Attendance Transcripts Attendance Transcripts Attendance l Mathematics Progress Reports Regents Preparation Academic Support Sessions Tutoring Science Progress Reports Regents Preparation Academic Support Sessions Tutoring Social Studies Progress Reports Regents Preparation Academic Support Sessions Tutoring Large Group Instruction Small Group Instruction Large Group Instruction Small Group Instruction Large Group Instruction Small Group Instruction Large Group Instruction Small Group Thursday-Friday5th Period Thursday-Friday5th Period Thursday-Friday5th Period During School Day At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, Progress Reports Transcripts Mandated Counseling One-to-One Tuesday Afternoon 2018-19 SCEP-FL 40 School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Attendance Parent Conferences Leadership Classes Thursday Afternoon College Planning Support 2018-19 SCEP-FL 41  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 26 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. STH Population will be provided with uniform assistance and access to basic school supplies. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 42  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 43  Section 8: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified.  Teacher candidates are required to do a demo lesson where they are evaluated by teachers and students.  The Staff Development Committee was created to provide professional development based on content and/or teaching qualifications as well as areas that have collaboratively identified as in need of improvement.  Teachers will do Learning Walks and teacher-to-teacher mentoring to observe other staff to learn best practices and provide constructive peer feedback. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). To help students meet the Common Core State Standards, the teachers meet in their grade/department team meetings on a weekly basis to discuss best practices on how to implement the CCSS. The staff meets collectively on Tuesdays to engage in professional development on varies topics such as Common Core State Standards, Topics offered on Tuesday's PD are based on the PD need Assessment survey conducted by the SDC at the start of the school year. MOSL, curriculum development, instructional expectations, as well as student engagement to ensure that all staff members are following the same model. All staff will also have the opportunity to engage in professional development and workshops provided by the BFSC. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. na 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program 2018-19 SCEP-FL 44  Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). na Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). na 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Professional Development Survey SLT meetings Staff Development Committee and UFT council meeting. Department and Grade Team meeting 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (SCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) X Column B Section Reference(s) 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E Title I Part A (Basic) Federal 259,587 2018-19 SCEP-FL 45 Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 0 42,867 0 12,366 0 2,203,950 X X X X X X N/A 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E N/A 5A, 5C N/A 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/SCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 46   Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 47  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Title I Parent Involvement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in our school. Therefore the Women’s Academy of Excellence, (HS 08x282), in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implement a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between our school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Advisory Council, as trained volunteers and welcomed members of our school community. The Women’s Academy of Excellence will support parents and families of Title I students by: 1. providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level (e.g., literacy, math and use of technology); 2. providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; 3. fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effective support and monitor their child’s progress; 4. providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 48  5. sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 6. providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of our school community; 7. To provide workshops based on parent needs and interests to enhance their professional, personal lives and to assist them in that goal for their children; The Women’s Academy of Excellence Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. Our school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of the parent involvement policy with Title I parent to improve the academic quality of our school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Women’s Academy of Excellence Title Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association, as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, are consulted on proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. In order to increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the Women’s Academy of Excellence will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the Comprehensive Education Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated to schools to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parent skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in our Parent Involvement Policy and the School-parent compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association and Title I Parent Advisory Council. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend our school and will work to ensure that our school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the Central Office for Family Engagement and Advocacy (OFEA); ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include; parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to assist their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system (e.g. ESSA/State Accountability System, student proficiency levels, Annual State School Report Card, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report;) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 49  ● host the required Title I Parent Annual Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings (e.g. quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s education program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; and ● conduct and Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student’s academic skill needs and what parents can do to help. The Women’s Academy of Excellence (08x282) will further encourage school-level parent involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Open School Week and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Advisory Council; ● supporting or hosting OFEA District Family Day events ● establishing a Parent Resource Center or lending library, instructional materials for parents. ● hosting events to support men asserting leadership in education for their children, parents/guardians, grandparents and foster parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; and ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students In order to increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the Women’s Academy of Excellence will: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 50  ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the Comprehensive Education Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated to schools to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parent skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in our Parent Involvement Policy and the School-parent compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association and Title I Parent Advisory Council. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend our school and will work to ensure that our school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the Central Office for Family Engagement and Advocacy (OFEA); ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include; parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to assist their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system (e.g. ESSA/State Accountability System, student proficiency levels, Annual State School Report Card, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report;) ● host the required Title I Parent Annual Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings (e.g. quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s education program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; and ● conduct and Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student’s academic skill needs and what parents can do to help. In order to increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the Women’s Academy of Excellence will: Parental Involvement and School Quality 2018-19 SCEP-FL 51  ● increase parental engagement by creating a Grade Team institute that is composed of a President, Vice President, and Secretary. This Grade team Parent Institution will become the liaison for all parents in each grade team and will represent or bring the voice of their students and other parents to the Parent Association or School Leadership Team. ● Increase teacher involvement of the Parent Association activities by engaging team leaders series of brainstorming or meetings to plan out parent engagement activities that will encourage parents to attend Parent Night, teacher conferences, etc. The school Data Specialist will be tasked to monitor progress of any team meeting initiatives. ● Conduct regular meetings (at least once a month) with the Grade team Parent Institute to address areas of concerns among parents and students. ● Conduct parent need survey to understand their perspective on parent involvement, get their opinion on how they want to be involved and how the parents and the teachers can work together to increase student's academic performance.  Invite parent for a Data Workshop (Regents Examination, Quality Review Report, Learning Survey Reports, credit accumulation, Baseline, formative and summative assessments) to increase their awareness on how their children progresses and likewise brainstorm strategies on how they can increase partnership with the school on increasing their student's academic progress.  Establish effective way of communicating to parents (school-to-home and home-to-school) by regularly sending progress reports to reports every 6 weeks after the start of the marking period, providing all parents and students access to pupilpath to monitor their own academic progress, clearly communicating school policies to all families in their home language, monitoring parent engagement time Mondays, providing parents with copies of the course syllabus and school-wide grading policy. Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The Women’s Academy of Excellence (08x282) will further encourage school-level parent involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Open School Week and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Advisory Council; ● supporting or hosting OFEA District Family Day events ● establishing a Parent Resource Center or lending library, instructional materials for parents. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 52  ● hosting events to support men asserting leadership in education for their children, parents/guardians, grandparents and foster parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; and ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. Section II: School-Parent Compact School-Parent Compact (SPC) The Women’s Academy of Excellence (08x282), in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and families. The Women’s Academy of Excellence (08x282) staff and the parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards and Assessments. School Responsibilities: Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences ● implementing a curriculum aligned to State Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; and ● providing instruction by high qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 53  ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● conducting quarterly parent-teacher conferences of at risk students after the distribution of report cards during which the individual child’s progress is discussed along with any interventions that may be necessary to aid the child attaining promotion to the next grade; ● convening a Title I Parent Annual meeting (prior to December 1 st of each school year) for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times (e.g., morning, evening) and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation, child care or home visits for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and to improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● providing parents with information regarding events up to the information to parents/guardians via school messenger telephone system; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide Parents reasonable access to staff by: ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretations services in order to communicate with limited English speaking parents effectively; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year (e.g. Open School Week); Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming, respectful environment for parents and guardians; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 54  ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● sharing and communication best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; and ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitoring my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensuring that my child is consistent in wearing the proper uniform and communicate with school officials if there is difficulty in obtaining the uniform; ● ensuring that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and her age; ● checking and assisting my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● encouraging my child to read and discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes/day); ● setting limits to the amount of time my child watches television, plays video games or is on the computer (unless it is for an assignment/project); ● promoting positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encouraging my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteering in my child’s school, on field trips, or assist from my home as time permits; ● participating, as appropriate, in the decisions relation to my child’s education. I will also: ● communicate with my child’s teachers about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 55  ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● taking part in the school’s Parent Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups (e.g., school or district Title I Advisory Councils. School or District Leadership Team; and ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Child’s Responsibilities ● attending school regularly, arrive on time and come to school will all required materials (e.g. notebook, pens, pencils, etc ); ● coming to school every day in required school uniform at all times unless permission is given for a school-wide dress down day; ● completing homework and submitting all assignments on time; ● following the school rules and being responsible for behavior; ● showing self-respect, and respect for other people and property; Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences ● implementing a curriculum aligned to State Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; and ● providing instruction by high qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming, respectful environment for parents and guardians; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 56  ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● sharing and communication best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; and ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; Provide Parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretations services in order to communicate with limited English speaking parents effectively; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year (e.g. Open School Week); Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming, respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 57  ● sharing and communication best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; and ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; Parent/Guardian Responsibilities II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitoring my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensuring that my child is consistent in wearing the proper uniform and communicate with school officials if there is difficulty in obtaining the uniform; ● ensuring that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and her age; ● checking and assisting my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● encouraging my child to read and discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes/day); ● setting limits to the amount of time my child watches television, plays video games or is on the computer (unless it is for an assignment/project); ● promoting positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encouraging my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteering in my child’s school, on field trips, or assist from my home as time permits; ● participating, as appropriate, in the decisions relation to my child’s education. I will also: ● communicate with my child’s teachers about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 58  ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● taking part in the school’s Parent Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups (e.g., school or district Title I Advisory Councils. School or District Leadership Team; and ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Child’s Responsibilities III. Student Responsibilities ● attending school regularly, arrive on time and come to school will all required materials (e.g. notebook, pens, pencils, etc ); ● coming to school every day in required school uniform at all times unless permission is given for a school-wide dress down day; ● completing homework and submitting all assignments on time; ● following the school rules and being responsible for behavior; ● showing self-respect, and respect for other people and property; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 59  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): K 6 1 7 2 8 3 9 4 10 5 11 12 2018-19 SCEP-FL 60  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Rationale The increasing demand of students passing Regents examinations and other college readiness initiatives has been a challenge in our school and in other schools across the country. The struggle has been increasingly challenging in preparing students to become competent in all content areas, while at the same time, improving their literacy skills This statement is affirmed by Draper (2002) who believes that, as in science, students cannot be fully prepared in Mathematics unless they are skilled in understanding the text. She also contends that literacy activities can engage students and teachers in conversations around mathematical texts. John and Giorgis (2001) through their investigations stated that reading, in the content areas, motivates students to read. For example, Social Studies classes can focus on areas that interest young students, using informational texts and fictional stories that support the narrative text. The Women's Academy of Excellence believes that our ELLs acquisition of language skills in four different domains (listening, speaking, reading and writing) is a simultaneous and interdependent process when the use of English language is used effectively in various settings (social and academic). It is therefore the priority of the school to provide our ELLs a structure in terms of direct instruction that is intentional in the acquisition of English skills. To achieve this tall order, it is extremely important that ELLs will have multiple opportunities for language acquisition through meaningful use and interaction inside the classroom and also outside the classroom. This therefore means that our school continue to implement research based literacy strategies. allowing teachers to engage all students including ELLs to engage in a more meaningful discourse of learning.. During the 60 minute additional direct instructions teachers will provide instructional time devoted to vocabulary, reading comprehension, and listening comprehension. This will help directly with the development of English language proficiency, and support in understanding content specific vocabulary of different content areas. Subgroups identified: The direct instruction after school direct instruction intervention program will address all ELLs but give priority to the following subgroups: 1) ELLs who are newcomers to the country (0-2 years) 2) SIFE 3) Long term ELLs who have low results on the 2018 NYSESLAT 4) ELL students with disabilities 2018-19 SCEP-FL 61  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Schedule and Duration: 1) After school - 2 days a week: Wednesday and Thursday from 2:55 - 3:55 (Cost to Title III funds) 2) Estimated Start date: October 2018. 3) The program will be about 30 weeks to be funded by Title III funds. 4) Lunch and Learn - 1 period per week (at no cost to Title III funds). Language of instruction: The language to be used during the instruction is English 1 ENL Teacher. The ENL teacher will provide direct instruction to develop students 4 different domains (listening, reading, writing and speaking. The teacher will use MyOn and MyAccess programs to support the reading and writing component of the reading and writing skills. 2 CONTENT AREA TEACHERS. This after school direct instruction program will also include 2 content area teachers (1 teacher each from a course with no ICT teacher in the class. For example, if there is an ENL teacher working with the Global class and Science, then a Math and English content area teacher will be working in the after school direct instruction program). Each content area teacher will provide remedial classes to targeted students who are academically challenged in their classrooms. This include deeper understanding of content specific vocabulary, review of topics so the identified ELL can go back to their classes the next day cleared up with their confusions. Types of Materials Laptops ( no cost to title III) Copies of graphic organizers/ review materials Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Rationale Title III teachers received extensive outside PD. Albeit useful, instructional time was lost. This year PD support will be continued but conducted in-house. In addition, an ELL consultant will be hired to work with ENL teacher and ENL administrator to train teachers on NYSESLAT prep. Teachers receiving training ENL Teacher/ 1 SPED teacher. Schedule and duration PLC- during students' lunch period - once a week for 5 weeks. After school- The PD's will take place on Monday's during the school regular PD from 2:45 - 4:00). The PD will be of no cost to Title III because we have 7 hours of PD remaining with Reading Plus which is including with the program. The SDC will coordinate with BFSC to provide Professional Development on SIOP Model, literacy based strategies . We will also have PD's with our ELL consultant to train on NYSELAT prep. The start date of the PD's is 11/1- 12/12 for about 5 weeks. (this will be of cost to Title III) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 62  Part C: Professional Development Topics to be covered Vocabulary building strategies to low performing ELLs Word Learning strategies MyOn and MyAccess Training Data collection and analysis to monitor progress NYSESLAT training Name of Provider Bronx Field Support Center School Development Committee (SDC) Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Rationale All parents are valued and we know that they play a vital role in their child's academic success. However, parents of ELLs minimally participated in the school-wide activities, information sessions, and parent-teacher conferences. This year we're looking for creative ways to increase engagement, using the activities below to disseminate important information and discuss their child's progress. All parent engagement agendas, attendance sheets, and invitations will be maintained in Title III binder that will be maintained and monitored by ENL teacher and ENL administrator. Schedule and Duration We will have two parent nights, one in November and one in December to encourage participation in after school programs and other school activities. Title III funds will be used to cover per-session and refreshments. Topics to be covered After school program High School Orientation Transcript Review NYSESLAT and Regents Requirements Road to Citizenship ESL Classes Multicultural Celebration How parents will be notified of these activities ( no cost to title III)) Letter to parents - parents will be notified about after school program. DOE translation services will be used to translate letters in parent preferred languages. Phone calls during Tuesday Parent Engagement - ENL teachers will make phone calls to parents informing them of parent nights and the after school program. These phone call will be made every Tuesday from 3:30 - 4:00. Phone calls about program will start 11/15/16. Emails will be sent to parents. Messages will be sent through KINVOLVE. Content of the written communication will be translated using the home language of the parents/families. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 63  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. This is the per session payment for the teacher who will be doing targeted intervention of ELL students. The teacher will meet at least 3 times a month for 1 hour each meting, This service will be offered to the entering ESL students. na Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff na and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL na na na na na na na na na 2018-19 SCEP-FL 64  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information Borough Bronx District 08 School Name Women's Academy of Excellence School Number 282 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Dr. Arnette Crocker Coach NA ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Tanya Stewart Teacher/Subject Area Therisa Campbell/English Teacher/Subject Area Ericka Blake/Sped Related-Service Provider Susan Ramlal Superintendent Carron Staple Assistant Principal Courtney Jones Coach NA School Counselor Najah Taylor Parent Lisa Lunsford Parent Coordinator Sonja Burns Field Support Center Staff Member Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 2018-19 SCEP-FL 65  D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 260 Total number of ELLs 73 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 28.08% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 K 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Lang. NA NA NA NA NA NA Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? The Women's Academy of Excellence utilizes various formative assessments that the teachers use to guide instructional planning. Among them are the following: teacher created baseline assessment, end of unit assessments, and periodic assessments. In addition, teachers use MyOn reading program to assess students' reading level and comprehension and to assess their writing skills, the school uses MyAccess writing program. In addition, teachers are continuously checking students understanding during, in the middle and after the delivery of the lesson by the use of various Checking for Understanding 2018-19 SCEP-FL 66  (CFU) strategies. Results of all these formative assessments are gathered and analyze in grade and departmental PLC meetings. Results of data analysis are used to data driven unit plans and lesson plans and necessary next steps. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Teachers are required to reflect the results of any formative assessments in their lesson and unit plans. To make sure that needs of ALL students including ELLs are addressed, they are required to provide modifications to support their learning. This may include the use of dictionaries, specialized grouping, translation of content specific vocabulary, use of pictures or diagrams, and many other. This year, a school wide PD need assessment survey revealed that 100% of the teachers need professional development on research based literacy strategies. This has been one of the priority areas of the school for the past years. Hence, to put structures in place, Professional Learning Communities (PLCs) are engaged to collaborate with each other in conducting inquiry on the effectiveness or impact of various literacy strategies learned in various Professional development sessions. Through the departmental and grade team PLC collaboration, teachers found out that Frayer model and annotations were effective in addressing the needs of the ELLs. For the school year 2017-2018, the inquiry team found out various literacy strategies such as sentence starters, sentence frames and 4A literacy protocol. It is expected that for school year 2018-2019, teachers will continue to investigate the effectiveness of these strategies and then expand its implementation school wide. Teachers must indicate the school wide use of literacy strategies and modification of all subgroups based from the data revealed in any formative assessments. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? At the beginning of the year, students are required to take baseline assessments For this year, teachers used previous regents questions that address the Common Core standards for their baseline assessments. Baseline assessments are systematically grouped by the Common core standards and broken down into different units. The English department administers argumentative essays through the prompt created by MyAccess at the end of the First Semester and then another one in the Spring Semester to determine progress and monitor areas of needs. In addition, History Department likewise conducts thematic/ DBQ essays at the end of the First Semester, then conducts at the middle of May to determine progress and monitor areas of needs. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? 1). Each teachers are required to submit results of the post unit assessments and their own reflection of the results. 2) Unit plans and lesson plans must indicate results of any of the summative assessments and show how data is being used to modify lessons, create groups, and likewise scaffold lessons. 3) Teacher Teams and Departmental Meetings are scheduled once a week. During these meetings summative data is analyzed to determine the necessary supports needed to promote positive student outcomes. 4) Based from the result, teachers identify students who are in need of further academic intervention and place them in Lunch and Learn programs at least two times a week. 5) Targeted homework are provided to students based on the result through Castlelearning. 6) Through the Grade Team initiative, an individualized student action plan is designed based on the needs of the students. 7) Student-teacher (which may also include student-teacher and parent conference) conference is conducted on a regular basis to track students' progress and identify areas of concerns based on the written student action plan. 8) Teacher constantly provide students with rubric and feedback to identify areas of strengths and next steps. 9) Differentiated formative assessments are designed to provide students multiple entry points and determine readiness of concepts or skills. 10) Constant monitoring of the use of data through regular evaluative and targeted observation and by making sure that lesson plans indicate data as basis of the planning 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] 2018-19 SCEP-FL 67  N/A 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The school used various Regents examination results and the NYSELAT to evaluate and inform us of our ENL programs. According to the Regents Examination result for school year 2016-2017 (the Regents result for 2017-2018 is not available yet), there is an increase of ELL students who passed the Algebra Common Core, Global and Living Environment Data from the NYSED school report card indicates that 54% of ELLs in 2016-2017 passed Algebra 1 Regents as compared to 24% in 2015-2016; 29% of the ELLs passed Global Regents in 2016-2017 as compared to 19% in 2015-2016 and 46% passed Living Environment Regents in 2016-2017 as compared to 33% in 2015-2016. In terms of NYSESLAT result, the data indicates a steady gain of students scoring Expanding and that 40% of our students scored an Expanding score in 2016. The data in 2017 also indicates that 10 or 33% out of the 30 students who took the NYESLAT in 2015 and 2016 increased their classification level by at least 1 level higher. Results of these assessments are used to design instructional resources, choose appropriate instructional strategies and daily lesson plans. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? 1) Teachers conduct item analysis of all the Regents examination and create unit plans based on the results. 2) The School Development Committee (SDC) will be provided with the Data and use result to design a school wide PD plan for the year. 3) Data Specialist conducts data analysis sessions with teachers and staff. at least two times a year 4) Teachers create SMART goals to address areas of needs. 5) Programmer use the information to make adjustments of the programs. Dialogue with ENL and Special Education teachers will continue and then they talk about the change of the students programs. 6) Teachers use the Beginning and End of Unit Assessment tracker and use result to adjust instruction, curriculum and unit plans. Unit plans are regularly collected on a monthly basis to monitor progress. 7) Midyear conference is conducted by school administrators to track and monitor progress and adjust teacher SMART goals based on data results. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Freestanding ESL targeted instruction is designed to promote language proficiency and acquisition of academic language.In grades 9-12 the school utilizes a Freestanding ENL program model. Classes are ungraded and heterogeneously grouped. ont he belief that it would create a need to use English as the common language.There is a total of 3 standalone ENL classes 5 times a week. Freestanding ESL targeted insruction is designed to promote language proficiency. In addition, there is a total of 3 push in classes, 5 times a week (2 classes in Global History and 1 in Living Environment).Students travel as a group in one class with mixed proficiency level. b. TBE program. If applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 68  Paste response to questions here: c. DL program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? To meet the units of study requirement in the New CR-Part 154, the school programs English Language Learners based on their level of English Language Proficiency (according to the NYSITELL and/or NYSESLAT results). Students are therefore placed in Entering, Emerging, Transitioning and Expanding classes appropriately. Entering students receive 540 minutes of ENL instruction, Emerging and Transitioning students receive 360 minutes and Expanding students receive 180 minutes.The ELL student's program is reviewed with the Esl teacher to schedule Freestanding classes according to the ELL student's proficiency levels. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Content area instruction is delivered in English by highly qualified teachers with differentiated instruction to meet the needs of all levels of learners. To meet the needs of all ELLs, the following instructional approaches are provided: 1) Each student are provided with dictionaries to provide intervention in understanding content specific vocabulary. 2) The use of pictures/ diagrams are provided to support language acquisition of content specific vocabulary. 3) Data are constantly used to modify activities and student groups. In most cases, ELLs are placed in the middle of the class surrounded by English speaking students to help her become familiar with the language. 4) Non English speakers are given support by providing her with a student who speaks the same language as her. 5) Use of graphic organizers, visual aids, and use of real life examples that address the students cultures are also provided.This allow ELLs to interact with written text in a variety of ways. 6) Vocabulary building strategies have been a major component of the teaching process. This may include use of non-verbal cues at the initial stages of language development, use of multi-media presentation, etc. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? 1) Provide the necessary accommodations as provided by the CR part 154. This include time extension, separate locations and use of bilingual dictionaries 2) Provide interpreters to Regents examination except the EL Regents Examination 3) Provide students the opportunity to take Regents examination in their native language (if available) or provide translators 4) Allow them to use a native language glossaries, word-to-word dictionaries and bilingual dictionaries in their content area classes. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. Students identified as SIFE are given extra academic support through 45 minutes of tutoring at least 2 times a week through the Lunch and Learn Program.. Students are also offered additional after-school instruction Students also receive social and academic support from their guidance counselor. Also, ENL teacher support is provided. All teachers differentiate instruction 2018-19 SCEP-FL 69  to meet the need for support in basic concepts and skills necessary for academic success, including how to study and take notes and how to participate in class discussions, looking for the heading of a chapter in pre-reading exercises, and using a dictionary. Teachers incorporate hands-on learning opportunities when they teach. Knowing that students may lack prior knowledge in some cases, teacher plans include explicit instruction and supplementary materials. Teachers work to include visuals in their lessons such as pictures, photographs, videos, role playing and real objects. Teachers try to relate the concepts they are teaching to real-life experience situations. If the text used is too difficult they modify it for to meet the needs of the SIFE student. Teachers plan ample time for practice within each lesson and make sure they are using pacing for the lesson. Also, in the classrooms teachers use a buddy system where peers or classmates can work with classmates and help them adjust to the daily schedule. b. Students identified as newcomers are provided support by the ENL teacher and an additional minutes of tutoring session after school 1 hour for at least two times a week. Collaboration with content area and ESL teachers is integral to make this extra support to work. Content area teachers will coordinate with ESL teacher to identify specific target areas of needs for our newcomers. In addition, teachers design instruction so that students have multiple opportunities to interact and practice academic language, both orally and written. In response to the immediate social, cultural, and linguistic needs of ENL students in US schools less than three years, teachers are work to design supportive learning environments which are highly attuned to the emotional strain these students may experience as they adjust to a new country, language, and customs. Therefore, instruction is intentionally designed with clear language targets that align to content standards and learning targets. Teachers provide language development through content, build background through learning experience, and scaffold language and learning experiences. Teachers follow the Gradual Release of Responsibility Model to provide students with explicit instruction in an age-appropriate manner. c. ENL's receiving services for 4-6 years are provided support by the ENL teacher specifically targeting those areas on periodic assessments and the NYSESLAT which identify as in need of improvement.Teachers across all subject areas ensure that the four modalities, listening, speaking, reading, writing are addressed in their lessons. Their lessons include both content and language objectives. To differentiate instruction teachers create print rich environments and stimulate student motivation using activation of prior knowledge techniques which link new information to what ENLs already understand d. Long-Term ENL's will be provided targeted assistance based on need identified on the NYSESLAT. Guidance support will also be scheduled for all long term ENLs. We offer these students literacy supports, to help students develop a strong academic foundation. Teachers build on students’ prior knowledge and engage them in hands-on learning, including the use of manipulatives, reciprocal teaching, and teaching using multiple intelligences identified areas. Teachers give students frequent checks for understanding and incorporate peer-assisted learning opportunities during which ENL students work in structured pair activities. Also, pre-reading and post-reading strategies are utilized. The use of graphic organizers and reading logs and journals are incorporated in reading and writing activities e. Former ELL's will be provided extra academic support through an additioinal 45 minute tutoring session. For the ENL students reaching proficiency, the ENL teacher continues transitional supports for 2 years. The transistional supports include the following terms: - ENL teacher and classroom teachers continue to discuss the areas in need of improvement for ENLs. - The ENL teacher offers support by conferencing with students in and outside the classroom. - The ENL teacher offers guidance and level appropriate materials to assist students with final projects and assignments. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? All teachers are encouraged to use as many mediums as possible to convey information: oral, written, videos, teacher. .Teachers of ELL-SWDs use differentiated instructional strategies as well as ESL strategies such as scaffolding, schema building, accessing prior knowledge, vocabulary building, using graphic organizers, and self and peer monitoring. The use of literacy based instructional strategies that were found out to be effective by our inquiry teams. This include Frayer Model, Annotation., sentence frames, sentence starters and for some high performing students, the 4A protocol are also major instructional strategies used.Also students will receive modified and scaffolded instruction to meet their needs. We use ENL strategies such as differentiated instruction, visuals, technology, accountable talk and small group instruction. This includes but not limited 2018-19 SCEP-FL 70  to think-alouds and think-pair-shares when asking questions, and making sure t to give students enough time to process the question.Teachers focus on grammar, reading, writing, listening, and speaking skills through content. By using the content-based approach to language learning, ELL-SWDs gain content knowledge while accelerating their English Language Development. Adapted texts would be used as well. ELL's with special needs will have their needs addressed through required mandates on their IEP's or 504 accommodation plans. . The use of other resources such as bilingual handouts and cue list, use of imagery for cues. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Various tools such as ATS, SESIS and Skedula are used to research each ELL-SWD’s biographical information, exam history, and IEP information. The ELL Coordinator and The Special Education Department work together to create the least restrictive and most learning-conducive environment for every child. Individualized Educational Plans (IEPs) are reviewed and updated annually. If an ELL-SWD’s IEP states that the student needs accommodations, the teachers are made aware and these accommodations are strictly enforced. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. The targeted academic intervention program at Women's Academy of Excellence are the following: Lunch and Learn and the after school program as credit recovery and Regent's Prep. The Lunch and Learn initiative is a year round academic intervention program that provides extra scaffolded support to all ELLs whose daily formative assessment strongly suggest that students needs extra help. All core content area teachers provide. lunch tutoring is available with content area teachers. The purpose of our lunch tutoring is to bridge the gaps in their understanding. They receive academic support in a variety of content areas while building their English language skills. In order to maximize the effectiveness of the lunch tutoring, we have a small student/teacher ratio. This allows the teachers to work more closely with each ELL, tailor instruction according to each student’s needs and foster academic skills and content-area knowledge necessary to pass their classes. This service to all students but give priority to ELLs.. This initiative addressed more closely on helping students pass the class rather than pass the Regents. However, Lunch and Learn classes also expands towards the end of the semester (usually 2 months before the Regents examination. At this time, Lunch and Learn is more targeted in helping students pass the Regents ExaminationTutoring for Regents Examination is also offered after school, specifically 2 to 3 months before the Regents schedule. ESL teacher will also work closely with the ELLs after school 3 times a week to help them learn in the development of reading and writing skills to help the student acquire language skills in English.Online homework took is also provided to students through Castlelearning. This online system help them develop their skills in various content areas at home. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Looking at the trend of the data of the ELLs, the school is considering to provide an intensive after school tutoring for ELLs that will include language development and targeted intervention services that address their strongest needs (speaking and writing). In addition the plan to educate parents of their role in the educating their children will be expanded by having to meet with them at least once a month. Use of flip classroom will be provided to ELL students who are taking Mathematics, Living Environment, and Social Studies. Teachers will prepare videos using Screencast to record lessons designed for ELLs. This allows ELL students to have prior background of the lesson and be able to seek support from their family members. Teachers will be provided one 3 hour a month to prepare flip classroom designed to ELL students to bridge the gap in different academic skills. Te integration of flip classroom provide the ELLs a chance to assimilate the topic by watching the video over and over again at home and where family members can provide assistance in terms of translation.Programming will include grouping ELLs for each grade level in the same class.Create peer support tutoring program utilizing high performing students who speak the same native language. Google classroom will be used to become a place for ELL students to communicate with peers, teachers and staff to seek academic support. The ENL teachers will be required to create assignments to students that meet the students strengths and needs. It will also be used as a non-threatening environment to express their concerns or questions that they are hesitant to raise during class hours. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? 2018-19 SCEP-FL 71  N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs have access to all school programs and course offerings at Women's Academy of Excellence. In terms of programming, ELLs whose level of performance in Math and ELA are 3 or 4s, they have the same opportunity as others being placed in the honors classLunch ad after-school tutoring is given by ENL and content area certified teachers. At tutoring, ELLs have the advantage of small-group instruction and one-on-one attention using relevant materials and technology.School has uniform policy to all students and therefore give ELLs the same opportunity as othersMulti-cultural day is celebrated where ELLs are given the opportunity to develop their leadership skills and increase their level of confidence. ELLs are also encouraged to participate in campus wide activities and sports teams. ELLs are notified of all school programs in the same manner of which the general population is notified. Tutoring is offered to all students is recommended to those students who would benefit. Expand the use of Read 180 to all 9th grade and 10th grade English classes as research indicates high success rate of Read 180 to ALL students including ELLs and SWDs. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Read 180 materials and textbooks Our English classes have an array of high interest/low level books in English. We are also focusing more on non-fiction and informational texts. Dictionaries and glossaries have been ordered in the identified languages of the ELL population. Also, Smart Boards and laptops are utilized. Our teachers use and adapt realia in the form of newspaper articles, magazines, advertisements, film, music, and educational television programs, which they adapt for instruction and effective skills building. At all levels of English proficiency, teachers incorporate literature, both abridged and unabridged classics. Free account of SCREENCAST online resource/software/ technology for teachers to create/ implement FLIP classroom 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? ELLs at Women's Academy of Excellence speak 5 native languages which are Spanish, Bengali, Arabic, Urdu and French and Wolof . We value our students' native languages as a powerful resource in the instruction of adolescent ELLs. Acknowledging the students’ native languages helps keep their cultural identities intact, boosts their self-esteem, and in general, empowers them. Our teachers, whenever applicable, access students’ prior knowledge and make connections between students’ native languages and English. This enables our educators to use comparative linguistics and build students’ metacognitive awareness. Home language support for our ENL program s deliberately incorporated into daily lessons, elevating teaching to higher cognitive academic levels. Another method of delivery is the buddies systems where a high performing student who speaks the same native language is asked to assist a fellow student who is new or struggling. However, for a student who speak Wolof and French, the teacher had to use Google translator to provide students with the important content related vocabulary. Use of pictures is critical way of supporting students with their home language. Glossaries and word-to-word dictionaries in various native languages are also used in our classrooms. The home language support is assessed with the use of the following multiple indicators: * results of formative assessments such as checking for understanding before, middle and after the lesson, exit slips, do now, homework and other form of teacher made formative assessments * Weekly tests, quizzes or graded essays * Summative assessments such as End of Unit assessment results compared to the Beginning of Year or unit assessment results; End of marking period tests and final examinations each semester * Students' reading level based as reflected in MyOn online reading tool * Students' writing essay as performance based from the student reports generated from MyAccess online writing tool * Teacher observation feedback 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 72  ELLs are grouped heterogeneously. Class programs are carefully designed for ELLs to make sure it is in compliance with the mandate. Results of baseline assessments are used to design resources that are appropriate to the performance of each ELL in the classroom. Based on the need and data available, push in classes are provided to classes/ courses that need the most support. For example since Global regents is the lowest performing Regents examination in the school and having found out the struggles in writing and speaking, an ELL teacher is provided to push in this subject area. While providing required services, we make sure that such services and resources are high-school level, age and grade appropriate and are aligned with the NYSCCLS. All lesson plans are aligned with the Common Core. Various systems of accountability are being structured such as checking all required support/ modifications in the lesson plan; providing sections for teachers to identify the standards addressed in the lesson, sections for grouping and data are all required in the lesson plan. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Women's Academy of Excellence assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year by inviting them to our annual Orientation event in order for prospective new ELLs, along with other students, can learn about our programs, traditions, and extracurricular activities. On the first day of school, incoming new students are welcomed through a meaningful ROSE Ceremony where new students, parents and families are welcomed by their WAE sisters and WAE staff through a ceremonial giving of roses as a gesture of warm welcome and love. In the Fall, guidance counselors typically visit “feeder schools” and engage in articulation. They meet new ELLs, among other potential freshmen, assess their programming needs and inform them about their new high school preparing them for the transition. In addition, our new ELLs, together with other freshmen, are invited to participate in the Orientation activities held just before the beginning of the academic year. Any newly admitted ELL during the year is welcomed by the ENL Coordinator and Parent Coordinator. They serve as mentors and help students settle down in our school. In addition, they are first assigned in the honors classes and assigned a buddy in that honors class to help them learn on the culture of the school, guide them on different offices and services and make them feel welcome and make a smooth adjustment to the school setting. Once records are properly evaluated, students are then placed to the correct classes making sure that school is in compliance with the mandate. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Spanish is the language elective that is offered to ELL's. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Paste response to question here: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 73  Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? School-based personnel is offered various professional development opportunities throughout the year and the School Development Team provides professional development for all teachers. These workshops are developed with Administrator support. Attendance at these training sessions is mandatory and attendance is monitored. The sign-in sheets are kept by the ENL Coordinator. Follow-up workshops are offered to assist faculty in realizing their full potential both in teaching ELLs and providing support services for them. They monitor the attendance of teachers and support staff. Also, ELL personnel is allowed to attend outside professional development and turn key information to the teaching staff.Professional development is offered to teachers of ELL's through the School Development Team. The SDC sends members to professional development sessions and the information acquired is turn-keyed to all teachers. Our Assistant Principal also attends the city-wide and network cluster workshops in order to take the lead in addressing current ELL-related issues. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. School Development Committee or SDC has created our school's Professional Development plan for ELLs to encourage all staff to be sensitive to the needs of our transitioning ELLs. Sdc also meets with counseling staff about the programming needs of ELLs and the group counseling sessions that are provided to our ELLs. The school has included into the Professional Development Plan 6 hours of professional development over the course of the school year. The plan includes a 3-hour workshop session on Election Day and three follow-up sessions on the UFT Monday allocated PD. Women's Academy of Excellence School provides professional development to all teachers and administrators that specifically address the needs of English language learners. To meet the minimum of fifteen percent (15%) of the required professional development hours for all teachers prescribed by CR Part 154, the school has dedicated PDs to language acquisition, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English language learners. Also, for the English as a new language teacher, a minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the required professional development hours are dedicated to language acquisition in alignment with core content area instruction, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English language learners. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? At Women's Academy of Excellence we value parents and we know that they play a vital role in the success of their children. 1) NYSESLAT results for 2018 will be communicated to the parents in two ways: through sending them a copy of the result and through individual parent conferences. It is the target of the school to conduct individual conferences of the result to at least 5 parents per week starting the middle of September, 2018. 2) Symposiums and/or workshops about how parents can provide support at home, NYC services and support to ELLs, family outreach, financial counseling, college application process, FAFSA, college readiness are provided. 2) Goal setting meeting with parents will follow after individual student and parent conferences. In order to get good result on this initiative, content area teachers will be asked to create individual student goal for each ELL student they have in their class and share and discuss these goals to each identified student. It is expected that goal setting for each identified ELLs will 2018-19 SCEP-FL 74  be completed by November 2018. 3) Mdpoint check of goals will be discuss with students and parents by March 2019 or preferably before the administration of the 2019 NYSESLAT. This will provide parents and students targeted steps/ intervention on how they can make use of the resources available in school and hopefully at home to improve students performance in the NYSESLAT and other State wide examinations. The school is considering hiring a teacher applicant who speaks 5 different languages. This teacher will be used to be the translator. In addition, the NYC over the phone translator services will also be utilized. In addition, students of the upper classes will be utilized as translators during these various conferences. Spanish speaking paras and the LOTE teacher will also be utilized to translate for Spanish speaking ELLs. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. 1) Invite parents of ELLs for the planning meeting of the annual school cultural day presentation. This will help parents and families of ELLs feel empowered and hopefully boost the students emotional and social skills. 2) Create a school based ESL parent coordinator/ representative for the school and invite this parent during SLT meetings. 3) The parent coordinator plans to host a panel/food fair that includes former students and their families. This will allow current families to potentially obtain support and knowledge from former families. 4) Involve parents with their students homework. Encourage the ENL teacher to provide students homework at least once a month that includes participation of the parents. 5) Invite ESL parent to volunteer in different school activities. Conduct an interest survey to the ESL parents. 6) Regularly communicate with families about school programs and student progress through SKEDULA and KINVOLVE. All written communication will be sent using two languages, English and a translated version using their home language.. The school believes that by sending communication using English and translated version will eventually help families with the English language acquisition. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 75 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Arnette Crocker, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 76  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Women's Academy of Excellence School DBN: 08X282 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Title Principal Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 SCEP-FL 77 2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools School Name: Women's Academy of Excellence Superintendent: Carron Staples DBN: 08X282 The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Sonja Burns Parent Coordinator Yes - 11/28/2016 Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. The school will first assess the needs of new students entering the school system by conducting the ELL identification process. During this process we will identify the preferred Home language. Documents used for the ELL identification process are translated of the parents' preferred languages. This will help parents who prefer language other than English provide accurate information during this language identification proces. This allows us to know the students native languages and inform us of what needs to be translated. For information on students who aren't ELL's their Home Language Identification Survey can be found in ATS under biographical information. Emergency contact cards are also utilized to assess language preferences. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 78  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Arabic Bengali Spanish English French Soninke American Sign Language Urdu 62 8 35 296 2 2 2 1 15.2 1.96 8.58 72.55 0.49 0.49 .49 .25 64 7 38 292 2 2 2 1 15.69 1.72 9.31 71.57 0.49 0.49 .49 .25 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Parent and Student handbooks September - October 2019. May also be given to parents at different times especially for over the counter enrolment. Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Send the file to interpretation and translation services before September 2019. Blue Cards School Academic Policy Progress Reports September 2018 and whenever appropriate Send to interpretation and translation services September 2018 and whenever is approriate Send to interpretation and translation services Every end of Marking Period or whenever appropriate This document is automatically translated by SKEDULA (IO) with the 2018-19 SCEP-FL 79  Parent Invitation during Parent-Teacher Conferences Various dates (depending on DOE calendar) Parent Survey September -January 2018 parents' preferred language generated from ATS. Students will be asked to create their parent's invitation cards/ flyers using the parent's home language. Online translation services for parents' preferred languages. Documents translated to parents preferred language are then translated back to English to ensure the accuracy of the translation. In addition, upper classmen performing students will also be asked to review the translated document. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school Uniform Policy Cell Phone Policy plan to provide interpretation service(s)? The school will utilize staff who speak Spanish, Bengali and Arabic for the translation of these parents. In addition, upper classes performing students will be invited to provide translation services to parents/ families who speak the same home September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 2018-19 SCEP-FL 80  Family Night Parent Teacher Conferences/Parent Teacher's Association Meetings School Leadership Team Meetings Individual Parent teacher/parent outreach every Tuesday and student conferences; goal setting and planning meeting for multi-cultural day September 2018- June 2019 language as theirs. Various dates (depending on the DOE calendar) Various dates September 2018 - June 2019 The school will utilize staff who speak Spanish, Bengali and Arabic for the translation of these parents. In addition, upper classes performing students will be invited to provide translation services to parents/ families who speak the same home language as theirs. Send notices through Kinvolve that automatically translate the messages to the family's home language.. During the conference, utilize the over the phone translation services of the NYC DOE 2018-19 SCEP-FL 81  Send notices through Kinvolve that automatically translate the messages to the family's home language. During the conference, utilize the over the phone translation services of the NYC DOE. Send notices through Kinvolve that automatically translate the messages to the family's home language. During the conference, utilize the over the phone translation services of the NYC DOE. Send notices through Kinvolve that automatically 2018-19 SCEP-FL 82  translate the messages to the family's home language. In-house translation services to Spanish, Bengali, and Arabic speaking parents. For those that cannot be covered by the in-house translation service, the school will utilize the over the phone translation services of the NYC DOE. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency.  Teachers and staff who speak languages other than English will be asked to communicate with parents/ families during school emergency. If the teacher is not available, the second option is to ask a student of the upper classes to translate the message to the parents.  To provide support for parents who will be calling the school during emergency, teachers who speak English, Arabic and Bengali will be asked to communicate wtih parents/ families. If a teacher has a class during this emergency situation, a teacher coverage will be provided for the teaching providing the translation service. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. The Chancellor's Regular A-663 will be discussed during the first week of September to all staff members. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 83  Coordinate with the School Development Committee (SDC) to conduct PD on how to effectively maximize the over the phone translation services and create a plan on how to engage the Department Team after school parent engagement to use this service. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Our school has displayed in the main office the a poster where will provide each parent whose primary language is a covered language and who require language assistance services with a copy of the Bill of Parent Rights and Responsibilities which includes their rights regarding translation and interpretation services. Flyers or parent invites for Family Night or Parent Conferences will be created by students using their parents; preferred language. Other documents such as promotion in doubt letters/brochures/important announcements will be sent to interpretation and translation services. Send the file to interpretation and translation services Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Our school will provide each parent whose primary language is a covered language and who require language assistance services with a copy of the Bill of Parent Rights and Responsibilities which includes their rights regarding translation and interpretation services. Provide parents with language access parent survey after every over-the-phone or language translation services received. If it is an over the phone translation, the language access parent survey will be sent through the students and collected the next day. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 84 
