 09X350 School Name: NEW DIRECTIONS SECONDARY SCHOOL Principal: JAMES WASLAWSKI 2018-19 SCEP-P 1  School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Section 4: SCEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Section 7: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 8: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 9: Title I Program Information Section 10: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 SCEP-P 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information New Directions Secondary School 09X350 320900011350 6 to 12 School Number (DBN): 240 E. 172 nd St., Room 129, Bronx, NY 10457 718-410-4343 718-410-4101 Phone Number: James Waslawski Fax: JWaslaw@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Citywide Transfer HS Geographical District: Superintendent’s Office Address: Superintendent’s Email Address: Phone Number: Email Address: James Waslawski Michael Grant Stephanie Prior Laura Lusardi Linda Pacheco Saul Wessel Donovan Parker Max Krauss District Information Paul Rotondo Superintendent: 198 ForsythSt., Rm 410 New York, NY 10003 PRotond@schools.nyc.gov 646-654-1261, ext. 4105 212-432-8035 Fax: 2018-19 SCEP-P 3  Team 1 FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Field Support Center (FSC) Jose Ruiz Executive Director: One FordhamPlaza, Rm 811 JRuiz2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-828-7776 Phone Number: 718-828-3113 Fax: 2018-19 SCEP-P 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the SCEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) James Waslawski Michael Grant Stephanie Prior Nahum Laureno Isaiah Pacheco Saul Wessel Donovan Parker Max Krauss Andria Cuello *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Parent Member/ Teacher Member/ Parent 2018-19 SCEP-P 5  Laura Lusardi Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/ Parent Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 SCEP-P 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) is a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. The process of developing and implementing the SCEP is aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding SCEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and SCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 SCEP-P 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: 2018-19 SCEP-P 8  Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the SCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the SCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for SCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you 2018-19 SCEP-P 9  monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 5: Build consensus around activities, strategies and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 6: Step 6: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 7: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 SCEP-P 10  Section 4: SCEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? New Directions Secondary School assists socially and educationally disconnected teens in navigating the many complex issues they face in the successful completion of their K-12 education. Providing substantial social and emotional support, college and career coaching and mastery-based grades and curriculum, our school teaches struggling teens how to become successful in school, on their job and in their personal lives. Our mission is targeted to serve over-aged Bronx youth trapped in a cycle of struggle that begins in early middle school or high school and intensifies as they navigate young adulthood. We work hard to actively build a connective community for students and families through the highly visible, openly-accessible and non-judgmental student-adult relationships that each member of our school team is supported to create and maintain. These essential relationships are nurtured through the formal processes of repair and restoration that are employed when there are misunderstandings and problems between students and staff and/or among our students. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. The New Directions Secondary School community has completed its fifth year as one of two New York City middle/high transfer schools expressly designed for over-aged youth. Maintaining our our collective attention on persistent academic success for all our students, we were able to engage over two-thirds of our middle school students in academic success to such an extent that they attained promotion to the next grade. During the 2018 School Year, we worked to consistently engage 178 over-aged sixth through twelfth graders utilizing the successful strategies of tiered support and Restorative Justice from our first four years. In addition, we strengthened our co-teaching models through consistent professional development work and specific use of teacher team-time. With the support of the Transfer School Institute, we implemented new research-based classroom practices which emphasized student-to-student discussion to clarify and enhance understanding of content and positively impact the quality of student work on written tasks. For the 2018 School Year we also focused on and did improve overall attendance (from 67% to 72%). For 2019 our attendance focus is to improve on-time arrival of students (before 8:30 am) so as to improve our credit accumulation rates in high school and to reduce our summer program roster for middle school grades. Our targeted outreach and ongoing work with families is comprehensive, intensive and continual. We work in conjunction with CBO partner Wediko Children's Services of NY to provide systematic supports which address specific family concerns that contribute to a student's erratic attendance. For fall of 2018 we have established weekly incentives to visually make students aware of the necessity of period 1 through 9 attendance. Rewards, small group encounters and first choice at special activities are part of the incentives "package" attached to on-time arrival in school. To achieve and support this work Wediko provides three full-time middle school advocate counselors, an internship developer, a college and career specialist, a Site Manager, and an after school program with various high-interest sub-contractors who provide enrichment and youth development programming. In addition, other part-time clinicians support the social and emotional growth of every student by facilitating small single-interest support groups during lunch time and after school (e.g., Grief and Loss). As we strengthen our program for Year 6 fall of 2018, the following characteristics of New Directions remain as core pillars of our school model. 1) Our academic program is outcomes-focused, with all instruction and learning organized around students successfully completing tasks which demonstrate mastery of course outcomes. Such "mastery" is set at a level which accommodates student success on state Regent's and middle school exams. Courses that are organized around specific learning outcomes provide a better opportunity (not a guarantee) for students with poor to moderate attendance to reconnect and experience success in school. 2) As an non-conventionally-organized school, New Directions builds a base cohort in both sixth and ninth grades, and accommodates mid-way transfer students in any grade whenever there is seat capacity. 3) We are focused on the holistic support of our students and to this end, counselor to student rations remain 1 to <30 in middle school are effectively 1 to <30 in high school through the work of our two social workers, DOE guidance counselor and CBO clinical staff. Additionally, in an effort to engage students in a wide range of ways and to encourage creativity, wellness, and community, each middle school student receives SEL-centered advisory at least three times per week. 4) Restorative Justice practices remain the organizing idea of all 2018-19 SCEP-P 11  of our student behavioral interventions. Suspension rates for New Directions remain low for our population, with nearly all students experiencing rates of recidivism 80% or lower than in their previous school. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Our goal is first to re-engage young people in a school community by establishing strong relationships and sense of community, and, second, to work with our youth to set, achieve and maintain "life-relevant", academically-centered goals which include high levels of persistent academic achievement. We have shown early and limited success in these areas over the past five years, and in our sixth year we will continue to strengthen the instructional and assessment practices which give youth a clear path to academic success. As this academic persistence correlates with a consistent, pro-social school culture, for the 2019 school year we have taken lessons from our first five years and applied them as new supports to interrupt non-productive school behaviors among our students. These new initiatives are a core part of the work of our new social worker from the "Bridging the Gap" funding allocation received in August 2018. This social work position will assist school staff to respond to specific student concerns relating to housing status, immigration status, chronic health conditions, and other uniquely challenging issues for out students. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. We made progress this year in several areas of the Framework for Great Schools. We improved in creating and establishing “Supportive Environment and Strong Family-Community Ties.” In the area of supportive environment, our data suggests: (source January 2017 IIT Review) "Students told reviewers that they knew the adults they would turn to at school for help with academic and social-emotional concerns. Advocate counselors are present in classes to support students who have behavioral or academic issues." and "Parents told the Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) that the school leaders and staff provide a welcoming environment. They reported that the school leaders and teachers are accessible and noted that teachers contact them frequently to discuss their children’s accomplishments and challenges." and "Through the school’s partnerships with external agencies, counselors support students’ social-emotional and academic growth by conducting weekly advisory groups and restorative justice circles that promote positive student behavior." The area of focus for 2019 remains as “Rigorous instruction.” As per our QR feedback, PPO / Supt. office reports, test scores, our Advance results, and feedback from teachers, we are going to strengthen the support to all teachers by adding a "Model Classroom Teacher" to our instructional cabinet. This individual, along with our Peer Collaborative Coach, will assist school administration to further our differentiated professional development through the implementation of our Professional Learning Community structures for all Professional Learning in our school. We will also maintain specific curricular and targeted teacher teams (new teachers, math teachers, teachers of text-based instruction, etc.) as needed. Through the structure of our PLC's and our second year supports of the Transfer School Institute we are going to continue our work on indicator 3b - discussion and question techniques - through the school wide implementation of the Think-Pair-Share protocol and regular use of Turn-and-Talks. We have been focused on creating classroom structures to yield student voice and choice. 2018-19 SCEP-P 12  2018-19 SCEP-P 13  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 09X350 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08,09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 234 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 29 29 7 5 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 20 17 1 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 96.0% % Attendance Rate 94.4% % Reduced Lunch 35.5% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 4.3% 69.2% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 0.9% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 5.25 5% 43% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 5.6% N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No No Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District Yes Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO N/A N/A NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A NO N/A N/A NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Yes N/A 37 38 70.3% 1.3% 32.9% 24.8% 0.9% 4.3% 4 67% 4.9 0.0% 6% N/A N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 SCEP-P 14  2018-19 SCEP-P 15  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed X X X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. As measured by five years of middle school state math and ELA testing, two administrations of the MSQI/DRP assessment, three years of high school Regent Tests in English, Algebra, US History and Earth Science, the spring 2018 MOSL and Pearson RLI scores, our students' non-fiction reading comprehension and standardized problem solving ability is well behind their peers on similar grades city-wide. Priority and focus: To ensure progress we have reviewed the 2018 testing efforts and re-constructed an assessments as well as regents prep calendar. With expanded application and use of course outcomes aligned ot standards and testing foci we are ensuring relevant assessment practices on weekly/daily formative and monthly/quarterly summative assessments in all subjects. We have restructured our administrative period schedule to allow for weekly data / success-centered teacher discussions on student need and next steps for differentiation. Results from this weekly discussion will be used to further necessary Tier II supports in form of: Wilson Reading; Pull-out just words; ENL teacher intervention; IXL math lab; SETTS. 2018-19 SCEP-P 16  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 all students scoring a below a level 2 on their 2018 middle school Math or ELA state exams will have received an additional minimum of 900 minutes of Tier II academic intervention through the five intervention strategies our school offers on a 6:1 or less basis during 7th period AIS. These additional Tier II interventions will raise middle school assessment measures (proficiency ratings) in spring 2019 by at least .8. High school student Regent Exam scores in US History, Earth Science and Algebra will improve on average 7 percentage points for students receiving such Tier II interventions and over 20 hours of Regents Prep throughout the semester. (period 7 or Saturdays) 2018-19 SCEP-P 17  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Use of new curricular tools in Math and English along with block scheduling in middle school to support development of foundational Math and strengthen English skills, particularly for students with disabilities and English Language Learners through co-planning and specific learning targets. All middle school students September 2018-June 2019. Professional development on team teaching as provided by the BFSC in August and on-going through the fall. The goal of this support is to provide on-going, systematic team instruction and assessment to students. All classroom teachers August 2018 to February 2019 Weekly department meetings to monitor student progress, using student work and assessment evidence. Special attention to be directed at how to modify curriculum structure to address the needs of students with disabilities and English Language Learners. ELA and Math departments September 2017 to June 2018 Training of teachers by MSQI Program Coaches to implement structured independent reading and assessment, a debating program to enhance students' writing skills offered during a workshop model for students, and a poetry slam that allows for students to interact with other middle school students. Students, All families and care givers of students at 09X350, and teachers. September 2017; November 2017; May 2018 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Pedagogical staff members; Literacy department chair; Special Education Coordinator, English as Second Language Coordinator, Literacy coaches; Assistant Principal Principal, Assistant principal; department leads; BFSC staff; Principal, Asst. Principal, coaches, mentors, department leaders Principal,AP, ELA Dept Social Studies Dept., Literacy leads, and MSQI Coaches. How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Partnering with CBO Wediko Children's Services, By June 2019 we will provide six different (October/ November/ December - 3; February/ March/ May - 3) parent-student focused workshops on topical matters related to: early academic success and achievement, planning for high school and college, personal organization needed to successfully graduate from school and / or maintain paid employment, personal management and social skill development needed to maintain positive peer relations and to feel comfortable in new settings. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 2018-19 SCEP-P 18  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. MSQI training sources for Tier II and III intervention strategies Title I funds for NYCMP and MPI grant for Eskolta LLC workshops on data interpretation protocols (which identify students most at need and measure progress achieved) TL FSF for the support of our Peer Collaborative Coach and Model Teacher Title I funds for IXL and other Tier II purchases and supports Title III for supplemental ENL supports of ELL students Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded X P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Administrative presence at weekly data meetings and oversight of the subsequent Tier II actions. Administrative alignment of teacher Tier I and implemented Tier II strategies for literacy in all classes across the 6-12 grades. This includes feedback on lesson plans and instruction using these Tier II strategies. Bi-weekly review of formative assessment data as part of every observation debrief conducted by AP and Principal. By December 2018, there will be improvement in reading comprehension and prompted writing scores as measured on course projects, tasks, and RLI indicators (Lexile levels) scores for at least half of our targeted students. Non-progressing students will be enrolled to participate in intensive after school interventions two or three days per week using additional literacy support tools made available to our school as a result of our Priority/Focus Status. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. RLI Lexile Level report by month DRP scores on middle school by quarter F&P reading levels as reported by the Peer Collaborative Teacher and ENL Lead Grades on assessments as recorded in IO Classroom will be reviewed at these meetings. In addition, our Google drive curriculum units with tracked changes and amendments including use of additional support resources related to student reading can also be produced as evidence of DDI. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 19  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. X X X X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Supportive environment strengths: *  In our January 2017 IIT review students told reviewers that "they knew the adults they would turn to at school for help with academic and social-emotional concerns."  Over half of the above referenced students feel they have three or more adults actively supporting their  progress in school Students fully participate in the school's advisory and advocate counseling program. Advisory remains as one of the student’s most preferred activities of the school week.  Every cohort of students has an advocate counselor who provides social-emotional support to support student learning and social emotional functioning. This counselor works side-by-side key classroom teachers to assist with the building of culture for learning and academic success. Student incidents and misbehavior as tracked on the DOE Online Occurrence Reporting System (OORS) were held to nearly the same low number of 44 for the 2017 school year (43 for the 2016 SY).  * data compiled from Wediko Children's Services' interviews and surveys from 2013 through 2017; NYSED IIT Review audit posted on NYSED.gov; OORs summary data for 2016 and 2017 2018-19 SCEP-P 20  Supportive environment needs:  Stronger student academic culture which includes clear student understanding of our mastery-based grading system and our high school course outcomes.  Daily wrap-around support to students recently involved in a conflict mediation or Restorative Justice process.  Training and support of visible student leadership that has voice and "design authority" in school academic, and behavioral climate and culture. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools –Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By January 2019, we will have improved student lateness by 20% for first period; 35% for second period and 40% for third period. This improved on-time arrival will be achieved with student leadership and appropriately designed incentives. Student leaders will meet bi-weekly as part of the Taft Student Council and on alternate weeks with the school's leadership team to discuss incentives and progress. They will serve as the "Face" of our on-time arrival "Be Here" Campaigns. 2018-19 SCEP-P 21  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Create course design for 6th - 12th graders which incorporates the academic success strategies of Elevate Education for use in our "Homeroom / Academic counseling" (MS) or College and Career Readiness (HS) courses newly programmed for 2017-2018. Establish an "attendance office" to which all RJ-involved and late arriving students report for signing into school and checking in with their counselor (MS B-27 / HS 163). Enforce a pass system which Build upon our current student government structures to collaborate with our Taft Campus Student Council by holding joint student-led governance / voice meetings in the first floor auditorium after the last dismissal on a monthly basis. Create monthly student presence at the Building Council Meeting of principals. July 2017 to June 2018 August 2016 to June 2017 Classroom teachers, Advocate Counselors, student and families Counseling Lead, school support staff, Admin Students and counselors Sept 2016 to June 2017 Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Principal, AP, Behavior Intervention Specialist (Dean), Counseling leads, CBO site managers Behavior Intervention Specialist (Dean), Behavior Intervention Team Behavior Intervention Specialist (Dean), NDSS and other TEC Administrators, Teachers, Advocate Counselors Co-facilitate six campus-wide student events with TEC student council. TEC student council Sept to June Student support team 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Website invites for parents to student-led events; Website updates and photos of homeroom activities and student-led discussions at parent teacher conferences based on the structured conversations that take place in homeroom. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. TL Fair Student Funding for HS will be used to provide the necessary staff to fully outfit the two "Attendance Offices". Title I SWP funds will be used to support student leadership training experiences and campus-wide actions. 2018-19 SCEP-P 22  SIG funds will pay for CBO advocate counselors to be trained included in our revitalized homeroom college and career readiness courses. 21 Century funds will be used by CBO to provide summer staff for planning homeroom, advisory and C & CR class. Funds from New York State Assemblywoman Joyner's line-item grant to CBO provider Wediko will be used to have advocate counselors train student leaders in summer and fall 2017. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded X P/F Set-aside SIG Grant X 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Our Guidance and Student intervention lead (Dean), along with CBO Site manager will meet weekly with all advocate counselors to measure impact on student lateness, class cutting and any trends with student behavior incidents. Our teacher-led Behavior Intervention Team will monitor the ongoing use of Tier 1 and Tier 2 Restorative Circles / mediation weekly. Principal and AP will observe "Homeroom" class and provide developmental feedback to teacher and counselor. Administration will also preside over the joint teacher- counselor planning meetings at the beginning of each academic quarter. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Course pass rates for high school. Quarterly middle school report card grades. First period attendance Quarterly OORs summaries Student anecdotal reviews of "Homeroom" and College and Career Readiness Elevate Education curriculum outcomes Frequency of NDSS and TEC student sponsored events. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 23  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. SOP(s) Addressed X X X 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. X 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Findings: Beginning with our NYS Integrated Intervention Audit (IIT) and Principal Performance Observations (PPO) from 2016-2017 school year, the suggestion of improvement around Collaborative Teachers is to lead to the improvement of instruction in order to meet the needs of all learners. The IIT Audit finding focused on collaborative teachers is as follows: Tenet 3: The school leader plans and schedules planning sessions to monitor and implement collaborative planning for the English as a New Language teachers and the Special Education teachers The 2017 PPO I and II visits found the following: 2018-19 SCEP-P 24  Observed Strengths: School leaders make strategic organizational decisions to support the school's instructional goals and meet student learning needs, as evidenced by meaningful student work products. (PPO I (10/14/16) & II 2/13/17) Priority Needs: Create an observation calendar for administration team to observe teachers that allows for teachers to implement the provided next steps. Provide teachers with observational feedback that details concrete next steps and a time frame for administration to check in and measure progress. Establish systems and structures to better monitor and address two main areas of focus: school culture and pedagogy. Other feedback: Differentiate instruction to meet the needs of all learners including SWD and ELLS with specific emphasis on the 20 minutes of active engagement involving group work and active application of team teaching models. Conferring with students during the twenty minute structured activity block of each lesson in order to provide targeted instruction and facilitate effective grouping . Tracking data more consistently as department and grade teams. Fostering academic discussion through consistent and effective use of high leverage focus questions. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all core content teachers will have received 12+ hours of professional development on the implementation, planning and best uses of our student - to - student discussion protocols implied by our Think-Pair-Share protocol and regular use of the quick Turn-and-Talk. The work on this goal - led by the Multiple Pathways Institute Core Team - will be the central focus of our Professional Learning Community structures. 2018-19 SCEP-P 25  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Common planning time will be used to develop standards-aligned units in Math, Science, ELA and Social Studies and ESL instruction, as well as Curriculum Design Team. In the high school grades common planning will be used similarly to support the effective delivery of course content and assessment of standards based work using rubrics where appropriate. In the middle school grades common planning will focus on deepening the understanding of units and seeing how the application of the depth of knowledge questions can be applied efficiently during classroom activities and instruction. Teachers will use student work analysis data to differentiate instruction for all learners in the classroom. Educational Assistants will be included in the planning process so they can help student engage in tasks. Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) All core content teacher teams. Sept.2017-May 2018 Pedagogical staff, supervised by coaches and administrators Teachers will use planning time to align rigorous content to competencies, standardize instruction, develop assessments, rubrics, create a bank of level 3 and 4 Depth of Knowledge questions, create interdisciplinary units, analyze student work, and implement and track student academic growth in i-ready and My On reader. All core content teacher teams, Sept.2017-June 2018 Pedagogical staff, supervised by coaches and administrators New online systems will provide parents with access to student grades using a uniform grading system such as Teacherease. Use uniform grading system to analyze student progress each quarter based on the student work rubric co-created with Eskolta. Parents and students October 2017-May 2018 Advocate counselors, teachers, guidance counselors, administrators Utilize Course Outcomes as created by the Curriculum Design Team (CDT) to clear pathway for success for course completion towards graduation. Students Sept. 2017- June 2018 Teachers, Administration, Eskolta 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. September curriculum night; workshops on logging into Teacher ease; SLT meetings Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 2018-19 SCEP-P 26  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Tax levy funds and SIG funds will be used to support the coverage of classrooms necessary to create some of our department meetings and to provide coaching/consulting to the common planning meetings. Title I funds will be used to purchase the curriculum materials necessary for appropriate differentiation. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. The school’s administrative cabinet will evaluate the actions and outcomes (modified unit plans, team teaching plans, course curriculum maps) and outcomes of the teacher team collaborations each month at the Instructional Cabinet meeting (October to June). Periodically at these key meetings changes to the common planning time or departmental meeting structures will be made based on an analysis of team outcomes, which include looking at student progress data (attendance, Performance Series results, reading levels moved, etc.) Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Student academic outcome measures such as reading Lexile levels, scores on periodic math, science and social studies assessments will be utilized to assess impact on student progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 27  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). X X X X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. As cited in the 2017 NYSED Integrated Intervention Team Audit: 1. Parents told the Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) that the school leaders and staff provide a welcoming environment. They reported that the school leaders and teachers are accessible and noted that teachers contact them frequently to discuss their children’s accomplishments and challenges. 2. Leaders have established the school’s partnerships with appropriate external agencies, so that counselors support students’ social-emotional and academic growth through weekly advisory groups and restorative justice circles that promote positive student behavior. Effective School Leadership Needs: (as per the January 2017 IIT audit)  As per the January 2017 IIT audit report, school leaders should develop a schedule of informal walk-throughs to ensure that all teachers are visited regularly. o In addition, school leaders should develop and/or adopt a walk-through tool that includes feedback to teachers on their practices. o Teachers should be given timely, targeted feedback. o School leaders should conduct three calibration walks to ensure they are consistent in their ratings. 2018-19 SCEP-P 28  o The schedule should include return visits to ensure that teachers are implementing the school leaders’ recommendations.  As per the above cited audit, the school leader should schedule one meeting to enable English as a New Language (ENL) and special education teachers to plan with general education teachers. Subsequently, meetings of ENL, special education, and general education teachers should be programmed monthly in each content area.  The school leader should collaborate with ENL and bi-lingual education teachers to outline a systematic approach to language development for English language learners (ELLs). This outline should include, for example, the stages of language acquisition, examples of instructional strategies for ELLs at each proficiency level, and strategies for assessment of ENL students in a variety of content areas. Once the outline has been completed, it should be shared with general education teachers and teachers of students with disabilities and revisited every quarter in the 2017-18 school year. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART– Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 School administration will increase total allocated time for classroom observation, constructing and delivering high quality, resource-referenced feedback to teachers by at least 15% using the tools and meeting protocol of the SAM program. 2018-19 SCEP-P 29  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Conduct an thorough time-use and task-impact analysis with the assistant principal to set priorities for delegation in the coming school year. Develop observation calendar using instructional and assessment cabinet, program team, school schedule and other key personnel to prioritize frequency and focus of informal classroom observations and formative observations beginning September 13, 2017 Create the "Period 7" administrative meetings schedule for Sept through January to allocate administrative time to establishing a data-driven culture on department teams, discuss student functioning and success in classes, establish feedback and support loops for struggling teachers and to develop teacher leadership / capacity on "task teams". Conduct one formative observation of every teacher by September 30th. Connect to goal (or TIP) planning conference for the beginning of the school year. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Principal and AP July through Sept 2017 Admin cabinet, Principal's secretary, Instructional Cabinet; Programmer; Leads for the defined dpartments, secretary Dept Leads; support staff; Admin cabinet August – Oct 2017 Instructional cabinet; Department leads for all core subjects; support staff programmer, secretary July - August 2017 Dept. leads; Programmer; Dept. Leads; Admin cabinet All teachers Sept 2017 Principal, AP, Admin cabinet; Dept leads How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Families will be invited in for learning walk-throughs of Tier II supports for targeted youth. These learning walks, organized by the TEC Parent Waiting Room, will include discussion of teaching and learning effectiveness and provide families the opportunity to clarify understanding, ask questions and make further sense of our teaching, curriculum and assessment practices. On February 6, 2019, we engaged parents and the community through our school receivership hearing, where the public provided feedback and developed recommendations for the improvement of the school. This year’s recommendations include: 1. Additional teacher training on curriculum to improve teacher effectiveness 2. The creation of a de-escalation space and mediation space for students 3. Sharing best practices across transfer schools to improve scores on State assessments 2018-19 SCEP-P 30  4. The creation of an AP position for the High School grades 5. Increased opportunities for learning in the evening for students who are working during the day possibly in connection to the YABC program Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. This goal is designed to best organize the time and subsequent impact of the principal and assistant principal on effective, appropriate and rigorous instruction every day. We will leverage the talent of support staff, teachers and campus resources to focus effective supervisory attention of school leaders on the every day support of effective teaching and learning. Budget and resource alignment primarily comes from the use of delegation, support and follow up procedures such that school leaders are solely focused on improving learning outcomes and success rates of / for our students. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Weekly admin cabinet meetings will review observations accomplished and devise strategies for sticking to this goal - review of interceding factors on school leaders. Weekly planning meetings with instructional and assessment cabinet to re-prioritized attention and effort on struggling teachers and students. Quarterly strategic planning retreats to assess effectiveness on this goal. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Progress will be measured by observations recorded in ADVANCE Notes and actions taken by instructional cabinet Student grade improvement Student improvement on monthly summative assessments State testing data to be improved Attendance to be improved. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 31  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. X X X X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. New Directions secondary school‘s mission is meaningfully to re-engage students who have previously struggled in school. The amazing work we do directly with students is only as effective as its extension to their families. Family engagement at New Directions is extensive – we seek genuine partnership with our students’ care givers. This engagement has been one of the most valuable components in route to our students’ success. For the past four years, we have been committed to engage every parent in our school through:  Frequent (daily) meetings and phone follow-up with families to mediate conflict, improve performance and attendance;  Extensive use of "phone blitzes and banks" by our eleven counselors, family worker, and social worker to produce maximum turnout for school-wide events.  Regular use comprehensive parent outreach strategies such as – daily use of our school website and School Messenger to make informative phone calls, and home visits by any of the eleven counselors, principal, teachers and other staff.  Use of our strategic partners, Wediko Children’s services, Tomorrow's Leaders, and Global Kids to educate and coach families through the challenges of making academic progress, student adjustment to school, running away, homelessness, parental lock-out, cutting class/school, drug use, trauma from violence and many other experiences our students are working through towards recovery. 2018-19 SCEP-P 32  New Directions Secondary School Needs to establish: (as per June 2017 NYSED IIT published audit)  Parents told the IIT that they found the report card difficult to understand, the school needs to review and revise the current report cards to make them more understandable to students and parents. Report cards should include students’ progress towards goals in an additional area on the report card, or in a cover document. The document for high school students should indicate Regents examinations completed, credits accumulated, and the number of credits still needed for graduation.  The designation of a "parent waiting room" for NDSS families to meet, connect to services, receive support and network with each other along with the collaboration of the other campus schools' parent coordinators. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Partnering with CBO Wediko Children's Services, By June 2019 we will provide six different (October/ November/ December - 3; February/ March/ May - 3) parent-student focused workshops on topical matters related to: early academic success and achievement, planning for high school and college, personal organization needed to successfully graduate from school and / or maintain paid employment, personal management and social skill development needed to maintain positive peer relations and to feel comfortable in new settings. 2018-19 SCEP-P 33  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Our Guidance and Student Intervention Lead, high school English Department and arts teachers will train and mentor four senior high school students as Success and Progress Workshop facilitators to create a brief webinar; Vimeo tutorial; and in-person workshop experience in English and Spanish that presents our report card and transcript format in an understandable and interactive manner. Student and family workshop participants will take an assessment for understanding before completion of the event. All students with a focus on new students; families; student leads Late Aug 2017/Sept 2017 with redo's in January Guidance and Student Intervention Lead, high school English Department and arts teachers Draft a shared vision for the TEC Parent Waiting Room to include: Scope Process to connect parents to schools Daily Schedule for PC's Student / Parent volunteer training Initial calendar for events Draft survey of campus parents Outfit the T.E.C. Parent Waiting Room (Office Suite 127) Plan and execute 6 campus-wide "Success Events" 3b – Parent and Family Engagement July - Aug 2017 Principals and cabinets of the three schools BHSB; BCA and NDSS Parent Coordinators and Principals IIT liaison for TEC; Principals; PC's; Custodian Students; families; PC's Aug to Oct 2017 IIT liaison for TEC; Principals; PC's; Custodian November 2017 to June 2018 Student leaders; PC's; Counselors; Principals; Teachers If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 34  Wediko children's services; Tomorrow's Leaders; Committee for Hispanic Children and Families; Counseling In Schools Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Title I SWP funds will be used to support the TEC Parent Waiting Room; TL New HS OTPS funds will be used to purchase new or transport used furniture to the Parent Waiting Room; TL School to School Transfer funds will be used to support workshop activities. SIG funds will be used as Wediko Children's Services (SIG funded) will be used to facilitate parent events. Title III funds will cover events for parents of ELL students. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded X P/F Set-aside SIG Grant X 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Physical establishment of the Taft Campus "Parent Waiting Room" in room 127 by October 2017 Creation of the shared "Desk Schedule" involving the three primary and other secondary (all six schools will contribute) parent coordinators for our campus and their coordinated agenda by October 2017. Facilitation of at least six campus wide parent events using resources and planning from the Parent Waiting Room by June 2018. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Parent sign-in logs; workshop impact surveys; parent involvement rates (turnout for events); student attendance rates; partner vendor PO's Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 35  Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Program Description Directions: Expanded Learning Time activities are directly aligned to the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, Rigorous Instruction, Supportive Environment, and Strong Family and Community Ties. ELT provides enriching educational experiences that happen outside of the traditional school day and blend skill acquisition, relationship-building and fun to foster academic and social-emotional growth. Summer learning, afterschool programming, and extended-day ELT models, when well-implemented, play a critical role in supporting students in all grades and ensuring that they graduate from high school, college and career ready. SED requires that Priority schools offer a minimum of 200 additional student contact hours as Expanded Learning Time in addition to the current mandated length of 900 hours of instruction per year (25 hours per week) in grades K-6 and 990 hours of instruction per year (27.5 hours per week) in grades 7-12. Effective ELT models will blend school staff with community partners, and will provide a balanced curriculum that can include ELA, Math, STEM, arts, physical activity, and leadership development. Complete the sections on this page to demonstrate how the school will meet these requirements. Part 1 – ELT Program Goal(s) Describe the summative goal(s) of the ELT program for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. In one year students who are deemed more than 2 years behind in math and ELA will make a 30% gain in task completion as measured by report card grades, portfolio presentations, and MOSL scores. Part 2 – ELT Program Type Is the ELT program voluntary or compulsory? X Voluntary Compulsory If the ELT program is voluntary, indicate how you will actively encourage the participation of all students, with the goal of serving at least 50% of students. Students two or more years over-age will be our first tier of targeted students - ELT work will be specifically targeted for them secure middle school promotion by June and / or HS course credit within a semester; Students will be identified using attendance data; course failure data and other student performance measures Part 3 – ELT Program Description The ELT program will be offered to all students eligible for Academic Intervention Services (AIS), with the goal of serving a minimum of fifty percent of AIS-eligible students. Describe how the school will meet the following SED requirements for an ELT program in a Priority School:  Integrate academics, enrichment, and skill development through hands-on experiences that make learning relevant and engaging.  Offer a range of activities that capture student interest and strengthen student engagement in learning so as to promote higher attendance, reduce risk for retention or drop out, and increase the likelihood of graduation.  Actively address the unique learning needs and interests of all types of students, especially those who may benefit from approaches and experiences not offered in the traditional classroom setting.  Contain components designed to improve student academic, social, and emotional outcomes, including opportunities for enrichment programs such as in music and art.  Ensure instruction in any core academic subject offered in the program will be delivered under the supervision of a teacher who is NYS certified in that particular content area.  Engage in outreach activities made to families. Middle school students will receive grade level ELT instruction and/or intervention by certified DOE teachers and enrichment activities as designated, planned and provided by SONYC provider, Global Kids. 2018-19 SCEP-P 36  High school students will receive supplemental grade level instruction in math, social studies, English and science by certified DOE teachers at least once a week in each subject and intervention support three times a week. Enrichment activities will be provided by Tomorrow's Leaders through a mentors program grant form the Pinkerton Foundation. Part 4 – ELT Program Implementation and Oversight Part 4a. Who will implement the ELT program? Who will oversee the program? 1. Indicate the key personnel that will be responsible for implementing and overseeing the ELT program, including school-based staff and any high-quality community partners that will be involved. If applicable, describe the scope of involvement of all community partners and how the joint ELT program is structured. 2. 3. Explain how you will evaluate the program to assess impact on student achievement. Assistant Principal (middle school) and principal (high school) will coordinate and implement ELT programming on these two levels. The academic coursework and interventions will be a function of the school's departmental teams and instructional leads; Enrichment activities will be coordinated and implemented by CBO partners - Global Kids for MS and Tomorrow's Leaders for High School. Student achievement will be measured by increased student participation in after school intervention programs, improved overall attendance, and improved report card grades. Part 4b. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. ELT enrichment activities will start by 10/01/2016 for middle school and by 10/15/2016 for high school Core academic support sessions, with intervention services will start by 10/31/2016. All programs will run until June 5th. Part 5 – ELT Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the ELT program. Title III, Title I SWP and SIG funds will be used to pay teacher overtime for academic support and intervention SONYC funds will pay for middle school enrichment Pinkerton foundation funds will be used to pay for high school enrichment Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support the ELT Program. Note: If the program is funded by 21st Century Community Center Learning Funds, it must be offered in conjunction with a high quality, high capacity community partner. 21st Century Title I 1003(a) Tax Levy X X Title III Title I SWP PTA Funded Title I TA P/F Set-aside C4E SIG Grant School X Achievement X Other Funding Part 6 – ELT Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 2018-19 SCEP-P 37  Twice monthly ELT team meetings will take place with school administration to devise improved attendance strategies, clarify enrichment activities and goals and to align financial resources to support these after school programs Part 6b. Indicate the instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Student grades as indicated in TeacherEase; Student daily attendance rates for target students Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 38  Section 7: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Periodic Assessments, Performance Series, Running Records Periodic Assessments, Performance Series, iReady or IXL, CMP3 baseline assessments Coach book pre-test, NGSS standards Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) MyOn Reader, leveled books, book clubs, modified texts, native language texts IXL, CMP3, Engage NY assessments Coach books, Close reading strategies Failing grades and poor performance in ELA. Afterschool Intervention At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Student intakes, personality inventory, IEPs Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small group, one-to-one instruction During and after school Small group, one-to-one, after school intervention During, before, and after school Small group, one-to-one, after school intervention Small group; Tutoring During, before, and after school During the school day and afterschool Small group, one-to-one interventions During and after school (Wednesday and Thursday) Group counseling, individual counseling 2018-19 SCEP-P 39  Section 8: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 23 are officially recorded as STH, however, there are an additional 50+ students who fall "in and out" of one or more of the STH residency designations. The brings the potential percentage of students in our school in this group to nearly 30%. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. 2018-19 SCEP-P 40  Family conferencing and referral planning with school AIDP social worker and CBO clinicians Referral and follow up services on all referrals will be conducted by our CBO and school-based PPT On-going weekly counseling will be provided by one of the school's twelve counselors School supplies, clothes and transportation needs will be met by the school from its STH and OTPS transportation allocations. The school has created care packages for STH filled with school supplies. STH are provided with a school t-shirt and gym shorts. STH get priority access to after school intervention programs. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). Not applicable 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. Not applicable 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. Not applicable 2018-19 SCEP-P 41  Section 9: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Professional development will be provided by Re-Design NYC master teacher/facilitators, our school's lead teachers and mentors, as well as by a New York City Math Project coach. Our one other independent consultant along with school administration will establish our "3-3-3 Collegial Coaching" teams to study and implement all professional development efforts for this school year. "3-3-3 Collegial Coaching is differentiated by design with its small teams of 3 teachers with a common interest or need pursing a focused PD topic for three weeks over three cycles. These 3-3-3 teams are also used to implement key focus areas for PD in response to Supt. and NYSED feedback. Our staff leads will help teachers implement and appropriately modify our instructional model with an emphasis on active student engagement. In addition, based on the supervision and observations of teaching practice conducted using the Advance Framework we will direct school mentor, NYC Math Project, Eskolta and other internal resources to effectively support teachers on TIP’s or those who exhibit any other needs. Alternating bi-weekly instructional foci of department team meetings as directed by our Collegial Coaching model that has teachers diagnosing and designing solutions to problems they face in common group. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 2018-19 SCEP-P 42  3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. New Directions Secondary School partners with Eskolta School Research and Design since our inauguration in the fall of 2013. For the 2017 school year we will continue to use our partnership to include and empower teachers in the use, selection and modification of appropriate and multiple assessments for our school in the core subject areas and courses. For school year 2017 we will be intensely focused on creating common formative assessments for curriculum units in the form of common investigations (STEM) and "missions" (humanities) to be administered routinely in a 15 to 18 minute "independent practice" block at the end of every lesson. Teachers have previously collaborated with ESKOLTA to design the tests and create project rubrics, but now we have enough assessment tools in use and will convene content committees by department to modify and better align more frequent assessments. We continue to support a highly collaborative assessment practice program which has been embodied in the Curriculum and Assessment Design Team work for school year 2017. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (SCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) 2018-19 SCEP-P 43  Title I Part A (Basic) Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 186,478 0 30,795 0 12,366 0 2,610,298 X N/A X N/A X N/A X Pages 13 to 30; N/A Pages 13 to 30 N/A Pages 13 to 30; N/A Pages 13 to 30 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/SCEP. 2018-19 SCEP-P 44   Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 SCEP-P 45  Section 10: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. 09X350, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students New Directions Secondary School will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 SCEP-P 46  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association, as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator will facilitate parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); 2018-19 SCEP-P 47  ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand New Directions Secondary School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) 09X350, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. 2018-19 SCEP-P 48  Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; 2018-19 SCEP-P 49  Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; 2018-19 SCEP-P 50  ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time by 8:20 am; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time using the school’s learning portal NDSSonline.org; ● follow the school’s Four Agreements and take responsibility for my actions, submitting to the decisions of the Restorative Justice Committee; 2018-19 SCEP-P 51  ● show respect for myself, other people and property by actively participating in at least two student voice and leadership opportunities in school (daily advisory, school wellness council, student leadership council, school leadership team, PBIS team; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully using my Advocate Counselor and the Restorative Justice Team; ● always try my best to learn and follow through on my education “Be Great” is one of the Four Agreements. ● 2018-19 SCEP-P 52  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 SCEP-P 53  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Beginning November 28, 2016 three days of Title III extended day instruction for a total of 270 minutes will be provided after school on Tuesdays, Wednesdays and Thursdays from 2:45 to 4:15 pm. Three of our five team members will be working within this program with one day focus on the math content area for ELL students on any of our current six grades (6th through 11th). These sessions will go from November through May 25, 2017 for a total of 67 sessions. We use NYSESLAT scores to organize students into learning groups based on speaking, listening, writing and reading skills in the after school time. Most students scored the lowest on writing and reading so teachers will target these skills in our supplemental program time. We will also target our schools largest ELL subgroups: Long-Term ELLs and Emerging/Entering ELLs. For Long-Term ELLs, the focus will be on identifying and filling in missing gaps in their literacy development and on keeping them engaged in school to support higher daily attendance. For Emerging/Entering ELLs, we will focus on developing strategies to increase comprehension and supporting their work in core subject areas. Attendance tracking and family outreach calls will be conducted by HS Counselor and After School coordinator, Andria Cuello and Parent Coordinator intern Sheila Gamarra. Student participation in our Title III program will be tracked on a google spreadsheet. Home language support will be provided by bilingual outreach team members. Additional support materials to be used include: specifically designed and scaffolded writing tasks, vocabulary lists, visual supports, modified texts, books in Spanish, and bilingual glossaries (Spanish and Arabic). The majority of instruction wil be provided in English. Spanish will be used when necessary to scaffold student learning. Materials will include Common Core aligned texts that have been modified to fit the needs of English language learners. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: The Title III teachers will receive professional development from a TESOL certified literacy coach. The PD to be offered (80 minute sessions) is about: text modification and creating modified texts for Title III ELL students (10/17 and 10/24); Use of the Frayer Vocabulary Square in content area classes (10/31); Language Experience in the high school writing class (10/31). ELLs need to be able to access the same content as their non ELL peers, therefore, a Title III ELL teacher's ability to modify common grade-level texts is essential. These sessions will be conducted on the Monday afternoon PD schedules from 2:40 to 4:00 pm on: 10/17; 10/24; and 10/31 - 2016. They will be repeated in our peer-to-peer professional learning circles during the second semester for 45 minute sessions once a week over three weeks. While they 2018-19 SCEP-P 54  Part C: Professional Development initially are facilitated by our tenured ENL teacher who is supported by our consultant / coach later sessions will be facilitated by social studies, science and English department leads. Our consultant / coach (ESL certified teacher leader with over 20 years experience and two years experience with our staff members) will also offer two 90 minute professional development sessions (January 30th and February 6th) around conducting and analyzing running records for Title III ELL students in Spanish and English. Agendas and attendance sheets are kept by school administration, AP Morris. Workshop and planning support will be used to review data and to organize skills teaching and small group instruction. Ongoing supplemental PD will be offered by BFSC staff pertaining to word structure and systematic teaching of vocabulary to support Title III ELL's with content area texts. This professional development will take place in cycles four times a year with inter-visitations to other ENL/TBE programs and will include a round of modeling and periodic workshops of 3-4 hour length. This PD will be offered to all Title III ELL teachers in each content area. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Special outreach efforts to parents of ELL students begin at our school's initial INTAKE meeting with families. Our intake process collects relevant family information for supporting student and family language development beginning at this first contact. In early September our language department meets with all families of identified ELL's to share with them our program offerings for this school year. This team of five staff members also assists families to make plans to enroll in local ENL courses for adults. Additional workshop / small group offerings to families of ELL students include: >culturally sensitive counseling for students and parents; - conducted by bilingual Wediko CBO LSW clinicians - 09/15/16 Family Night for 45 minutes >referrals to local support organizations around documented status, housing concerns, etc. conducted by our bilingual School Social worker - On-going workshops provided on an as needed basis. Initial workshop provided on Saturday, November 19, 2016 Invitations in the preferred home language are ensured by language department team, our pupil accounting secretary and our guidance staff. Written invitations sent by mail, school website announcements available in many languages and verbal translations in Spanish and French are provided by the school. Our parent coordinator keeps the agenda, sign-in forms and planning documents for such workshops. Workshops are typically provided by our ENL certified staff members, our MSW-level guidance / social work team members or outside providers procured by our parent or community coordinator. For 2017 parents will now be directed to these resources and informed of these workshops through our new website "ndssbx.org". This website has the feature of presenting all updated school information in the home languages found in our school. Coaching on use of the website is provided by bilingual office and counseling staff members. 2018-19 SCEP-P 55 Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Title III ELL funds will also be used to ensure that the school effectively reaches out to parents of ELLs in their home language to encourage them to fully participate in school and district parent engagement activities, advocate for services, make appropriate program (language and educational) choices and to begin planning for post-secondary goals and readiness. These outreach actions to parents of Title III ELL's are also to promote participation in our regular school parent activities such as: the School Leadership Team, the Parent Teacher Association, Student Performances and recitals and our School Wellness Council. To support parents, our bilingual teachers and staff are present at many of these meetings. We also conduct special outreach to parents of Title III ELL's during our student portfolio presentation weeks, which happens four times a school year. With translation, parents can witness and participate in a panel evaluation of their student's work. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) N/A  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL N/A N/A Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 SCEP-P 56  2018-19 SCEP-P 57  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information Borough Bronx District 09 School Name New Directions Secondary School School Number 350 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal James Waslawski Coach ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Laura Lusardi Teacher/Subject Area Rebecca Keith/ELA Teacher/Subject Area Katie Dennison/Special Ed Related-Service Provider Superintendent Paul Rotondo Assistant Principal Nina Morris Coach School Counselor Nazeema Baboolall Parent Parent Coordinator Thalia Whittaker Field Support Center Staff Member Sabrina Cruz Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 2 2 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 2018-19 SCEP-P 58  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 233 Total number of ELLs 91 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 39.06% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 4 3 2 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Our school assesses the early literacy skills of ELLs using various methods depending on the individual needs of students. The assessment tools that we use include: Fountas and Pinnell (in English and Spanish), the San Diego Quick Assessment, Performance Series, myON Reader, and teacher-created assessments. One important insight that these assessments have provided is that many students have literacy skills in their native language (Spanish). Knowing that a student has native language literacy skills informs our instructional plan because it indicates that we should incorporate targeted native language use into instruction in order to access students' prior knowledge. These assessments also provide us with the necessary data to identify students that need remedial literacy support provided in the form of small group or individual instruction. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 2018-19 SCEP-P 59  ENL department planning and review of student work meetings are part of our "Period 7" administrative schedule each week for 2017-2018. Teachers of ELLs identified as in need of literacy support meet with the middle school and/or high school ENL teacher during department meetings and co-planning periods to incorporate skill work, differentiation, and the appropriate amount of scaffolding into instructional plans. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We evaluate the success of our programs for ELLs by looking at the EDAT on a monthly basis. We use our own periodic assessments, teacher created assessments, running records, Wilson Reading, the 6 Minute Solution Fluency Program, and Performance Series test results to regularly assess ELL progress and evaluate the effectiveness of our programs for ELLs. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? As part of our weekly data review process school administration works with Tier II intervention providers to best address students needs as most recently measured. Students identified as in need of extra literacy support are flagged and scheduled into small group literacy intervention groups (Wilson Reading or small group ENL pull-out). 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] N/A 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The ENL coordinator runs the EDAT report monthly to evaluate and inform ELL programs. At risk ELLs (especiall long-term ELLs and over-age new comers) receive extra academic interventions through small group ENL instruction and after-school regents prep classes. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Our instructional and assessment cabinet ensures that teachers integrate time and strategies to best address the shifting needs of our ELL students. In addition, the ENL coordinator disseminates this information to other ENL and bilingual teachers during ENL and ELA department meetings. The ENL teachers also regularly attends different subject department meetings to ensure that content area teachers are incorporating knowledge of assessment data into their planning. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. ELLs in the Freestanding ENL program at our school are grouped by grade level in cohorts of similar proficiency level. Our school differentiates in the purest form by supporting ELLs in ELA and content areas, based on NYSESLAT and ELA scores. All ELLs in the middle school receive support from an ENL certified co-teacher in either science or math. Middle school students who scored Entering or Emerging on the 2017 NYSESLAT receive additional ENL support in the form of small group instruction tied to a content area. In the high school, students who scored Entering, Emerging, or low Transitioning on the 2017 NYSESLAT receive one credit of ENL reading/writing/conversation per semester, which is also tied to regents content. High school long-term and overage/new arrival ELLs receive additional support to prepare for the ELA Regents exam. 2018-19 SCEP-P 60  b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? As per the mandates of CR 154, our school ensures that the mandated number of instructional minutes are provided by building our program and its student cohorts around ELL needs. Each year, the ENL Coordinator uses the RLAT report in ATS to review NYSESLAT scores and student proficiency levels. This information is cross referenced using the RELC. Then, the scores and proficiency levels are used to calculate actual minutes based on student schedules. Finally, students schedules that fall below required minutes are modified (either with push-in ENL or pull-out ENL) to ensure that all required minutes are achieved. Units of study per proficiency level are as follows: Grades 6, 7, and 8 Entering: 360 minutes Emerging: 360 minutes Transitioning: 180 minutes Expanding: 180 minutes Commanding: 90 minutes Grades 9-12: Entering: 540 minutes Emerging: 360 minutes Transitioning: 180 minutes Expanding: 180 minutes Commanding: 90 minutes The Freestanding ENL Program uses individualized differentiation as its guide to providing students with instruction that will help them succeed. Teachers use the student's NYSESLAT English proficiency levels as a guide to provide them with appropriately modified English texts, among other supports. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. In the Free-Standing ENL program model, core content is delivered using up to 20% of home language support (Spanish). Texts are not translated into Spanish, but other supports such as bilingual glossaries, bilingual word walls, glossing of English texts, and brief summaries in students' home language are utilized Students also receive push-in support in core content areas from a certified ENL teacher. In order to meet the demands of the NYS Learning Standards, content delivered in the instructional language (English) is differentiated and scaffolded to make it accessible to all ELLs, regardless of proficiency level. Specific methods that we use to support comprehensible language input are essential word lists and word walls, texts modified according to student reading level, contextualized grammar instruction, and explicit instruction for ELLs on applying current linguistic knowledge to new learning in English (bilingual glossaries, cognate identification, and non-verbal cues. ) 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? 2018-19 SCEP-P 61  There are many opportunities for ELLs to be appropriately evaluated in their home language throughout the year: we conduct running records (Fountas and Pinnell) in Spanish; teachers create content area assessments that have been translated into the student's home language. Students also have ample opportunities to brainstorm, plan, and collaborate in their home language and report back on it in English using specific supports such as sentence starters, essential word lists, etc.. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Because our school uses an asynchronous curriculum, it is well suited to SIFE students. SIFE students are able to pick back up where they left off after an extended absence. Much or our curriculum is on-line and accessible to students that do not come to school every day. Newcomers at our school receive extensive support through the use of ENL strategies, including appropriately modified texts, bilingual word lists, glossaries, visuals, etc. Most teachers at our school are fluent in Spanish and able to use student' previous knowledge as a beginning framework for new learning and communication in English. Developing ELLs continue to receive support in the forms mentioned above, although to a lesser extent. Long Term ELLs at our school often have low attendance, and, in addition to receiving individualized instruction in the form of pull-out groups, receive concentrated outreach efforts to increase their attendance. Former ELLs continue to receive .5 unit of ENL support and ELL testing accommodations. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? At New Directions, teachers of ELL-SWDs support our students in whole class, pull-out, and small group settings. Students are permitted to use the native language on a limited basis to activate prior knowledge- This includes tasks such as planning before writing, small group sharing, and bilingual essential word lists. This not only helps students to make connections in their work, but often gives them the opportunity to demonstrate content knowledge that they might otherwise be unable to access. Teachers of all subjects incorporate visuals into their daily lessons, as well as technology. Students have the opportunities as well to use laptops in all of their classes, which gives teachers greater flexibility to differentiate content as well. In addition to these strategies to promote content knowledge acquisition, students are also given language support to accelerate English language development. Students who qualify receive Wilson Tier II and III interventions, and all students engage in guided reading groups throughout the week. In addition, students are taught a variety of vocabulary strategies in their content classes, including bilingual dictionaries and glossaries, and using roots to determine word meaning. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? At NDSS, we have worked to create a curriculum that is built around differentiation. Students have lots of choice in their work, and teachers are able to target instruction towards individuals, which ensures that all students are able to access the content to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency in the classroom setting. In addition, NDSS has integrated co-taught classes, where teachers are able to use flexible grouping and differentiate for their ELL-SWDs. We offer classes co-taught with ESL teachers so that students are able to receive their ESL services without losing instructional time. Other students receive pull-out and push-in services to help them attain English proficiency in the least restrictive environment. In addition, high school students are offered a literacy elective that furthers all students, not just ELL-SWDs in their English language development. By having this flexibility in the scheduling, students are able to receive specialized instruction throughout the day as opposed to simply in an ESL classroom. 2018-19 SCEP-P 62  8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. This year our targeted intervention subgroups are Entering and Emerging ELLs. The first two years of working with ELLs at our school taught us that these subgroups are the most difficult to reach because they have very low basic literacy and math skills. For the 2017/19 school years, we will target these subgroups through regular pull-out with an ESL teacher that is bilingual in English/Spanish. Our plan is to improve their literacy skills so that they can be more successful in ELA, math, science, and social studies. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We hire for more content certified ENL teachers this year, which enables us to provide focused support in the core math, science and social studies courses. ENL literacy electives will be more closely tied with key conent in one or more of these areas. In addition, based on the data, ELLs that attended after school for additional small group support scored better on the regents exams. We will reach out to families this school year to encourage more ELLs to stay after school for extra support with content area teachers working with the ENL teacher. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? Very few students chose the TBE option at our school. Those in the program did not progress as rapidly as required for high school regent exam expectations. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs are invited to all school programs with letters sent home and translated in the preferred home language of their parents or guardians. This year, several Entering ELLs participated in an after-school program run by Global Kids, where they were able to converse in their home language with Global Kids instructors. In addition, ELLs regularly participate in after-school academic intervention services to get extra help with class work. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. In order to support ELLs our school uses the Wilson Reading Program, myOn Reader, Reading A to Z, The 6 Minute Solution fluency program, bilingual glossaries, bilingual libraries, flashcards, and translated assessments and exams in the content areas. The myOn Reader program uses technology to provide additional support to ELLs in the modalities of reading and listening. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? In the ENL program, students receive about 20% of instruction in the form of home language support by content and or certified ENL teachers who speak Spanish. Students do not use translated texts, but are permitted to activate prior knowledge through the use of their home language (bilingual word lists, glossaries, short targeted home language summaries, etc.) in order to increase English language communication. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Since we are a transfer school and our students are overage, we are very careful to select appropriate materials that will engage students while still delivering the required support to develop their literacy skills and knowledge in the content areas. For example, the ELA department ensures that independent reading books are on point for cultural, grade, and age needs using a book interest survey that students complete to help the teacher identify books that match their individual interests. These interests, combined with results of Fountas and Pinnell running records scores, are used to provide students with engaging texts that target their reading level +1. Whenever an appropriate book cannot be identified, teachers modify existing texts to meet the needs (age, grade, interest level, cognitive needs) of ELL-SWDs. Research has shown that students make the most improvement when they read one level above their current reading level. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? 2018-19 SCEP-P 63  The Behavioral Intervention Team (BIT) meets every afternoon to review data submitted daily by teachers on student academic, behavioral, linguistic, and emotional needs. Efforts to address every ELL that demonstrates a need in one of these areas are coordinated through this process. Counselors and teachers follow up with students and students' families to find the best solutions for each student. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). In addition to the Parent Orientation for new ELLs, our ELLs are invited to the Summer Bridge Program in August, where they can meet teachers, school counselors, the parent coordinator, the ESL coordinator, the principal and assistant principal, and other students. ELLs who enroll throughout the school year receive letters home inviting them to participate in after-school programs such as Global Kids. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? All Entering, Emerging and low-Transitioning ELLs take a content themed literacy elective focused on improving reading, writing, and conversation skills. These students complete assignments weekly which are used to identify areas of needed improvement and next steps in the revision process. ELLs also take 2 credits of Spanish as a foreign language. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Since all teachers at our school are teachers of ELLs, all staff receive professional development to help ELLs improve their literacy skills. Our teachers work regularly with Eskolta, Redesign, the NYC Math Project, and MSQI and our supt office personnel to improve their practice. Teachers receive regular professional development from Eskolta and other paid consultants to improve their teaching of literacy skills to ELLs and to align their teaching to the Common Core. ENL teachers regularly attend PDs on teaching struggling readers by Really Great Reading. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Guidance Counselors at our school maintain updated information on transitioning students from middle school to high school. They meet regularly with teachers of ELLs to provide them with the necessary information for students. As per CR Part 154, all teachers and administrators at our school receive professional development that specifically addresses the needs of ELLs (more than 15% of the required professional development time). For example, last summer, all teachers received PD around best practices for co-teaching strategies which specifically addressed strategies for working with English Language Learners and integrating language and content. Throughout the year, the ENL coordinator regularly offers PDs 2018-19 SCEP-P 64  around new language acquisition that focuses on strategies for content area teachers working with ELLs. Bilingual and ENL teachers regularly attend PDs on teaching struggling readers offered by Really Great Reading. Records (agendas, sign-in sheets) are maintained by the school secretary. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Annual individual meetings with parents of all ELLs are done in person or over the phone if a family member is unable to come to the school. The meetings are logged in a shared document by the teacher who completes the meeting. All four teachers (two certified ENL teachers and two certified bilingual teachers) who provide the individual meeting with parents speak Spanish. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Our parent coordinator encourages ELL parent involvement by reaching out to parents of ELLs in their preferred language (most of our teachers and staff also speak Spanish) whenever there are activities in which parents can participate. We also provide translated information for students to take home to their parents. Activities that foster parent involvement at our school include our annual Wellness Fair, the PTA, bake sales, and assemblies. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 SCEP-P 65 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, James Waslawski, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 SCEP-P 66  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: New Directions Secondary Schoo School DBN: 09X350 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) James Waslawski Title Principal Nina Morris Assistant Principal Thalia Whittaker Parent Coordinator Laura Lusardi ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Katie Dennison/Special Ed Teacher/Subject Area Rebecca Keith/ELA Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Nazeema Baboolall School Counselor Paul Rotondo Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 9/10/17 9/10/17 9/10/17 9/10/17 1/1/01 9/10/17 9/10/17 1/1/01 1/1/01 9/10/17 9/10/17 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 SCEP-P 67 2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools School Name: New Directions Secondary School Superintendent: Paul Rotondo DBN: 09X350 The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Laura Beltram School Secretary Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. We assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication using Part III of the Home Language Survey, ATS reports, the students' Emergency Contact cards, and regular outreach by school staff. Languages preferences will be entered into a report by class and grade and updated regularly. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral English 178 76 178 76 2018-19 SCEP-P 68  Spanish French Arabic 47 4 3 20 2 2 47 4 4 20 2 2 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. None Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Parent-teacher conference announcements, Wellness Fair announcement September, November, January March after-school program information September, January New York State testing dates October, January, March invitation to the Summer-Bridge program July, August Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. We translate into Spanish using qualified native speakers of Spanish on our staff We translate into Spanish using qualified native speakers of Spanish on our staff We translate into Spanish using qualified native speakers of Spanish on our staff We translate into Spanish using qualified native speakers of Spanish on our staff 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide ELL Parent Orientations (within 10 days of student admit), , September and on-going Yearly ELL Parent Conference Last week of September interpretation service(s)? Forms are already prepared by our bi-lingual language coordinator Language coordinator is in charge of translating and sending the appropriate announcements. 2018-19 SCEP-P 69  Parent-Teacher Conferences (four times a year) Daily informal calls to parents made by counselors, teachers, and administrators Sept, November, January, March Sept and on-going all year Language coordinator is in charge of translating and sending the appropriate announcements. Most of our support staff are bi-lingual. Spanish and French are covered by the school team. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Specific bi-lingual staff are pre-assigned to make calls to the families in the language they prefer / need. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. The second day teachers report back to school we review this part of our staff policies and procedures handbook. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) As per the Chancellor's Regulations A-663, our school fulfills the parent notification requirements for translation and interpretation services by 1) making sure that parents whose primary language is not English receive a copy of the Bill or Parents Rights and Responsibilities and 2) posting a sign in a visible location that informs parents of the availability of interpretation services. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Staff conduct regular outreach to parents and use informal feedback from these conversations to assess the quality and availability of the translation and interpretation services that our school provides. 2018-19 SCEP-P 70 
