 11X455 School Name: HARRY S TRUMAN HIGH SCHOOL Principal: KERI ALFANO 2018-19 SCEP-FL 1  School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Section 4: SCEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Harry S Truman High School 321100011455 9-12 School Number (DBN): x455 750 BaychesterAvenue, Bronx, NY 10475 718-904-5400 Fax: 718-904-5502 Email Address: eklein@schools.nyc.gov Keri Alfano Michael Hayes TBD Phone Number: Evan Klein School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Barbara Moye-Staten TBD TBD TBD NA District Information Geographical District: 11 Superintendent’s Office Address: Carron Staple Superintendent: One Fordham Plaza, Bronx, NY 10458 cstaple@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-741-5852 Phone Number: (718) 828-6280 Fax: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 3  Bronx FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Field Support Center (FSC) Jose Ruiz Executive Director: OneFordhamPlaza, Bronx, NY 10458 JRuiz2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-828-7776 Phone Number: (718) 741-7691 Fax: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the SCEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name K.Alfano(Principal) Staff 1 M. Hayes, (Staff 2) K.Dinham, (Parent 1) S. Campbell (Staff 3) G. Potter (Parent 2) O Lekan(Student 1) D Francis (Student 2) Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) BMoye(Staff 4) V Joyner (Staff 5) B Ortiz-Garcia (Student 3) S Chisholm (Parent 3) N Simpson-Torrvella(Parent 4) E Brown (Parent 5) SLT Chairperson (Guidance Counselor) Teacher Student Parent Parent Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 SCEP-FL 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) is a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. The process of developing and implementing the SCEP is aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding SCEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and SCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 7  In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement 2018-19 SCEP-FL 8  NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the SCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the SCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for SCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 9   Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 5: Build consensus around activities, strategies and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 6: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 7: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 10  Section 4: SCEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Our mission statement reads, “Harry S Truman High School promises to engage students in rigorous instruction, to ensure a safe and nurturing learning environment, and to graduate young men and women who are skillful problem solvers, creative thinkers and global citizens." 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Contextual information Truman features amenities seen elsewhere in city high school: 9 computer labs, planetarium, classrooms with Promethean flat panel boards, Court Room, Culinary arts rooms, television production studio, graphic arts studio, photography lab, 1200 seat auditorium, Olympic size pool, cycling gym, weightlifting room, and a host of other gyms. We offer comprehensive programs in Media Arts, Culinary Arts, JROTC (Junior Reserve Officer Training Corps), Pre-Engineering, and Law and Legal Studies. Our Pre-Engineering program is one of only two screened programs in the school. The program needs to be screened due to the complexity of the electives we offer that require strong reading and math skills. This program introduces students to basic design principles during the first year, simple robotic design the second year, and surveys the various fields of engineering the third year. Air Force JROTC is our other screened program. The AFJROTC program at Truman High School is grounded in the Air Force core values of integrity first, service before self, and excellence in all we do. The curriculum emphasizes the Air Force heritage and traditions, the development of flight, applied flight sciences, military aerospace policies, and space exploration. The Culinary Arts Program teaches students food preparation, restaurant management, hospitality and provides work based learning opportunities. The program offers partnerships with Monroe College, The Culinary Institute of America, and careers in the food services and hospitality industries. Our culinary students participate in America’s Best High School Chef (sponsored by Monroe College); America’s Best High School Pastry Chef (sponsored by Monroe College); Careers through the Culinary Arts Program (CCAP) scholarship competition; and Sports and Arts Iron Chef cook-off. Our culinary students have earned hundreds of thousands of dollars in scholarship monies to attend some of the finest culinary programs. Our Business and Computer Technology program provides students with the opportunity to explore various career options including growth careers in the 21st century, including the use of current technology in today’s marketplace. The program provides an option for students to focus on business or computer applications. Once a student completes a MOUS (Microsoft Office User Suite) certification course, he or she is eligible to take the MOUS certification exam and earn a permanent MOUS certificate. Students can also earn college credit for this certificate. This is an advantage when seeking employment in a technologically oriented society. Students take the following courses while enrolled in Truman’s Business and Computer Technology Program: Keyboarding, Microsoft Word, PowerPoint, Excel, Access, Webpage Design, General Business and Entrepreneurship The Law Program fosters an appreciation of Law and Government while equipping students with strong analytical, reading, writing, and public speaking skills. Throughout the course of the program, students examine the many perspectives of law and government. Emphasis is placed on the importance of public service and civic involvement and participation. Students are encouraged to think critically, become problem solvers, and learn how to take and 2018-19 SCEP-FL 11  defend a position both orally and in writing. Students have an opportunity to gain valuable skills through mock trials, debate, law related internships and college pre-law courses. Students also utilize our full-size student-built courtroom for class debates, moot court and mock trial. The Law Program has earned awards including those from the We the People Constitutional Law Competition, the New York State Mock Trial Contest, the NYC Moot Court Competition, and The New York City Bar Association Negotiation Competition. Truman is also proud to have sent students to the International Moot Court Competition at The Hague in the Netherlands. The Television Production and Media Communications Program focuses on teaching students how individuals communicate in a digital world. The course focuses on video production, as it has become pervasive in our everyday lives. We see video on our smart phones, in our taxi cabs and even on billboards along the highway. The course teaches students the fundamentals of production and writing for a variety of audiences. We will also expand our WISE Program for the 2018 / 2019 school year. The program allows seniors of all ability levels to create individualized real-world experiences (WISE projects), exploring their passions outside the traditional classroom. The program affords our participating seniors an opportunity to engage in experiential learning and internships. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Student Populations for the 2018 / 2019 school year. Truman High School, located in the North East Bronx, is one of the last remaining large comprehensive high schools in the Bronx. According to the current Student Demographics report we have 2198 students on register. For our demographics we have 50% Black or African American, 42% Hispanic or Latino, 3% Asian, 3% White and 1% American Indian. We have 4.4% ENL students and 22.3% students with disabilities. Truman High School is also Title I, with 65% eligible students. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: We utilize Collections by Houghton Mifflin for our E.L.A. (English Language Arts)curriculum. The program helps to develop student abilities to analyze complex texts, determine evidence, reason critically, and communicate thoughtfully. It uses active and engaged learning with a blended digital and print approach; a balance of complex texts with collections of fiction, non fiction, and informational works; and provides a deeper learning approach through enhanced collaboration with interactive digital tools. We offer I.C.T. (Integrated Co-Teaching) programs in 9th, 10th and 11th grade in English, Math, Science and Social Studies. We promote the use of assessment practices to further sustain the use of effective checks for understanding 2018-19 SCEP-FL 12  and student-self assessments, so that students are aware of their learning and teachers make thoughtful instructional adjustments at the classroom level, thus meeting the needs of all students. We utilize a school wide assessment strategy "Show Your Card." The assessment can be used at any point during a lesson. It is a self-guided self-assessment where students can show their level of understanding on a specific concept or idea during a lesson. This allows the teacher to gauge individual student understanding at any point and adjust their lesson accordingly. For the 2018 2019 school year, we are also focusing our professional development on Accountable Talk and Exit slips. We also train the staff on Annotating for a Purpose strategy which they then turnkey to the students. The students annotate for a purpose for every text they read and engage with. A class set of highlighters are available to help with the annotation. We will continue to grow our WISE Program (WISE Individualized Senior Experience) for 2018 / 2019. WISE allows seniors of all ability levels to create individualized real-world experiences (WISE projects), exploring their passions outside the traditional classroom. The program will afford our participating seniors an opportunity to engage in experiential learning and internships. During the 2018 / 2019, school year we will utilize the N.T.N. once gain to provide support to our math department. C.E.I . (Center for Educational Innovation) will once again provide training and support services. In June 2019, our Global students will transition TO NEW GLOBAL HISTORY AND GEOGRAPHY II REGENTS EXAM. Our social studies teachers will continue to receive extensive training on the new framework and curriculum. Supportive Environment: We excelled in this category during the 2016 / 2017 school year. As the 2016 / 2017 school survey indicates we went from a rating of 2.28 in 2015, to 2.91 in 2016, to 3.10 in 2017. The principal has created a safe and supportive learning environment. As well as having the support of guidance counselors, our students also have access to counselors and social workers through the RAPP Programs, SPARK program, Sports and Arts in School Foundation counselors and social workers from the Morris Heights Health Center. All of the aforementioned programs are housed in our building. Collaborative Teachers: The school administration in conjunction with the staff development team and the school staff developer will work in concert to create a comprehensive professional plan for the 2018 2019 school. We conduct weekly 80 minute long professional development workshops. The topics of the workshops arise from information that is gleaned during formal and information teacher observations. Professional development opportunities are also offered during the school day in our Staff Resource Center. Our Staff Resource Center is lead by an assistant principal. She meets with teachers, helps to develop lesson plans and assessments, and conducts demonstration lessons. The Resource Center also contains computers, printers, copy machine and supplies for teacher use. We also afford teachers the opportunity to participate in professional development that is conducted outside of the building during the school day, after school, on weekends and during holidays. Effective School Leadership: The principal has a process in place focused on supporting all teachers and progress toward individual goals. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 13  Internal and external professional development is informed by the observation process of informal and formal observations. This is supported by supervisory co-led observations and individual supervisory monthly visits conducted by assistant principals. The principal also ensures that succession plans are designed to include peer support, such as lead teachers mentoring new teachers, and classroom intervisitations across and within departments to build instructional and professional capacity, resulting in leadership roles. Strong Family-Community Ties: The principal has multiple structures to support a culture of high expectations communicated to all staff members, students and families via online systems that transparently depict student progress, attendance and personal growth. A staff handbook, student handbook, and the weekly Tru-Connection newsletter set the expectations, and celebrate ongoing accomplishments and upcoming events. School Messenger and Text 100 afford immediate communication with the school community, including families, ensuring that everyone understands the expectations and in partnership are accountable for student progress leading to a path toward college and career preparation. Our students and parents also have access to Pupil Path / Skedula, an online program that provides students and parents with attendance and school records, as well as up to date classroom work and teacher grades. Our brand new Parent Welcome Center opened in time for the 2018 2019 school year. The Center provides parents and guardians with a comfortable and welcoming room where they can fill out registration paper work or await for a counselor. We currently have the NYSED designation ”Focus School". On our 2017 2018 School Report Card we did not make our AYP in ELA for the following Student Groups: All students, Black or African American, Hispanic or Latino, Students with Disabilities and Economically Disadvantaged. For math we did not make our AYP in Mathematics for the following Student Groups: Hispanic or Latino, Students with Disabilities, and Economically Disadvantaged. Our four year graduation rate for 2018 was 77%. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 14  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 11X455 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 2000 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 382 379 35 60 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 119 97 11 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 72.0% % Attendance Rate 69.7% % Reduced Lunch 7.3% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 1.1% 41.0% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 2.9% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 5.06 2% 9% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 80% 76% 74.1% 9.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No No Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups Hispanic, ED Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A YSH N/A YSH YSH Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient N/A YES N/A YES No N/A 91 79 5 90.3% 2.7% 28.2% 51.6% 2.8% 1.8% 16 17% 6.5 N/A N/A 78% 79% 70.1% 9% N/A No Yes N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A YSH N/A N/A N/A YSH NO N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 15  Economically Disadvantaged YES ALL STUDENTS YES 2018-19 SCEP-FL 16  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed X X X X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our 2018 MOTP averages for each component are as follows: 1a 3.27 1e 3.14 2a 3.47 2d 2.88 3c 3.12 3d 3.08 4e 3.50 2018-19 SCEP-FL 17  On the 2017 / 2018 School survey we received a 3.51 score in Rigorous instruction which is .11 points higher than the borough average. Below are samples of some of the questions with percentages of students who responded in the affirmative. Also indicated are our results compared with the city averages. In order to ensure that professional development is meeting the needs of our teachers, we have enhanced our professional development team. The team meets twice a month to plan future professional development. We also conducted with all teachers a professional development needs assessment survey. The results of the survey will help to guide our professional development for the year. The two subgroups we struggled with for the 2016 / 2017 school year were our ENL and self contained special education. Both groups are being focused on this year through ENL push-in classes and the use of Achieve 3000. For special education we have expanded our I.C.T. courses to both 9th and 10th grades in all subjects. As a single session school we provide weekly professional development every Monday from 2:20 - 3:40. PD is provided by Assistant Principals, master teachers, in house staff developer, N.T.N., C.E.I. and other outside sources. Teachers within our academic houses are given common preparation periods to allow them to meet with one another to discuss specific students and concerns, to plan interdisciplinary projects, and to share best practices. Common prep periods have been arranged horizontally among grade level and common courses. During this time teachers can plan common lessons, interdisciplinary lessons and common assessments. Priority Needs: Professional development and training for all social studies teachers on the new Global and Geography curriculum and the forthcoming transitional exam.  2018 2019 professional development will focus on Accountable Talk and Exit slips.   A continued emphasis on student questioning, discussion techniques and enhancing student participation. I.C.T., Resource room, and ENL teachers need additional training on how to facilitate Collaborative Instruction. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will effectively integrate rigorous standards-based curricula across content areas, resulting in a 4% increase in average credit accumulation for our lowest one third students across grades, from 63% to 67%. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 18  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Teacher Intervention Plans (T.I.P.'s) will be created for the teachers with the MOTP "developing" and "ineffective" designation for the 2018 / 2019 school year. Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Teachers designated as "Developing" and "ineffective" Sept 2018 / June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals Supervision and school staff developer.  Social Studies teachers will attend professional development workshops in reference to the new Global and Geography curriculum and the forthcoming transitional exam. All social studies teachers.  Math Teachers will continue to attend professional development provided by National Training Network (NTN). NTN will also supply in house support to math teachers. All Math teachers To meet the particular needs of students with disabilities, English Language Learners, and other high-need student subgroups we will do the following:  For ENL we offer freestanding classes for our entering and emerging students; we offer integrated ENL classes in Diverse populations such as SWD, ENL, at risk students, and students (February 2019 Benchmark) Sept 2018 - June 2019 school year (February 2019 Benchmark) - when we will assess what additional training / supplies are needed Sept 2018 – June 2019 school year Sept 2018 – June 2019 school year Assistant Principal social studies. Assistant Principal Mathematics Principal, Assistant Principals Administration, Assistant Principals Supervision, and all teachers 2018-19 SCEP-FL 19  science and ELA for all levels: entering, emerging, transitioning, expanding and commanding; we offer an after school ENL Academy and Writing workshop; Achieve 3000 for entering and emerging students; and finally we offer a Saturday ENL Academy for Regents Prep. For our students with disabilities we offer: ICT classes in ELA, Math, Living Environment and Global Studies; comprehensive spectrum of special education services from A.C.E.S. (Academic Career and Essential Skills) to SETTS as an Indirect service; using the Ed Performance Assessment; tutoring and P.M. School is available for all students with disabilities. For At-Risk students we offer AIS classes, Saturday and after school tutoring, PM school classes, and online classes through iLearn. ICT, Resource room, and ENL teachers will attend a series of Collaborative Instruction workshops.    performing in the lowest third All ICT, Resource room and ENL teachers. Sept 2018 – June 2019 school year Assistant Principals and staff developer.  Teachers will be provided with Professional Development in All teachers the following areas: Accountable talk and Exit slips. Sept 2018 – June 2019 school year All assistant principals, staff developer and professional development team. (February 2019 Benchmark) - when we review professional development that has been offered and what follow ups need to be offered 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight.  Frequent and varied communication with parents (mailings, phone calls, e-mails, orientations, parent handbook, conferences, and workshops) regarding educational goals providing informational dissemination regarding the Common Core Learning Standards, changes to NYS Regents exams, and college admittance. Key personnel: Principal, Assistant Principal Organization, Assistant Principal Guidance 2018-19 SCEP-FL 20   Dissemination of student handbook and course catalog to all students and parents. These were handed out during the freshmen orientation held on August. In addition they are available year round in the Main Office. Key personnel: Principal, Assistant Principal Organization, Assistant Principal Guidance.  Use of Pupil Path to communicate grades and student progress by subject to parent. Pupil Path information will be provided to students and parents during the first week of school. Log in information will be provided in both English and Spanish. Pupil Path registration information was handed out during the first full week of school. Assistance with creating Pupil Path accounts will also be available during Parent Teacher conferences held on September 26. Key personnel: Principal, Assistant Principal Organization, Assistant Principal Guidance, and Program Chair.  Use of website www.bxtrumanhighschool.com and School Messenger. The website contains information about the Truman environment, the school discipline code, expectations , and highlights and achievements. The website is updated monthly and as needed throughout the school year. Key personnel: Principal, Assistant Principal Organization, Assistant Principal Guidance, and Media Teacher.  Use of contractual Parental Engagement Tuesdays for targeted outreach to parents and grade team conferences with parents. Assistant Principal check logs of parental outreach on a weekly basis to ensure teachers are keeping up with this contractual obligation. Key personnel: Principal, Assistant Principals, and all teachers.  During September 26 "Curriculum night" teachers will review curriculum and learning learning goals. Key personnel: Principal, Assistant Principals and all teachers.  During September 26 "Curriculum night" parents will be able to get assistance with setting up Pupil Path and filling out Free Lunch applications (still needed even though free lunch is now universal in the city) Key personnel: Principal, Assistant Principals and all teachers.  Whenever feasible, all notification are sent in both English and Spanish. Key personnel: Principal and Assistant Principal. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Common prep period, when feasible, will be scheduled for teachers in each academy.  Teachers will have access to the following resources: EdHelper, Achieve 3000, Brain Pop, EngageNY, Ilearn and Discovery Education to assist in designing lessons and assessments.  We will gauge the effectiveness of these resources by reviewing teacher lesson plans and student credit accumulation, especially among our ENL and special education populations  We will utilize Pupil Path and School Messenger as means of parental outreach.  We will obtain the services of an NTN trainer to work with Math teachers. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Fall scholarship reports will be reviewed. Credit accumulation for students in our lowest one third will be analyzed to see if we met the goal of 67%. Adjustments will be made as needed.  o Current data suggests we will meet this goal by June 2019 2018-19 SCEP-FL 21   Credit accumulation outcomes for Fall P.M school for the lowest one third will be analyzed. Adjustments will be made as needed. o For Fall 2018, 401 credits were attempted, 234 were earned with a 58% passing rate.  Formal and informal observations will continue to be analyzed by assistant principals on a monthly basis. o Assistant Principals supervision will continue to conduct formal and informal observations. All observations should be completed by May 2019  Teachers designated as T.I.P.s are being focused on. Weekly meetings with assistant principal supervision are scheduled to discuss: lesson plans and classroom instruction, resources that are available to teachers, o o o effective and highly effective teachers from whom to observe best practices, o a time-line for improvement, etc. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress.  Progress will be assessed through the data provided on ADVANCE  Scholarship Reports, specifically credit accumulation - for each of our 6 marking periods- will be reviewed by principal, assistant principals and programmers  2018/ 2019 Professional Development Binder  School Quality Report Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 22  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. x x x x SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child?  The school effectively uses support systems including guidance counselors, social workers, Morris Heights Health Center personnel, RAPP Coordinator, and Spark Coordinator (SAPIS) to provide social and emotional support.  Currently all guidance counselors and several other staff members are trained on LSCI (Life Space Crisis Intervention) strategies .  The school disseminates weekly newsletters to all staff members. Newsletter focuses on school highlights and achievements.  All grade nine students and parents receive an orientation session as soon as they start their career at Truman. In these sessions school leaders, teachers, school personnel, and senior students convey the expectations as well as detailed information about the academies, school programs and clubs. Parents appreciated that during the orientation sessions they received a hard copy of the student handbook which contains school regulations along with a description of all school courses and programs as well as face-to-face sessions with key members of the faculty. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 23  Since November 2017 we have assigned one guidance counselor whose job it is to oversee mediation and intervention services Priority Needs:  Our major need in this section is to ensure that by the end of November 2018 that additional staff members are training in (Therapeutic Crisis Intervention Services) . TCIS offers an alternative approach to how discipline has traditionally been handled in schools. Staffing our just opened Parent / Guardian Welcome Center   Assigning one of our counselors who will specifically deal with student mediation and intervention  Special attention will be paid to students in temporary housing. We currently have 221 students in temporary housing which is the largest number we have ever had. Principal Alfano and Assistant Principal Mourino, P.P.S., will meet with them twice a year to ascertain their needs. They will provided with school supplies, including backpacks and gym clothing. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools –Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all staff and students will receive formal training in the Citywide Behavioral Expectations, resulting in a 10% decrease in student incidents, as measured by the internal student reporting form. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 24  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional   development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Staff members will be trained on a variety of intervention and de-escalation strategies. We will specifically train our staff members whose job it is to deal with student behavioral issues on a daily basis: dean of students, guidance counselors, Assistant Principal for Pupil Personnel Services, Assistant Principal Special Education, our RAPP coordinator, our SAPIS counselor, and one of our social workers. A cadre of select supervisors, guidance counselors, teachers and deans. Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Sept 2018– June 2019 school year Principal, Assistant Principal Pupil Personnel services and the Head Dean of Security. Benchmark for assessing progress: February 2019 ● All schoolwide written and voice messages for parents dealing with intervention, de-escalation, discipline and programs offered by Truman will be printed and sent in both English and Spanish. Principal, assistant principals and program chair . All parents Sept 2018 Benchmark for assessing progress: February 2019  Special attention will be paid to students in temporary housing. Principal and AP Guidance will meet with them twice a year to ascertain their needs. They will be provided with school supplies, including backpacks and gym clothing. All students in Temporary Housing. Sept 2018 – June 2019 school year Principal, Assistant Principal Guidance and Meetings will be held in October 2018 and March 2019 Enhance activities that foster trust and fellowship in the school community: All students Sept 2018 – June 2019 school year Principal, assistant principals, Student Council President  Honor roll and Principals list certificates disseminated after each marking period 2018-19 SCEP-FL 25   Promotion of student winter and spring concerts  Extensive after school sports, club and tutoring are available  Active utilization of Parent / Guardian Welcome Center To meet the particular needs of students with disabilities, English Language Learners, and other high need student subgroups we will do the following: SWD, ENL, and at risk students    For ENL we offer free standing classes for our entering and emerging students; we offer integrated ENL classes in science and ELA for all levels: entering, emerging, transitioning, expanding and commanding; we offer an after school ENL Academy and Writing workshop; Achieve 3000 for entering and emerging students; and finally we offer a Saturday ENL Academy for Regents Prep. For our students with disabilities we offer: ICT classes; comprehensive spectrum of special education services from A.C.E.S. (Academic Career and Essential Skills) to SETTS; the Ed Performance Assessment; tutoring and P.M. School. For At-Risk students we offer AIS classes, Saturday and after school tutoring, PM school classes, and online classes through iLearn. Benchmark for assessing progress: February 2019 Sept 2018 – June 2019 school year Benchmark for assessing progress: February 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, Administration, Assistant Principal Supervision, and all teachers  Additional staff members will be trained in the Citywide Behavioral Expectations setting forth academic and behavior expectation, rewards for positive behavior and consequences for infractions. Additional staff members September 2018 This is information will be disseminated again to all students in February 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, Administration, Assistant Principal Supervision, and all teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight.  Frequent and varied communication with parents (mailings, phone calls, e-mails, orientations, parent handbook, conferences, and workshops) regarding educational goals providing informational dissemination regarding the Common Core Learning Standards, changes to NYS Regents exams, and college admittance. Key personnel: Principal, Assistant Principal Organization, Assistant Principal Guidance 2018-19 SCEP-FL 26   Dissemination of student handbook and course catalog to all students and parents. Key personnel: Principal, Assistant Principal Organization, Assistant Principal Guidance. These were handed out during the freshmen orientation held on August. In addition they are available year round in the Main Office.  Use of Pupil Path to communicate grades and student progress by subject to parent. Pupil Path information will be provided to students and parents during the first week of school. Log in information will be provided in both English and Spanish. Pupil Path registration information was handed out during the first full week of school. Assistance with creating Pupil Path accounts was also be available during Parent Teacher conferences held on September 26. Key personnel: Principal, Assistant Principal Organization, Assistant Principal Guidance, and Program Chair.  Use of website www.bxtrumanhighschool.com and School Messenger. The website contains information about the Truman environment, the school discipline code, expectations , and highlights and achievements. The website is updated monthly and as needed throughout the school year. Key personnel: Principal, Assistant Principal Organization, Assistant Principal Guidance, and Media Teacher.  Use of contractual Parental Engagement Tuesdays for targeted outreach to parents and grade team conferences with parents. Assistant Principal check logs of parental outreach on a weekly basis to ensure teachers are keeping up with this contractual obligation. Key personnel: Principal, Assistant Principals, and all teachers.  During September 26 Curriculum / Parent Teacher night teachers will review curriculum and learning learning goals. Key personnel: Principal, Assistant Principals and all teachers.  During September 26 Curriculum/ Parent Teacher night parents will be able to get assistance with setting up Pupil Path and filling out Free Lunch applications (still needed even though free lunch is now universal in the city) Key personnel: Principal, Assistant Principals and all teachers.  Whenever feasible, all notification are sent in both English and Spanish. Key personnel: Principal and Assistant Principal.  We are currently in the process of creating a Welcome Center for parents and guardians. Key personnel Principal, Assistant Principal Organization, custodial staff, and purchasing secretary. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  All freshmen and their parents will receive a hard copy of our student handbook which contains school regulations along with a description of all school courses and programs.  Discipline codes will be provided to all students and parents during the school year. These are available in multiple languages in our Main Office and the Guidance Office.  Truman's website provides a link to school rules and regulations.  Additional staff members will be trained on a variety of intervention and de-escalation strategies: TCIS and  LSCI. In-kind support will continue for SASF, BuildOn, Spark, RAPP and the Morris Heights Health Center to help them provide social, emotional and health support to our students.  We will gauge the impact of the aforementioned by comparing with last year our number of ORRS Reports, principal suspension and superintendent suspensions.  We will dedicate one guidance counselor who will exclusively deal with student mediation and intervention  We will actively utilize our Welcome Center for parents and guardians Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA P/F Set-aside 21st Century C4E 2018-19 SCEP-FL 27  Title I 1003(a) Title III PTA Funded SIG Grant School Achievement Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal.  By February 2019, all staff members will be trained on Therapeutic Crisis Intervention for Schools (TCIS) strategies. o Training was conducted on September 4, 2018  By February 2019, all staff members will be trained on General Response Protocols o G.R.P. training was conducted on October 15, 2018. In addition we have conducted 3 soft lock down drills  By February 2019, all students actively attending classes will be trained Citywide Behavioral Expectations o Expectations were reviewed by counselors at different times during October 2018 Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress.  Attendance sheets for TCIS strategies workshop;  Attendance sheets for General Response Protocols training;  The number of serious infractions listed on OORS reports;  The number of Superintendent Suspensions  The number of Principal's Suspensions Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 28  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. SOP(s) Addressed x x x 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. x 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. On the 2017 / 2018 School survey we received a score of 3.58 in collaborative teaching. This was slightly below the borough and city scores.  Teachers participate in professional development activities that support curriculum and assessment development.  We utilize a school wide assessment strategy "Show Your Card." We use the assessment in all classes. The assessment can be used at any point during a lesson. It is a self guided self-assessment where students can show their level of understanding on a specific concept or idea during a lesson. This allows teachers to gauge individual student's understanding at any point and adjust their lesson accordingly. Professional development on the strategy was offered to all teachers during their preparation or C6R period.  Accountable Talk and the use of Exit slips for assessment are our two main professional development focuses for the year  Teachers align instruction to carefully selected Common Core Learning Standards that address skills needed to complete assessment tasks within each unit of study. Students are provided with instruction that addresses multiple skill levels, and CCLS aligned goals are articulated through feedback that targets student reading and writing needs and supports specific points of entry based on formative writing assessments such as NYC Performance Task or Regents based base-lines. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 29   Teachers create a safe environment to support student learning and needs through CCLS aligned and arts based instruction that provides opportunities to explore content through multiple modes of engagement.  Teachers use a variety of formative and summative data to monitor student learning and inform targeted changes within curriculum to address specific student needs. Priority Needs:  We will continue with and build upon our professional development focus from last year, Annotating for Purpose and 1,2,3,4 cards (used for assessment).  We will focus our 201 2019 professional development on Accountable Talk and Exit Slips  Additional training will be provided on analyzing student work and data to inform instruction Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. In order to increase student engagement in rigorous daily lessons, by June 2019, teachers will meet by departments for targeted professional development in questioning and discussion, resulting in a 4% increase in the number of teachers rated Effective or Highly Effective in component 3b. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 30  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Inquiry / teacher teams will be developed based on grade levels and subject. Following an agreed upon protocol, teachers and guidance counselors will work collaboratively in reviewing student work, identifying areas of strength and weaknesses and developing targeted teaching strategies to improve student writing skills. Evaluation will take place in classroom during formal and informal observations, walkthroughs, and through close analysis of scholarship reports.   Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) All teachers and guidance counselors Sept 2018 – June 2019 school year Principal and all assistant principals. Benchmark for assessing progress: February 2019  ICT, Resource room, and ENL teachers will attend a series of Collaborative Instruction workshops. All ICT, SETSS and ENL teachers Sept 2018– June 2019 school year Assistant Principals  Social Studies teachers will attend professional development workshops in reference to the new Global and Geography curriculum. All social studies teachers. Assistant Principal social studies Benchmark for assessing progress: February 2019 Once a month during 2018 / 2019 school year Benchmark for assessing progress: results of 2018-19 SCEP-FL 31  June Global Transition exam  Accountable Talk strips have been placed on every desk in All teachers every class. A set of 1,2,3,4 have been provided to every teacher for classroom use. September 2018 Assistant Principals and all teachers All ENL students.  Harry S Truman High School has instituted an ENL Academy in order to better serve the needs of its ELLs. This ENL Academy and the ENL Saturday academy include certified ENL teachers and certified content area teachers in social studies (US History, Global History), science (Living environment), and math( CC Algebra, Geometry). Our ENL teachers will lead workshops for our Saturday academy teachers on myriad topics, including classroom management and organization, improving academic rigor for ELLs and students with disabilities, data-driven instruction, and how to use multiple points of entry to enhance learning among students. (at no cost to Title III) Sept 2018 – June 2019 school year Benchmark for assessing progress: February 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal for ENL, and ENL teachers. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight.  Frequent and varied communication with parents (mailings, phone calls, e-mails, orientations, parent handbook, conferences, and workshops) regarding educational goals providing informational dissemination regarding the Common Core Learning Standards, changes to NYS Regents exams, and college admittance. Key personnel: Principal, Assistant Principal Organization, Assistant Principal Guidance  Dissemination of student handbook and course catalog to all students and parents. Key personnel: Principal, Assistant Principal Organization, Assistant Principal Guidance. These were handed out during the freshmen orientation held on August. In addition they are available year round in the Main Office.  Use of Pupil Path to communicate grades and student progress by subject to parent. Pupil Path information will be provided to students and parents during the first week of school. Log in information will be provided in both English and Spanish. Pupil Path registration information was handed out during the first full week of school. Assistance with creating Pupil Path accounts was also be available during Parent Teacher conferences held on September 26. Key personnel: Principal, Assistant Principal Organization, Assistant Principal Guidance, and Program Chair.  Use of website www.bxtrumanhighschool.com and School Messenger. The website contains information about the Truman environment, the school discipline code, expectations , and highlights and achievements. The website is updated monthly and as needed throughout the school year. Key personnel: Principal, Assistant Principal Organization, Assistant Principal Guidance, and Media Teacher.  Use of contractual Parental Engagement Tuesdays for targeted outreach to parents and grade team conferences with parents. Assistant Principal check logs of parental outreach on a weekly basis to ensure teachers are keeping up with this contractual obligation. Key personnel: Principal, Assistant Principals, and all teachers.  During September 26 "Meet the Staff" night teachers will review curriculum and learning learning goals. Key personnel: Principal, Assistant Principals and all teachers. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 32   During September 26 "Meet the Staff" night parents will be able to get assistance with setting up Pupil Path and filling out Free Lunch applications (still needed even though free lunch is now universal in the city) Key personnel: Principal, Assistant Principals and all teachers.  Whenever feasible, all notification are sent in both English and Spanish. Key personnel: Principal and Assistant Principal. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.     Funds will be set aside to support the new Global Studies curriculum, such as additional books, online licenses, and outside trainers Funds will be set aside for ENL Academy - per-session and OTPS Funds will be allocated for N.T.N. and other organizations to offer academic support and professional development. Funds will be allocated to pay for coverages and substitutes so SETTS, ICT and ENL push in teachers can attend training workshops. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal.  Fall term scholarship reports will be used to monitor the passing rates of ICT, ENL and SETSS students. o We expect to see an increased passing rate for ICT, ENL, and SETTS students by June 2019  Yearly progress reports, New York State Report Card, and School Quality Report will all show improved credit accumulation and regents results. o We expect to meet this goal by June 2019  So far for the 2018 2019 school year we have offered the following professional development focusing on questioning and discussion o Accountable Talk o Creating an Initial Assessment o Exit Tickets o Questioning and Discussion o Vocabulary Strategies o ENL Strategies o Danielson Rubric (New Teachers) o Questioning and Discussion (New Teachers) o Danielson Refresher (History) o Questioning and Discussion – Analyzing Images (History) o PD for Coaches o o Creating “Powerful Invitations for ELLs in Content Areas o Differentiated Questioning o Depth of Knowledge Item Analysis of Baseline Assessment 2018-19 SCEP-FL 33  o Exit Tickets o Self Assessment as an Exit o ENL Vocabulary Strategies o Management Strategies o Asking Effective Questions o Using Accountable Talk Stems o Analyzing Results of Mock Regents Exam to determine next steps o Sharing Best Practices o Discourse Cards/Accountable Talk o Depth of Knowledge o Math – Teaching Students to Ask their Own Questions o How to foster “Academic Conversations” within your Classroom Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress.  Progress will be assessed through the use of marking period grades, January 2019 regents grades, varied assessments tools, ADVANCE, and surveys Schedule of Professional Development for the 2018 2019 school year  Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 34  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). x x x x SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. On the 2018 school survey we received a 2.98 score which is slightly below the borough and city averages. We will expand upon our staff development focus from 2017 / 2018, "annotate for purpose" and "1,2,3,4 cards". Our focus for 2018 / 2019 will revolve around "Accountable talk" and "Exit slips". It is our core belief that if our teachers succeed then our students will succeed. Therefore, we have dedicated ourselves to the professional growth of our teachers. Our teachers attend professional development both inside and outside of the building throughout the school year. In addition, we make certain that our teachers have all the supplies they need in their classroom, in gym classes, in science labs, library, etc. All of our classrooms have interactive Smart Boards. We have 9 computer labs available to our 2018-19 SCEP-FL 35  teachers throughout the day. In short, we provide our teachers with whatever the resources they need to be successful in the classroom. The school leadership has a clear vision of leading teachers to higher levels of effectiveness for higher student outcomes. Teachers have come on board and are beginning to work together to make this vision a reality. The principal has created an environment of a professional learning community by providing teachers with:  Effective programming allowing academy teachers a common planning.  Time on Tuesday after parental outreach for teacher teams to meet.  Access to resources such as, Pupil Path online electronic grade book.  Professional development schedule aligned with increased teacher effectiveness, student questioning and discussion techniques and the Danielson Framework for Teaching.  Professional development provided from outside educational consultants, such as NTN.  A Teacher Resource center that is staffed by a school wide staff developer. She is available four periods a day to assist new and experienced teachers with lesson planning, curriculum alignment and teacher strategies.  A weekly staff newsletter is disseminated highlighting the achievement of our staff members Priority needs:  To enhance the number of peer to peer professional development workshops  The further development of teachers as leaders  The sharing of research based strategies to enhance best practices and student success Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART– Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. In order to improve teacher practice across the school, by June 2019, we will plan and implement targeted and differentiated professional learning opportunities for all teachers resulting in an increase in teacher satisfaction on the school survey question “Overall, my professional development experiences this year has been sustained and coherently focused, rather than short-term and unrelated." from 84% to 87%. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 36  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff)  The principal will provide a professional learning structures which includes weekly professional developments focused on the school-wide Instructional Focus. All teachers Sept 2018 – June 2019 school year Assistant principals, master teacher and school staff developer. Benchmark for assessing progress: February 2019 Sept 2018– June 2019 school year Benchmark for assessing progress: February 2019 Sept 2018 – June 2019 school year All teachers  Several workshops during the school year will focus specifically on the needs of all at risk student populations, including SWD and ELL: ELL Topics include: What drives the ENL compliance, school data summary report, ENL Data breakdown, ELL Identification process, ENL Services, ENL Exit, ENL Resources, ENL Text activity and ENL Academic words. SWD workshops include, Using Sesis for data entry, understating the IEP, and Functional Behavior Assessment (FBA) and Behavior Intervention Plan (BIP). All parents ● All vital academic information will be posted on the Pupil Path program. All students and their guardians have access to the programs. To meet the particular needs of students with disabilities, English Language Learners, and other high-need student subgroups we will do the following: All SWD and ELL students. Sept 2018 – June 2019 school year  For ELL we offer free standing classes for our entering and emerging students; we offer integrated ELL classes in Assistant principals, master teacher and school staff developer. Principal, Assistant Principal Administration, Assistant Principal Pupil Personnel Services, SLT Chairperson, and PA President. Principal, assistant principals, School staff developer, guidance counselors and school programmer. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 37 Benchmark for assessing progress: February 2019 All ENL students Sept 2018– June 2019 school year Principal, Assistant Principal for ENL, and ENL teachers. science and ELA for all levels: entering, emerging, transitioning, expanding and commanding; we offer an after school ELL Academy and Writing workshop; Achieve 3000 for entering and emerging students; and finally we offer a Saturday ENL Academy for Regents Prep. For our students with disabilities we offer: ICT classes in ELA (implemented this year; comprehensive spectrum of special education services from A.C.E.S. (Academic Career and Essential Skills) to SETTS as an Indirect service; using the Ed Performance Assessment; tutoring and P.M. School is available for all students with disabilities. For At-Risk students we offer AIS classes, Saturday and after school tutoring, PM school classes, and online classes through iLearn.    Accommodations will be made to ensure that Testing modifications are given to all eligible ELL and Students with Disabilities.  Harry S Truman High School has instituted an ENL Academy in order to better serve the needs of its ELLs. This ENL Academy and the ENL Saturday academy include certified ENL teachers and certified content area teachers in social studies (US History, Global History), science (Living environment), and math( CC Algebra, Geometry). Our ENL teachers will lead workshops for our Saturday academy teachers on myriad topics, including classroom management and organization, improving academic rigor for ELLs and students with disabilities, data-driven instruction, and how to use multiple points of entry to enhance learning among students. (at no cost to Title III) 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight.  Frequent and varied communication with parents (mailings, phone calls, e-mails, orientations, parent handbook, conferences, and workshops) regarding educational goals providing informational dissemination regarding the Common Core Learning Standards, changes to NYS Regents exams, and college admittance. Key personnel: Principal, Assistant Principal Organization, Assistant Principal Guidance  Dissemination of student handbook and course catalog to all students and parents. Key personnel: Principal, Assistant Principal Organization, Assistant Principal Guidance. These were handed out during the freshmen orientation held on August. In addition they are available year round in the Main Office.  Use of Pupil Path to communicate grades and student progress by subject to parent. Pupil Path information will be provided to students and parents during the first week of school. Log in information will be provided in both English and Spanish. Pupil Path registration information was handed out during the first full week of school. Assistance with creating Pupil Path accounts was also be available during Parent Teacher conferences held on September 26. Key personnel: Principal, Assistant Principal Organization, Assistant Principal Guidance, and Program Chair. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 38   Use of website www.bxtrumanhighschool.com and School Messenger. The website contains information about the Truman environment, the school discipline code, expectations , and highlights and achievements. The website is updated monthly and as needed throughout the school year. Key personnel: Principal, Assistant Principal Organization, Assistant Principal Guidance, and Media Teacher.  Use of contractual Parental Engagement Tuesdays for targeted outreach to parents and grade team conferences with parents. Assistant Principal check logs of parental outreach on a weekly basis to ensure teachers are keeping up with this contractual obligation. Key personnel: Principal, Assistant Principals, and all teachers.  During September 26 "Meet the Staff" night teachers will review curriculum and learning learning goals. Key personnel: Principal, Assistant Principals and all teachers.  During September 26 "Meet the Staff" night parents will be able to get assistance with setting up Pupil Path and filling out Free Lunch applications (still needed even though free lunch is now universal in the city) Key personnel: Principal, Assistant Principals and all teachers.  Whenever feasible, all notification are sent in both English and Spanish. Key personnel: Principal and Assistant Principal. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Funds will be set aside to pay for N.T.N and other outside consultants   Common preparation periods for academic houses where feasible   A total of twenty days of per-diem substitute funds will be set aside for coverages so that teachers can attend Funds will be set aside so teachers can attend workshops both inside and outside of the school related workshops both in and outside of the building. Additional, hours will be set aside if necessary. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal.  By February 2019, 90 % of our teachers will attend in school professional development workshops offered during and after the school day. So far for the 2018 2019 school year we have offered the following professional development workshops: o Accountable Talk o Creating an Initial Assessment o Exit Tickets o Questioning and Discussion o Vocabulary Strategies o ENL Strategies o Danielson Rubric (New Teachers) o Questioning and Discussion (New Teachers) o Danielson Refresher (History) o Questioning and Discussion – Analyzing Images (History) o PD for Coaches 2018-19 SCEP-FL 39  Item Analysis of Baseline Assessment o o Creating “Powerful Invitations for ELLs in Content Areas o Differentiated Questioning o Depth of Knowledge o Exit Tickets o Self-Assessment as an Exit o ENL Vocabulary Strategies o Management Strategies o Asking Effective Questions o Using Accountable Talk Stems o Analyzing Results of Mock Regents Exam to determine next steps o Sharing Best Practices o Discourse Cards/Accountable Talk o Depth of Knowledge o Math – Teaching Students to Ask their Own Questions o How to foster “Academic Conversations” within your Classroom  Fall term scholarship reports, yearly progress reports, New York State Report Card, and School Quality Report will all show improvement in student performance and progress. o We expect to meet this goal by June 2019 Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress.  Progress will be assessed through data collected by the school professional development committee, including needs assessments, surveys and exit evaluations.  Progress will be assessed through the use of marking period grades, January 2019 regents grades, varied assessments tools, ADVANCE, and surveys  Professional development binder will indicate all staff development conducted at Truman.   Copy of exit evaluation. Signatures will show number of staff members who attended workshops. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 40  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. x x x x SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. On the 2017 / 2018 School survey we received a score of 3.15 in Strong Family-Community Ties which is slightly above the borough and city averages.  81% of parents say that school staff regularly communicate with them about how parents can help their child learn (City average: 87%)  79% of parents say that they have communicated with their child's teacher about their child's performance (City average: 83%)  93% of teachers say that teachers at this school work closely with families to meet student needs (City avearge: 88%)  Based on the NYC School Survey, Truman will continue to strive to improve the family-community ties to create a supportive and collaborative environment to support student achievement.  We keep in constant contact with parents via School Messenger system, mailings, our website and Facebook page.  The Pupil Path online portal is used to allow parents with constant information about their child's grades and class work  Whenever feasible notices to parents are provided in multiple languages. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 41   We need to increase the number of parents / guardians who attend the Parents Association.  We need to see an increase in the number of parents / guardians who attend Parent Teacher conferences.  We run open houses for middle school students three times during the school year. Priority Need:  Utilization of parent / guardian Welcome Center  Increased outreach to parents and guardians in reference to school events, school achievements, schoolwide issues and concerns, and professional opportunities  More involvement by parents and guardians in the SLT and P.T.A.  Providing differentiated and relevant parent workshops Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the school will offer targeted seminars for parents and students, resulting in at least 90% of parents with positive response to the School Survey question around regular communication with them on how to help their child learn. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 42  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  The School Leadership Team and the Parents Teachers Association will assist with school teams to bring together teachers, parents and community partners to increase parental involvement and work collaboratively to identify new parent volunteer areas to address the needs of the school community. Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Teachers, students, parents and guardians. Sept 2018 – June 2019 school year Principal, SLT and parents association members. Benchmark assessment: February 2019 Sept 2018– June 2019 school year Benchmark assessment: February 2019 Sept 2018 – June 2019 school year Principal, PTA President Principal, PTA President  Parents will receive monthly sessions at PTA meetings addressing current issues affecting their children. Issues such as prescription drug abuse, respect for all, relationship abuse prevention, social media, college readiness and blended learning have been scheduled for the school year. Parents and guardians School Messenger is set to send automated advance notifications to all parents for upcoming meetings. Truman website contains calendar of all meeting dates; flyer of dates handed out during Parent Teacher Conferences. Parents and guardians   Frequent and varied communication with parents (mailings, phone calls, e-mails, orientations, parent handbook, conferences, and workshops) regarding educational goals providing informational dissemination regarding the new Common Core Learning Standards, changes to NYS Regents exams, and college admittance. All parents Sept 2018 – June 2019 school year Principal, assistant principals, SLT and PA.  Use of Pupil Path to communicate grades and student progress by subject to parent.  Use of website www.bxtrumanhighschool.com and School Messenger 2018-19 SCEP-FL 43   Use of contractual Parental Engagement Tuesdays for targeted outreach to parents and grade team conferences with parents.  During September Curriculum night teachers will review curriculum and learning learning goals. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. N/A Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.    In September 2018 our new Greeting Center for parents and other visitors to the building was opened Funds will be allocated for the 2018 / 2019 school year to continue the School Messenger phone system and Pupil Path program, both of which allow communication between the school staff and parents. Funds will continue to be allocated for the 2018 / 2019 school year for all staff members to make use of written translation services.  Parent Teacher Association will be given a room to hold meetings and to provide computer and phone access. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal.  Parent responses on the 2018 / 2019 School survey will be reviewed to see if we met 90% goal o Survey results are still being completed by parents o Surveys were mailed home to parents o Parents were sent several voice messages reminding them to please complete the parental surveys  Monthly Sign-in sheets to the PTA meetings will provide us a clear indication of attendance at these meetings. We will be looking for an increase each month in the number of parents attending. o For the Fall 2018 term the attendance for our PTA meetings is up 5% from this time last year  This September our Parent / Guardian Welcome Center opened up o The Welcome Center has been opened since September 2018  Voice messages sent from the PTA President to all parents are created in both English and Spanish o Written and voice messages from the PTA are sent in both English and Spanish  We will see an increase in the number of parents utilizing our Pupil Path system o 65% of our parents have a Pupil Path account which allows them to review their child’s grades / attendance 2018-19 SCEP-FL 44  Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress.  2018 / 2019 School survey results  Attendance sheets from PTA meetings, "Meet the staff" evening, Articulation sessions and Parent Teacher Conferences for 2018 / 2019 will all show an increase from the same events for the 2017 / 2018 school year. . Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 45  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Student has failed the ELA Common Core Regents; or student did not take ELA Common Core regents when they were scheduled; also eligible are students who failed a class and need to make up the credit. Student has failed the AlgebraCommon Core Regents; or student did not take Common Core regents when they were scheduled; also eligible are students who failed a class and need to make up the credit. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) The Academic Intervention Services in English are tailored for 12th graders who have not yet passed the English Language Arts Regents. As part of our AIS services we utilize Achieve 3000, tutoring, Castle Learning, Compass, and Apex Learning. Other at risk students will receive tutoring and opportunities for credit accumulation and PM school. ELA Regents tutoring is offered to General Ed, Special Ed and ENL students. The AIS service for Algebra is an accelerated one term class that prepares students for the Common Core Algebra exam. It is primarily offered to sophomores, juniors and a handful of seniors that still need to complete their math regents requirement. This course services ELL Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Full class instruction is utilized during the school day. PM school is 54 hours per semester and run right after school ends each day. Students are monitored in a one-to-one model for on line learning. When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) AIS classes are single period courses that run during the school day, Monday through Friday. Tutoring is available after school, select Saturdays and during the holiday breaks. Title III tutoring is available to our ENL population on Saturday mornings from 10 a.m. to 1 p.m. Tutoring is in small group instruction Full class instruction is utilized during the school day. PM school is 54 hours per semester and runs right after school ends each day. Students are monitored in a one-AIS classes for Algebra are single period and run during the school day, Monday through Friday. Tutoring is available after school, select Saturdays and during the holiday breaks. This Title III tutoring is available to our ENL population on Saturday mornings 2018-19 SCEP-FL 46  Science Student has failed the Living Environment Regents; also eligible are students who failed a class and need to make up the credit. Students who still need to fulfill required hours of labs. and special education students as well. As part of our AIS services we utilize Achieve 3000, Tutoring, Castle Learning, Compass, and Apex Learning. Other at risk students receive tutoring and opportunities for credit accumulation through PM school. Algebra tutoring is available for General Ed, Special Ed and ENL students. Regents tutoring is available for Title III students. Regents tutoring and credit accumulation is available for General Ed, Special Ed and ENL students. Also, with more than 85% of our students coming in at level 1 and 2 on the 8th grade State math exam we require all freshmen students to take a math literacy course. This is in addition to their Common Core Algebra course. The AIS course for Living Environment is an accelerated one term class that prepares students for the regents exam. It is primarily offered to sophomores, juniors and a handful of seniors that still need to complete their science regents to-one model for on line learning. from 10 a.m. to 1 p.m. Tutoring is in small group instruction Full class instruction is utilized during the school day. PM school is 54 hours per semester and runs right after school ends on Wednesdays and Thursdays. This is a single period course that runs during the school day, Monday through Friday. This tutoring is available after school, select Saturdays and during the holiday breaks. This Title III tutoring is available to our ENL population on 2018-19 SCEP-FL 47  Social Studies Student has failed the Global or US History Regents; or student did not take the regents when they were scheduled; also eligible are students who failed a class and need to make up the credit. requirement. This course services ENL, Special Education and General Education students in grades 9 – 12. As part of our AIS services we utilize Achieve 3000, Tutoring, Castle Learning, Compass, and Apex Learning. Other at risk students receive tutoring and opportunities for credit accumulation through PM school. Living environment tutoring is available for General Ed, Special Ed and ENL students. Regents tutoring is available for Title III students. Regents tutoring and credit accumulation is available for General Ed, Special Ed and ENL students. We also offer students who are behind on their labs the opportunity to make them after school, select Saturdays, and over select holiday breaks. The Academic Intervention Services in Global studies are tailored for primarily for 11th and 12th graders who have not yet passed the Global Studies Regents; As part of our AIS services we utilize Achieve 3000, Tutoring, Castle Learning, Compass, and Apex Learning. Students are monitored in a one-to-one model for on line learning. Saturday mornings from 10 a.m. to 1 p.m. Tutoring is in small group instruction. Full class instruction is utilized during the school day. PM school is 54 hours per semester and run right after school ends each day on Wednesdays and Thursdays. Students are monitored in a one-Both courses are single period and run during the school day, Monday through Friday. This tutoring is available after school, select Saturdays and during the holiday breaks. This Title III tutoring is available to our ENL population on Saturday mornings 2018-19 SCEP-FL 48  At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) All general education, special education, and ELL students in social, emotional or academic need. Other at risk students will receive tutoring and opportunities for credit accumulation through the Achieve Now Program and PM school. Global and US History Regents tutoring is offered to General Ed, Special Ed and ENL students. The Academic Intervention Services in US History are tailored for students who have not yet passed the Regents exam. As part of our AIS services we utilize Achieve 3000, Tutoring, Castle Learning, Compass, and Apex Learning. Other at risk students will receive tutoring and opportunities for credit accumulation through the Achieve Now Program and PM school. Global and US History Regents tutoring is offered to General Ed, Special Ed and ENL students. Individual and group counseling sessions; Educationally Related Support Services (ERSS) referrals to Social Worker; referrals to outside agencies; internships; summer school; tutoring; alternative programs such as YABC, GED, etc. Guidance counselor to-one model for on line learning. from 10 a.m. to 1 p.m. Tutoring is in small group instruction Small group, one-to-one, and tutoring, are all the methods of instruction The school at-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) are provided to ENL, Special Education and General Education students in grades 9 - 12. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 49  service ELL12. They are especially involved with at risk students and will set up meetings and intervention plans for students who are failing one or more classes. Psychologists are called in to assess emergency situations, suicidal ideations and depressions; consultations on specific students; consultations with teachers, counselors and other service providers. The school psychologist services ELL12. Individual and family counseling; ERSS referrals; referrals to outside agencies; recommendations for CSE evaluations; assessing emergency situations. Provide HIV/Aids lessons, Relationship Abuse Prevention Program (RAPP); SPARK presentations; referrals to Morris Heights Health Center; immunization status checked throughout the year by Health Office. The health related services are for ENL, Special Education and General Education 2018-19 SCEP-FL 50  students in grades 9 – 12. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 51  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) (2018 / 2019 results (as of 9/21/`8) 215: Breakdown: Doubled Up (137); Shelter (65); Other temporary living situation (23). 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Our STH (Students in Temporary Housing) are offered the following materials free of charge: book-bags, locks, gym uniforms and other school supplies they may not be able to afford. They are also provided with whatever counseling and educational support services they require. We also make certain that breakfast and lunch is offered to these students. Parents are also eligible for metro cards so they can attend meeting at the school. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). NA 2018-19 SCEP-FL 52 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. NA 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. NA 2018-19 SCEP-FL 53  Section 8: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. We utilize the following to recruit teachers to Truman: New Teacher Finder, Open Market, New York City Teaching Fellows, word of mouth, recommendation of other teachers, and human resources. We require ALL potential candidates to conduct a demonstration lesson, usually during our summer school program. The demonstration lessons are attended by the principal, several assistant principals, teachers and students. The assistant principals will confer with students and the teacher also about their thoughts on the demonstration lesson and whether or not the candidate is a good fit. All potentials candidates are interviewed by at least 3 to 4 assistant principals. We exhaustively check the references of all candidates to glean what we can from former employers. Highly Qualified Teachers are supported and encouraged to continue to grow by:  promoting a culture of shared belief in teacher and student excellence;  promoting clear communication of school’s mission and professional expectations. These are shared throughout the school year via our staff handbook, department and faculty meetings and weekly newsletter.  developing a culture of positive feedback and sharing of best practices.  highlighting professional development that targets teacher growth, curricula development, and student awareness. recognizing teacher achievement and professional growth.   promoting leadership in teams and professional development  enabling ongoing common planning for teacher teams.  providing frequent classroom visits by administration and inter-visitations.  Intensifying individualized attention to strengthen teacher skill set Truman High School provides its teachers with a myriad of resources to increase teacher effectiveness and improve student outcomes. Newly hired teachers are provided a mentor that meets weekly with them and addresses any and 2018-19 SCEP-FL 54  all questions that may arise. Newly hired teachers are also invited into the school a week early to meet with staff developer, review curriculum, set up their rooms, fill out paperwork, etc. Our school staff developer also works with new teachers on lesson planning, instruction, and educational strategies. The principal and departmental assistant principals visit the teachers’ classrooms at least once per month and provide meaningful feedback and next steps for improved classroom instruction. Professional development is provided for all new teachers both in house and offsite. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Assistant Principals for each department are experts in their fields. They provide one to one support for classroom teachers. Our staff development team works to provide quality professional development for 80 minutes every Monday. The PD team fills the Chancellor's Conference Days with meaningful, data driven professional development. The results of our annual teacher professional development survey guides are workshops for the year. Teachers attend professional development opportunities both inside and outside of the building throughout the school year. Our administrators attend training offered through ELI (Executive Leadership Institute) as well as other programs. We also have a Staff Resource Center, where teachers can go for assistance with lesson planning and other academic needs. We will also contract with N.T.N., and C.E.I. for the 2018 2019 school year to provide professional development. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. "Not Applicable" 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). "Not Applicable" Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 55  Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). "Not Applicable" 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. The professional development committee is comprised of teachers, staff developer and administrators and provides informational sessions to staff in order to promote an understanding of the assessments. Based on feedback, the committee selects appropriate assessments that are used to inform instruction. Professional development further supports the understanding, sharing, reviewing, and analysis of data by which students can be targeted for multiple intervention as well as the revision of curriculum to implement strategic benchmarks / outcomes / tasks. The professional development team is also working in concert with school administration and the school staff developer to ensure that meaningful and focused workshops are provided to teachers. We have a MOSL committee that chooses the Local and States measures that best represent our school. The committee consists of five assistant principals and five UFT members. Once chosen the measures are shared with the entire staff. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (SCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Title I Part A (Basic) Federal Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Federal Federal $1,458,600 0 0 x NA NA Column B Section Reference(s) 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E, and 6 NA NA 2018-19 SCEP-FL 56 Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Federal Federal Federal 0 0 0 $12,902,182 Tax Levy (FSF) Local NA NA NA x NA NA NA 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E, and 6 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/SCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not 2018-19 SCEP-FL 57  available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 58  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Parent Involvement Policy (PIP) Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Harry S Truman High School , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 59  Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. Harry S Truman High School will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students  providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology;  providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and  decision making in support of the education of their children; fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress;  providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments;  sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand;  providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community;  providing high-quality curriculum and instruction in a supportive and effective learning environment that enables the participating children to meet the State’s student academic achievement standards and the Common Core Learning Standards;  being cognizant of students with special needs and will alter lesson delivery to meet their needs as outlined on their Individual Education Plans;  being cognizant of English Language Learners and alter lesson delivery to meet their specific needs.  providing parents with daily information about their child by using the Pupil Path program  providing parents reasonable access to staff;  involving parents in the planning, review, and improvement of the school’s parental involvement policy, in an organized, ongoing, and timely way;  providing information to parents of participating students in an understandable and uniform format, including alternative formats upon the request of parents with disabilities, and, to the extent practicable, in a language that parents can understand; respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences;   offering high quality instruction in all content areas. Parental Involvement and School Quality To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will:  actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact;  engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills;  ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 60   support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills;  provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report;  host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting;   translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help;  host educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement  encourage meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; support or host Family Day events;   provide written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress;  develop and distribute a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) Harry S Truman High School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum respecting cultural, racial, gender and ethnic differences; implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards;  using academic learning time efficiently;    offering high quality instruction in all content areas;  providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Elementary and Secondary Education Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships    achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 61   providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact;   providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information;  ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff English speaking parents;  notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff     member; arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community;  ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as  described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; Parent/Guardian Responsibilities: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities checking Pupil Path program on a daily basis; listening to messages left via the School Messenger system;    ensuring that my child arrives to school on time as well as follows the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent;  ensuring that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my   child and his/her age; checking and assisting my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; setting limits to the amount of time my child watches television, plays video games, texts and using cellphone and or tablet device;  promoting positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; volunteering in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits;  encouraging my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child;   participating, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education;  communicating with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; responding to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested;   becoming involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 62  participating in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; taking part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serving to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; visiting my child's teachers during parent / teacher conferences.   Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities attending school regularly and arrive on time; completing my homework and submitting all assignments on time; following the school rules and being responsible for my actions; showing respect for myself, other people and property; trying to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; always try my best to learn; completing homework every day and ask for help when needed; reading at least 30 minutes every day outside of school time;         providing to parents or the adult who is responsible for my welfare all notices and information received from the school; acting in a respectful manner to fellow students and all adults in the building; following student rules as outlined in the NYCDOE Discipline Code; following Harry S Truman's High School cellphone policy.    2018-19 SCEP-FL 63  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): K 6 1 7 2 8 3 9 4 10 5 11 12 2018-19 SCEP-FL 64  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Many ELL students attending Harry S Truman High School are deficient in grade-level literacy skills, behind in credit accumulation, and have not passed New York State Regents Examinations. This makes it difficult for them to meet graduation requirements with their cohort in four years. Students are identified as at-risk in the fall of each school year, as well as during a mid-year performance review after January Regents examinations. At-risk students will be offered intervention services to support learning. We evaluate the success of our ELL by looking at the following areas: Credit accumulation, course passing rates, Regents passing rates, and graduation rates. Moreover, we disaggregated this data by cohort and students with disabilities. We include all grade levels from grade 9 to grade 12. The AP of administration, the AP of ENL, the ENL teachers, and a team of content area teachers from the four major subject areas will evaluate the success of these students based on the aforementioned criteria. All ENL students that fall short in one or more categories will be invited to participate in our Saturday Academy program. Implementation: Implementation of our Saturday Academy will allow us further opportunities to help at-risk ELLs grades 10-12 to improve performance in the four core subject areas, and on state examinations. There will be 4 content area teachers (1 Math, 1 ELA, 1 Science, and 1 Social studies certified teacher) and 2 ENL certified teachers working in this Saturday Academy. The Saturday Academy will run on 12/1/2018, 12/8/2018, 12/15/2018, 1/5/2019, 1/12/2019, and 1/19/2019 for the Fall session. The Spring Saturday Academy will run on the following dates: 4/27/2019, 5/4/2019, 5/11/2019, 5/18/2019, 6/1/2019, and 6/8/2019 . The hours of the Academy will be from 10:00 AM - 1:00 PM. During the Saturday Academy content area teachers in Math (CC Algebra or Geometry); Science (Living Environment, Earth Science); Social Studies (Global History, US History); and ELA will work with ELL students on preparing for the January and June Regents. 2 Certified ENL teachers will rotate through these classes to team-teach as necessary, as well as to support the content area teachers in strategies and methods for the students. We believe that ELL students should develop language through their exposure to different content areas. Our ENL teachers will focus a great deal on Tier 2/academic vocabulary, and they will build thematic units that allow students to see how skills and content go together with certain threads. Our ENL teachers will translate directions in students' native language and place them next to the English-language directions. Moreover, ENL teachers will help to develop additional materials for the content area teachers; for example: graphic organizers, guided questions, text chunks, close paragraphs, and guided reading and note-taking to help students develop vocabulary and analyze various types of text. Moreover, ENL teachers will help content 2018-19 SCEP-FL 65  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information teachers develop rigorous instructional outcomes appropriate for students' individual English fluency levels. Students will be using Barron's regents review books purchased exclusively for the Saturday academy (with no cost to Title III). Students will attend two different subjects during the Saturday academy and the schedule will be given to them by Dr. Frantova and AP Mourino. The schedule will be developed using the STARS graduation analysis report 1.67. and 1.63. Students from grades 10-12 will be attending the Saturday academy for the purpose of preparing for January and June Regents. Language of instruction will be English and the ENL department will provide additional translation and interpretation, when needed. Parents will be notified via mail, phone call, emails and PupilPath. Notifications will be send in various languages to accommodate all home languages in our ENL student community. A parallel 9th and 10th grade After School Academy will focus on strengthening students' academic language skills. The data informs us, that many of our students have developed their basic English-speaking skills, but when it comes to cognitive academic language (CALPS), students struggle a great deal. Also, regardless of levels, students struggle with academic language and with writing across the content areas. Based on the analysis of the different modalities, our teachers have revised the curriculum to encompass academic reading and writing across the four major content areas. In our 9th and 10th grade population, when looking at our ENL data analysis tool, one ENL teacher will work along with content area teachers (Social studies, Science, and Math certified teachers) with a group of transitioning and expanding students who are on the cusp of passing the NYSESLAT and the Regents exams. ENL and the social studies teachers will work with students on specific reading and writing skills, while the science and math teachers will work with a group of entering and emerging students who are still struggling to acquire basic academic language skills. The 9th and 10th grade After School Academy will be meeting on Wednesdays and Thursdays every week from 2:30 to 4:00 PM during the school year (20 days will be paid through the Title III funding, the rest of the days will be at no cost to Title III funding, the school will supplement using other funding sources). Language of instruction will be English. Parents will be notified via mail, phone call, emails and PupilPath. Notifications will be send in various languages to accommodate all home languages in our ENL student community. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration 2018-19 SCEP-FL 66  Part C: Professional Development topics to be covered   name of provider Begin description here: Begin description here: Harry S Truman High School has instituted an ENL Academy in order to better serve the needs of its ELL student population. This ENL Academy and the ENL Saturday Academy includes certified ENL teachers and certified content area teachers in Social Studies (US History, Global History); Science (Living environment); Math( CC Algebra or Geometry); and ELA. Our ENL teachers will lead workshops for our Saturday Academy teachers on myriad topics, including classroom management and organization, improving academic rigor for ELLs and students with disabilities, data-driven instruction, and how to use multiple points of entry to enhance learning among students and The Four Hallmarks of Literacy. (at no cost to Title III) During our Saturday academy, as well as afternoon workshops, our ENL teachers will focus a great deal on Tier 2/academic vocabulary, and they will build thematic units that allow students to see how skills and content go together with certain threads. Our ENL teachers will translate directions in students' native language and place them next to the English-language directions. ENL teachers will help to develop additional materials for the content area teachers, for example, graphic organizers, guided questions, text chunks and other methods of scaffolding. Additionally, guided reading and note-taking strategies will help students develop vocabulary and analyze various types of text. We believe that students should develop language through their exposure to different content areas. Therefore, the ENL teachers will also will help content teachers develop rigorous instructional outcomes appropriate for students' individual English fluency levels. ENL workshop schedule and Topics: September 2018 : Supporting ENL's Achievements: Oral Language Unpacked October 2018: Aligning Instructional Outcomes to NYSED Bilingual Progressions November 2018 : Text Complexity and Technology Resources For ENL Students (Reading Plus and Max Scholar) December 2018 : Conversation - Based Classroom Strategies for Student Collaboration. January 2019 : The Four Hallmarks of Literacy February 2019: Strategies for implementing Academic Vocabulary for ELL. March 2019 : Improving Academic Rigor For ENL Students and Using Contextual Clues. April 2019: Curriculum Mapping: Strategies for Successful Implementation of ELL Programs Part 1 May 2019 : Curriculum Mapping: Strategies for Successful Implementation of ELL Programs Part 2 The workshops will be provided after school once a month from 2:30 -4:15 pm. Additional workshops will occur during weekly school professional development meetings. ENL teachers and the AP ENL will be the main providers for these workshops. Dr. Frantova, AP ENL and Ms. Rivera (BESIS and LAP coordinator, ENL certified) will also meet with the Saturday academy teachers on a weekly basis to review lesson plans and assist teachers with making decisions based on their reflections of their own pedagogy. These meetings will take place during the teacher's preparation periods. Mr. Sugar (one of our certified ENL teachers) will confer with content team teachers, observe classes, and analyze student data 2018-19 SCEP-FL 67  Part C: Professional Development to affect instruction of the Saturday and regular school day instruction. The result of this work is to see student learning strengths and weaknesses in all four academic areas (ELA, Math, Science, and Social studies). This will help generate ideas and make the ENL Saturday academy and other ELL-specific instruction cater to students' individual needs. This will be at no cost to Title III. The ENL Academy (which consists of our 2 ENL teachers, ELA teacher, Science teacher, Social Studies teacher and a Math teacher) will serve as the school's main inquiry team. The teachers must meet regularly to discuss their target population and the students' progress. These meetings will take place once a month on Tuesday from 3:00- 3:30 pm, during the designated Tuesday Other professional activity time. The inquiry process will serve as professional development, so that teachers can examine student work to make decisions about student learning and their pedagogy (at no cost to Title III). Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Parents of ELLs will be invited to attend three workshops. The first workshop will be in October 2018, the second in December 2018 and the third workshop will be in June 2019. The meetings will be after school from 6:00 to 7:30 PM or on a Saturday morning from 10:30 - 12:30 pm. Parents will meet with Joseph Ward and Katia Pilla our ENL Guidance Counselors and the ENL teacher team will also be available. These meeting will assist parents with providing their children academic support at home, as well as informing them of graduation requirements and the importance of Regents examinations. In addition to the formal agenda, parents will have the opportunity to speak with Dr. Frantova, Mr. Ward, Ms. Pilla and the ENL teachers about their children's individual progress. Throughout the year, we will be providing parents with workshops so that they can be partners in their children’s learning. AP ENL, ENL guidance counselor and the ENL teacher will be the primary providers for these workshops. Translation services for parents will be provided at no cost to Title III. Topics for these workshops include but are not limited to: October 2018: Using Pupil Path to obtain their child’s assessment data and identify areas of strength and weaknesses, Saturday academy Introduction. December 2018: Looking at the NYSESLAT: Providing parents with their children’s NYSESLAT results. Also give them an in-depth look as to the structure of the exam and how they can help their child at home to be successful. FASFA completion with our senior population. (at no cost to Title III) June 2019: ENL Family Day and planning for next school year (what worked and what did not work). Records of attendance and topics of workshops are kept in the ENL binder. By looking at the records from previous years and reflecting on the success of the workshops offering, we are able 2018-19 SCEP-FL 68  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities to determine what workshops most interest parents and align those to the current workshop offerings. Parents will receive a binder with helpful information (Pathway to Graduation, College Programs, FAFSA information, etc.) These supplies will be provided at no cost to Title II. School will supplement through other funding sources. Parents will be notified via mail, Pupil Path, and follow-up phone calls. Light refreshments will be served and metro cards will be offered for transportation at no cost to Title III. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) $ 20,378.40  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff 0 and curriculum development contracts. Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Direct Service of Students 4 Content teachers (1ELA, 1 Math, 1 Science, 1 Social studies) along with 2 ENL teachers will work with 110 ELL students on homework help, CALPS, reading and writing skills and Regents' Prep. 6 Teachers x 12 Saturdays x 3 hours @$60.65 per hour = $ 13,100.40 ENL After School academy 3 content teachers (1 Math, 1 Social studies, 1Science) and 1 ENL teacher: 4 teachers x 20 days x 1.5 hours @ 60.65 per hour = $ 7,278 at no cost to Title III Supplies and materials 2018-19 SCEP-FL 69 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. at no cost to Title III 0 0 Parent Workshops - ELL Institute for Parents at no cost to Title III The total cost of the program is $ 588.40 higher than the budgeted amount. The school will compensate $588.40 from other funding sources.  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other 0 0 0 0 TOTAL $ 20,378.40 2018-19 SCEP-FL 70  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 11 School Name Harry S Truman High School Borough Bronx School Number 455 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Keri Alfano Coach T. Pappas ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Teacher/Subject Area Makley, Living Environment Teacher/Subject Area W. Beauzile, Earth Science Related-Service Provider C. Willie - Lawes Superintendent C. Staple Assistant Principal Petra Frantova Coach type here School Counselor J. Ward, B. Moye Parent Parent Coordinator Field Support Center Staff Member Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 5 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 2018-19 SCEP-FL 71  D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 1946 Total number of ELLs 136 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 6.99% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 3 4 2 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? We use the following resources to assess our students to guide instructional planning for our ELL: a) to assess the early literacy we use teacher created formative assessment derived from NYSESLAT sample tasks published on Engage NY as well as sample tasks publish fro ELA CC Regents exams. b) Quantitative data using Achieve 3000 reports c) Quantitative data using ILit reports 2018-19 SCEP-FL 72  d) evaluation on writing samples and culminating tasks during our ENL inquiry team meetings with specific goal for targeted group of students 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? In order to assess the early literacy skills of our ELLs, we use teacher-created formative assessments aligned to the standards set forth in the New York State Bilingual Common Core Initiative. The assessment tasks are derived from the New York State English as a Second Language Achievement Test (NYSESLAT) Sample Items found on Engage NY. Regardless of the last time the student took the NYSESLAT exam, we give the formative assessment at the beginning of each year to evaluate how well students read, write, listen, and speak. Students that arrive later in the year also receive the same assessment. We also use quantitative data from Achieve 3000, a reading and writing improvement program. Achieve 3000 provides an initial, summative, and ongoing assessment of the students’ Lexile levels. This program also allows teachers to track gains and regressions in the students’ reading abilities. These data inform us that many of our students have developed basic English-speaking skills. For the entering population we use data from ILit a Program by Pearson. However, students struggle a great deal with Cognitive Academic Language (CALPS), specifically Tier 2 and Tier 3 academic vocabulary. This struggle with academic language also impacts students’ writing abilities across the content areas. These data inform the lesson planning of the ENL department. Scaffolds, assignments, and assessments are differentiated to meet each student’s individual learner profile.During our ENL inquiry teachers follow the inquiry protocol. They select a targeted group of students and bring their work samples to evaluate them during the inquiry team meetings. Then they develop new strategies for their upcoming lessons and they incorporate these new strategies in their teaching. Once all lessons completed, team comes back together to evaluate how the strategies worked for the targeted group of students as well as other students in the class. The evaluation is accompanied by evaluating new students work as see if students made expected progress. The ENL team is planning to share 10 Tier II words each month via the staff Newsletter along with several teaching strategies . The expectations are for all faculty to incorporate these words in their lessons on every day bases. Then the ENL department will monitor the comprehension of these words in their classes as well as other classes we have access to through Push-In instructional model. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We use the following resources to assess our students to guide instructional planning for our ELL: a) to assess the early literacy we use teacher created formative assessment derived from NYSESLAT sample tasks published on Engage NY as well as sample tasks publish fro ELA CC Regents exams. b) Quantitative data using Achieve 3000 reports c) Quantitative data using ILit reports d) evaluation on writing samples and culminating tasks during our ENL inquiry team as well as other inquiry team meetings with specific goals for targeted group of students e)Using DDC Portal in Skedula to evaluate final exams reports for each unit in all subject areas for ENL student population f) using the Lab performance scores in Science classes to drive Lab instruction based on the needs of ENL population 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? We support ELLs second language development during instruction via a system of data analysis and implementation. First, ENL-certified teachers are partnered with science and ELA teachers in Integrated Co-Teaching (ICT) environments. In ICT environments, co-designed formative, ongoing and summative assessments of ELL work are performed during and after daily instructional cycles. This informs instructional modifications that are responsive to the data collected from these instructional assessments. The ICT pairings with science teachers assist with the acquisition of academic content, as well as Tier 2 and Tier 3 language. ICT teachers and ENL teachers co-plan curricula and lessons with dedicated co-planning time periods. In self-contained ENL classes, certified teachers base their instruction in the content areas, differentiated by student new language literacy levels. In self-contained classes, ENL teachers pre- and post- teach content for ELLs that is informed by collaboration with math, ELA, science, and social studies content teachers. To support math and social studies content, ENL teachers collaborate with subject teachers while the ENL department plans self-contained cycles of instruction. ENL teachers also perform formal longitudinal and cross-sectional inquiries, then collaborate with content teachers as necessary. Student use of 2018-19 SCEP-FL 73  Tier 2 and Tier 3 words in speaking, reading, and writing has been identified as a target area for intervention. ENL teachers pull individual representative student data regularly from aggregated student populations. This data is then cross-referenced and instructional interventions are co-planned between ENL and content teachers. ELA instruction is delivered by a dual-certified ENL and ELA content teacher. The ENL department partnered with content teachers in ELA, science, and social studies to write the ELA curriculum for ELL students. This curriculum draws from the content areas in alignment with the standards for Common Core ELA, as well as the standards from the New York State Bilingual Common Core Initiative. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] N/A 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Our ELL programs are driven using the following data: a) using the ELL Data Analysis tool using the regents passing results for individual students or groups of students b) using RLAT for tracking NYSESLAT results to track performance of students in all 4 modalities. c) using STARS reports to track credit accumulation and regents passing for individual students and for each cohort group. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? We evaluate the success of our ELLs by looking at the following areas: credit accumulation, course passing rates, Regents passing rates, progress on the NYSESLAT, and graduation rates. Moreover, we disaggregated this data by cohort and students with disabilities. The AP of administration, the AP of ENL, the 5 ENL teachers, and a team of content area teachers from Special Education and the four major subject areas will evaluate the success of these students based on the aforementioned criteria. To assist the inquiry work, we create individual goals for each student every semester, to enable success and growth in small steps towards graduation as the overall goal. We also evaluate student growth after every semester and Regents cycle, to determine the accuracy of individual goals. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Our freestanding ENL program incorporates differentiated populations on the basis of NYSESLAT and teacher-observed data. We implemented an Integrated and Freestanding ENL classes for each individual student, depending on their observed strengths and weaknesses in each core content area: science, social studies, math, and ELA. Our students tend to struggle with Algebra and Living Environment as freshmen. In order to pro-actively approach this recurring problem, our ninth grade ENL students will receive a literacy/skills course in Algebra five days per week. To support our struggling population in Science classes, our Push In model keeps students grouped together grouped based on their Science needs. During this period, our ENL teachers will push-in to these classes to aid students in acquiring the content knowledge and vocabulary skills necessary to pass their classes and Regents Examinations. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 74  Entering students will receive 360 minutes of freestanding ENL and 180 minutes of integrated ENL in Science and/or ELA Emerging students will receive 180 minutes of freestanding ENL and 180 minutes of integrated ENL in Science and/ or ELA. Transitioning students will receive 180 minutes of freestanding ENL and 180 minutes of integrated ENL in ELA. Expanding students will receive 180 minutes of integrated ENL in the area of need based on regents results and credit accumulation. Commanding students will receive 180 minutes of integrated ENL in the area of need based on regents results and credit accumulation. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Harry S. Truman High School ensures the mandated number of instructional minutes are delivered in compliance with CR-154 during each program model via precise pupil course scheduling and planning. ENL teachers will maintain freestanding ENL classes, as well as support in students' content area coursework by coordinating with content teachers. When students struggle in a course required to graduate, ENL teachers differentiate their instruction to support each student's preparedness for Regents exams. ENL teachers will push-in to content area classes and work with content area teachers to discuss how they will be best utilized, and how to provide the best support to each individual student. Entering students will receive 360 minutes of freestanding ENL and 180 minutes of integrated ENL in Science and/or ELA Emerging students will receive 180 minutes of freestanding ENL and 180 minutes of integrated ENL in Science and/ or ELA. Transitioning students will receive 180 minutes of freestanding ENL and 180 minutes of integrated ENL in ELA. Expanding students will receive 180 minutes of integrated ENL in the area of need based on regents results and credit accumulation. Commanding students will receive 180 minutes of integrated ENL in the area of need based on regents results and credit accumulation. ELA content is delivered by a dual-certified ENL/ELA teacher, based on grade level. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Our ENL program is cross-curricular. The ENL teachers get their content from teachers in the different content areas in English. Teachers program the students for different work stations, where they practice reading, writing, listening, and speaking via content from social studies, math, literature and science. At the end of each week, students work with their respective ENL teachers to program themselves for new stations for the upcoming week. This allows students to see their growth and areas of improvement at the end of each week. This method of evaluation allows students to work at their own pace and the teacher to supply lessons with the appropriate amount of rigor for each individual child. It also holds students accountable for their work. ENL teachers and content area teachers have a common planning time to discuss students' needs. ELA content is delivered by grade level using a curriculum differentiated by grade and fluency level. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? 2018-19 SCEP-FL 75  Upon arrival, students are given the option of taking the LAB-R in their home language if they choose. Students also have the option of take the LOTE in their home language. Students with the home language designation of Spanish are always programmed for Spanish classes and are encouraged to take the LOTE exam. ENL teachers and content area teachers work together to develop materials in various languages to support student learning in various content areas. Our curriculum allows for students to practice their speaking skills by making presentations and speeches. Students practice their reading skills by reading independently, listening to teachers read and think aloud, and practice choral reading. Our students use the writing workshop model to develop their writing skills in different writing genres. Our teachers often read small, targeted texts aloud so that students can practice note-taking and then reflect on the listening and note-taking processes. Students work in groups everyday, after engaging in a whole-group discussion, in order to ensure that they are enhancing their speaking and social skills. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status We differentiate instruction for ELL subgroups in the following ways: A. For SIFE, we focus on social-emotional learning, and how they can adapt study skills to make themselves better students. We also provide flexible seating and student choice in terms of content for these students. B. For newcomers, we ask our students to partner with newcomers from another country and exchange ideas and experiences from their native countries. We then ask students to identify the commonalities between the two different cultures, and we also ask them to prepare brochures and visual presentations on their native countries. Students work on developing their BICS, but they are also introduced to content-specific material from math, science, literature, and history. C and D. Students at this level, in addition to the support they receive in ENL classes, are provided with both After school ENL academy and Saturday ENL academy and Writing workshops in order to help build content, academic language, and general reading and writing skills. E. Former ELLs' students, their teachers are notified that they are former ELLs and are given native-language dictionaries so that students can still receive native-language support. Students are also invited to attend after school academy with the aforementioned group of students as well as to Saturday academy and any other events organized for ENL students. These students continue to be allowed extra time on state exams. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Our teachers focus a great deal on tier 2/academic vocabulary. We build thematic units that allow students to see how skills and content go together with certain threads. Our teachers translate directions in students' native language and place them next to the English-language directions. Teachers use an array of graphic organizers, guided questions, text chunking, jigsaw reading, guided reading and note-taking to help students develop vocabulary and analyze various types of text. We believe that students should develop language through their exposure to different content areas. Conversation is also a focal point of ENL classes. Students are encouraged to work in groups and discuss topics with each other to enhance their speaking skills and content knowledge. Teachers will often pair students using a self-rating scale (1-4) of how well students can answer a certain question relating to a core content subject area. Using this scale, students who rated themselves as a 4 will work with students who rated themselves as a 1, and students at levels 2 and 3 will work together. This allows students to work together, learn from each other, enhance speaking skill and usage of academic language, and/or reinforce what they already know. Our ENL-SWD population receives all their services according to their IEP mandate. One of our ENL teacher is also certified as a special education teacher. She is the mandated ENL teacher for our ENL-SWD population in our stand alone ENL classes. The rest of the integrated ENL services are provided in their regular SWD classes and our ENL teacher are providing a Push -In service in their classes. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 76  7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? By using individualized contracts for every student, students are able to complete the same culminating projects but receive different scaffold materials and mini-lessons in order to accomplish this. For example, if students are working on personal narrative, one student may need three different types of work stations to scaffold for such a project, while a student with disabilities might need scaffolding in basic grammar, sentence structure, paragraph writing, sequencing, compare and contrast, and essay structure. One of our ENL teachers is dual-certified in ENL and special education, and she makes IEP goals part of the students' weekly contracts. . 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Our ENL students are provided with many intervention programs. During the school day, we offer both freestanding ENL and push-in ENL and additional literacy classes for core content areas. We also offer Afterschool ENL academy, After school writing workshop, Saturday ENL academy, and small group instruction during lunch periods. All these intervention services are provided in English language and some days in Spanish language as well. We also keep a list of staff available to assist students in other languages on individual bases. This list is updated yearly at the beginning of the school year during our whole staff professional development. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? For the upcoming school year, we are implementing our new Math Literacy Push in Model as well as a new curriculum for the ELA classes servicing our ENL population 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Students are afforded time in a half on all assessments and exams. If they are unable to complete their work during class time, ENL teachers will be notified and they will be given time during ENL class to complete their work. Students are also After school and Saturday academy, and a Writing workshop and they have access to any other clubs, events, sports that are open to the whole school population as well. The ENL department involves student in community service during school events and we make sure that translators or peer translators are there to assist students at any program or event our ENL population is attending. . 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. ENL teachers develop and implement many different unit plans in order to prepare students for the NYSESLAT, as well as the ELA, Algebra, U.S. History, Living Environment, and Global Regents Examinations. ENL teachers work with content area teachers to incorporate the assignments and content from their classes into ENL classes, which allows for scaffolding for all the students. The contract method is used to have students held accountable for their work, which is level-appropriate for each individual student. This allows ENL teachers to spend time working one-on-one and in small groups with the English language learners who need more constant support. Students are provided with bilingual and picture dictionaries. Each ENL teacher has a Smart Board in his or her classroom for all lessons, typically utilizing it along with PowerPoint to create 2018-19 SCEP-FL 77  slides. This allows teachers to create interactive games and activities for students. Teachers update Skedula regularly, which allows them to communicate with students and parents (and vice-versa), post student grades, attendance, and anecdotes about student behavior and academic progress. Students frequently use Achieve3000, which is a computer program that enhances literacy by providing differentiated instruction for each student in the form of current events articles. Students are also encouraged to complete customized assessments throughout the content areas using Castle Learning both in class and in their free time. . 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? We are making sure that Spanish-speaking ENL receive a period of native language support everyday. We also make sure that materials (textbooks, workbook, software, dictionaries) in content area or ENL classes are available in various languages and as we said we have staff members for almost every language in the building that can assist the students as well. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. ENL students' schedules are programmed to correspond to their age and achievement level. This data will decide student programming for the year. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? N/A. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). We have ENL back to school night for parents in addition to the mandated parent/teacher conferences. We also have parent/teacher conferences to discuss all students' progress. ENL teachers Melissa Rivera, Jacob Sugar, and Nancy Farley are in attendance for these, as well as AP Frantova and Principal Alfano. We have a buddy system, where new ENLs are paired with a former/ current ENL who shares similarities in culture, who can assist transitioning to high school and to the new country. We also have a student-teacher buddy system, where teachers from various cultural and language background work with students with similar backgrounds. These teachers are helping us as translators when parents are visiting as well. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Spanish language, Italian language, French language . 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Paste response to question here: NA 2018-19 SCEP-FL 78  Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? ENL teachers and the AP of ENL meet every day during 2nd period to look at student work, plan lessons, plan upcoming units, and design uniform assessments. Once a month during PD on Monday, ENL academy teachers meet with ENL teachers so that content teachers develop the ENL teachers in content, and the ENL teachers develop the content teachers in ENL methodologies. The AP of ENL also offers weekly workshops on different ENL methodologies and encourages all teachers to send her lesson plans so that she can provide them with feedback on how to provide more scaffolding and support for ELLs. The AP of ENL will initially hold a Professional Development session for all staff outlining the process for identifying ELLs, ELL subgroups, and compliance issues. Throughout the 2017-2018 school year, we are projecting to hold a professional development session monthly for all staff members, including teachers (Humanities, Mathematics, Science, Music, Physical Education, Special Education), paraprofessionals, administration hosted by the AP of ENL or ENL teacher to help staff members become more knowledgeable of successful strategies for teaching and working with ELLs. Topics for these professional development questions are: • Analyzing NYSESLAT scores and proficiency levels in modalities to guide classroom instruction • QTEL Strategies • Project-based learning for English language Learners • Technology resources for English language Learners • Total Physical Response • Making instruction comprehensible for ELLs • Using context clues to provide meaning for instruction Staff members are also encouraged to attend professional development offerings from the Office of English Language Learners as well as the Network Support Organization. The AP of ENL shares information on any upcoming workshops from the Office of ELLs and other organizations such as NCTE, so that teachers can attend them and then turn-key information for their colleagues. This school year, the ENL team is working together to devise a plan for helping ELLs transition to high school; this plan will include the buddy program that was mentioned earlier. All teachers receive ELL training via the Chancellor's PD days, weekly workshops run by the ENL department and our Teachers Center, and by attending the workshops that OELLs offers. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. School wide professional development will address the needs of Ell students. Our Teachers Center will also run workshop based Professional development with the focus on our ELL population on regular basis. After completing these sessions, teachers will be given a certificate of completion and our ENL department will track the appropriate time allocated for ELL-specific professional development. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 79  Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? There will be 4 meetings this school year. October ENL parents meet and greet December - Graduation requirements and Curriculum night March - NYSESLAT meeting and meet with the teacher meeting June - Family Day The school will provide written translated materials by using its outside vendor translating service and sending all parent notification documents to be translated two weeks before the correspondence is scheduled to be mailed. The school will also follow up by sending out a phone message in the appropriate languages to make sure the parents received the notification via mail. For Spanish translation, our Spanish language and literature teachers will assist us with translation, both written and oral. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Our ENL parents are invited to all school wide meetings as well as special workshops conducted by the school. We have 4 separate meetings that are geared towards the ENL populations (please see above). Our ENL parents also participate in our College and Career meeting, FAFSA meeting, College fair and Cultural Night. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 80 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Keri Alfano, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 81  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Harry S Truman HS School DBN: 11X455 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Keri Alfano Title Principal Petra Frantova, Ph.D. Assistant Principal Billienette Lunsford Parent Coordinator Melissa Rivera ENL/Bilingual Teacher Mr. Fletcher Parent Wilfrid Beauzile Teacher/Subject Area Trisha Makley Teacher/Subject Area Themis Pappas Coach Coach Joseph Ward School Counselor Carron Staple Anita Bushi J. Sugar N. Farley Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Bronx Other ENL teacher Other ENL Teachers Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 6/29/2017 6/29/2017 6/29/2017 6/29/2017 6/29/2017 6/29/2017 6/29/2017 6/29/2017 1/1/01 6/29/2017 6/29/2017 6/29/2017 10/26/15 10/26/15 2018-19 SCEP-FL 82 2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools School Name: Harry S Truman HS Superintendent: Carron Staple DBN: 11X455 The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Petra Melissa Frantova Rivera A.P. Science and ESL Yes 11/28/16 ENL teacher No Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. We analyze the ATS home language report (RCPL) to find out how many different languages we must address. Our effort as a school is to address all the language needs for all our parents, but during events we invite interpreters of the most common languages which are now Spanish, Arabic, French, Nahuatl and Bengali. We make sure that materials such as parent notices, attendance records, automated phone class, along with report card notes and comments are translated into the different languages. For this purpose, we utilize the Infohub.nyced.org portal and the DOE Dept. of Education documents translated for the entire city. For documents that are not available, we utilize translation services suggested by the DOE. Also, whenever we have parent meetings or conferences, we make sure that we have interpreters (Spanish, Arabic, Urdu, French, Nahuatl and Bengali) who may serve as liaisons between our parents and our faculty. In case of a low incident language not represented by a on site 2018-19 SCEP-FL 83  interpreter during the meeting (conference), we call the Over-the-phone interpretation line with a designated staff member to explain the agenda of the meeting and answer any questions that parent/guardian might have. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral AFRIKAANS ALBANIAN ARABIC BENGALI (BANGLA IN BANGLADESH) BAMBARA CEBUANO CHINESE ANY FLEMISH FRENCH FULANI ITALIAN MANDINKA (AKA MANDINGO) MOSSI (AKA MORE) NAHUATL ENGLISH 3 12 31 12 1 1 10 1 12 4 3 1 1 26 2749 PUNJABI (A.K.A. PANJABI) 1 SENECA SPANISH (AMERICAN) SIGN LANGUAGE TURKISH TWI URDU UKRAINIAN VIETNAMESE 2 656 2 2 1 14 2 3 0.08 0.34 0.87 0.34 0.03 0.03 0.28 0.03 0.34 0.11 0.08 0.03 0.03 0.73 77.44 0.03 0.06 18.48 0.06 0.06 0.03 0.39 0.06 0.08 3 12 31 12 1 1 10 1 11 4 3 1 1 26 2753 1 2 653 2 2 1 14 2 3 0.08 0.34 0.87 0.34 0.03 0.03 0.28 0.03 0.31 0.11 0.08 0.03 0.03 0.73 77.55 0.03 0.06 18.39 0.06 0.06 0.03 0.39 0.06 0.08 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 84  Nahuatl - As of 9/28/18 Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families Student handbook September Attendance letter Monthly How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. We translate our documents in several ways. Smaller document is translated into Spanish, Arabic, French, Urdu and Bengali by in house staff who are bilingual. Longer documents in Spanish, Arabic, French, Urdu and Bengali are sent out to A-Language, Big World and other companies for translation. For the emerging Nahuatl population, we contacted all the families through the interpretation line and we were able to identify some alternative languages for future communication. We will be including this emerging language in the future translation for the upcoming school year. In case of any parent/guardian having questions about document in low incident languages, a designated staff member will contact them with the over-the-phone translation line and assist them explaining the written document. We also use the Infohub.nyced.org portal to find document translated by NYCDOE. Attendance letter is available on the Infohub.nyced.org portal and for the low incident languages we utilize the same process previously mentioned above. After school Academy September, February Writing workshop Entitlement letters Continuing service letters September September September See above. See above. See above. See above. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 85  NYSESLATS score report September Saturday Regents Academy November, April Earth Day April Family day flier - May April, May, June ENL Newsletter Letters from the Principal Monthly Monthly See above. See above. See above See above. See above. See above. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Parent-teacher conference September interpretation service(s)? We hire L.I.S. (Legal Interpreting Services) to provide translators in Spanish, Arabic, French, Urdu and Bengali. In case a parent/guardian is requesting services in one of the low incident languages, we find a bilingual staff member available to interpret in that particular language or we call the over-the-phone interpretation line to assist the parent/guardian. ENL parents meet and greet October See above. ENL and Special education transition meeting FAFSA / Senior Night Graduation requirements and Curriculum night NYSESLAT meeting Parent-teacher conference June - Family Day Parent teacher conference November November December March March June June See above. See above. See above. See above. See above. See above. See above. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 86  In case of an emergency we will utilize our phone messenger system to reach all families. Messages are sent out in both Spanish and English and the system has capability to translate into 200+ languages. Our school office personnel staff have all been trained in the Over-the-phone Interpretation Services Line, and they are capable in addressing emergency situations in the languages provided by this service, which is available for 24hrs/7 days a week. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. All staff members are informed about the Over-the-phone Interpretation services that are available to them in the first faculty meeting and in the Faculty handbook. We also train all the office employees on how to use the Over-the-phone Interpretation services as well. We distribute all brochures provided to us by the DOE. Our Language Access Coordinator (LAC) sends an email to all staff informing them of the Over-the-phone Interpretation services available to them on monthly basis. The Over-the-Phone Interpretation services desk aid is posted next to the phone in each classroom with directions on how to use it. All office phones have the Over-the-phone interpretation line number saved on speed dial and the desk aid is posted in each office with the proper school code. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) All staff at the main desk, Welcome Center, and Main office were trained by the Language Access Coordinator (LAC). All documents listed above are in the Welcome center and Main Office. For walk-ins, families can point to the language they speak, and we will readily get the Over-the-Phone Interpretation services on the line if no on-site interpreter is available for them. We have staff members available that are utilized as liaisons when parents come in and the main desk is informed to call the Language Access Coordinator (LAC) when they need help. All copies of translated materials are available in the Welcome center, Main Office and in the Guidance Office. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? 2018-19 SCEP-FL 87  During our parent meetings listed above we will conduct a survey. We will ask parents to fill out a quick feedback card when visiting for various reasons (open house, senior/FAFSA meetings, IEP meetings, NYSESLAT meetings, Curriculum meeting, and Family Night). These feedback cards can be filled out in their native language. We will seek feedback from our students as well. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 88 
