 12X479 School Name: BRONX CAREER AND COLLEGE PREPARATORY HIGH SCHOOL Principal: JULIA BALY 2018-19 SCEP-FL 1  School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Section 4: SCEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information BRONX CAREER & COLLEGE PREPARATORY HIGH SCHOOL 321-200-011-479 9,10,11,12 800 HOME STREET BRONX, NY 10456 School Number (DBN): 12X479 718-542-4377 Fax: 718-542-4011 Phone Number: Mercedes Avila MAvila4@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 12 Superintendent’s Office Address: Email Address: Julia Baly BhojTotaram Theresa Brewster Mercedes Avila Dianna Patterson Richard Diaz LisbethRivera Laverne Sparrow District Information Michael Alcoff Superintendent: Bronx Field Support Center MAlcoff@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: (718) 935-3074 Phone Number: 718 935 3074 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 3  94XFSC FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Jose Ruiz Executive Director: 1230 Zerega Avenue, Bronx, NY 10462 jruiz2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: Phone Number: Fax: 718-828-7776/ 718-741-8895 718-828-6280 2018-19 SCEP-FL 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the SCEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Julia Baly BhojTotaram Theresa Brewster Mercedes Avila Diana Patterson Richard Diaz LisbethRivera Laverne Sparrow SabrinaFinley *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Student Representative /Student Government Secretary 2018-19 SCEP-FL 5  Name ShericeBarnett CheriffMohamed N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Position and Constituent Group Represented Student Representative /Student Government Treasurer Parent Representative / PA Secretary PA Treasurer /Parent Member N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Signature (Blue Ink) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) is a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. The process of developing and implementing the SCEP is aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding SCEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and SCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 7  In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement 2018-19 SCEP-FL 8  NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the SCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the SCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for SCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 9   Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 5: Build consensus around activities, strategies and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 6: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 7: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 10  Section 4: SCEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Bronx Career & College Preparatory High School (BCC Prep) is an Ed. Opt. public high school located in the Morrisania section of the Bronx, NY. We believe that all students can achieve at high levels. BCC Prep High School prepares students to be successful 21st century participants. We couple relevant work based learning experiences with rigorous academic learning experiences to help prepare our students for life after high school. As a result of our concentrated efforts, students develop four pivotal standards of professionalism: prompt, prepared, positive and productive. Students at BCC Prep strive to embody our core guiding principles as they develop responsibility, teamwork and the resiliency needed to excel as collegians and career professionals. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Bronx Career and College Preparatory High School is a high school with 2 students from grades 9 through 12. For 2018- 2019 , the school population comprises 2% Asian, 40% Black, 55% Hispanic and 2% White students. The student body includes 21% English Language Learners and 27% Students with Disabilities. Males account for 54% of the students enrolled and females account for 46%. The average attendance rate for the school year 2017-2018 was 79% and 90% of our student population is on free or reduced lunch. A positive school culture inclusive of the family and the community will be another area of focus for this school year. Our students must be prepared for the reality of our ever changing fast pace 21st century career requirements. Therefore our plan is to work closely with the Children's Aid (CBO) to provide after-school enrichment, internships and social emotional support that develops the whole student and prepares them for their future goals. Additionally, our CBO has assisted with building the bridge between school and family and we will continue to strengthen the bond. We have solidified community partnerships with St. Barnabas Hospital to provide mentoring and internship for students striving to be a part of the medical field. We are partnered with BUILD an organization geared to help our students with the mindset of entrepreneurship. We have added partnerships with Bronx Net at the Lehman College Campus, Opening Act for exposure in the area of performing arts and Go Chef for the culinary experience. We believe that students need to experience careers to develop a deeper understanding of college and ultimately motivate them through high school. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Our instructional methodology is one that promotes continual depth of understanding of concepts and fosters a connection between interdisciplinary and integrated experiences. Our student population posses a variety of needs. Special attention is provided to our students in the lowest third, with a wide range of social, emotional, and developmental needs along with our Students with Disabilities (SWD), students that demonstrate the need for specific instructional guidance and emotional support. When conferring with our English as a New Language (ENL) students, they specified the need to be motivated along with the provision of core content classes in their native language. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 11  The following is based of CURRENT ATS enrollment 7/30/18: Total # ELLs = 72 Total % Commanding = 12.5% Total % Expanding = 31.9% Total % Transitioning = 26.4% Total % Emerging = 15.3% Total % Entering = 13.9% Total % Bengali = 1.4% (1/72) Total % French = 2.8% (2/72) Total % Fulani = 1.4% (1/72) Total % Mandinka = 1.4% (1/72) Total % Philipino = 1.4% (1/72) Total % Spanish = 84.7% (61/72) Total % Twi = 4.2% (3/72) Total % Wolof = 1.4% (1/72) The following is based off students enrolled in 17-18 SY: Total % Receiving ICT = 92.6% (63/68) Total % Receiving Stand Alone = 26.5% (18/68) Total % Receiving BOTH ICT & Stand Alone = 26.5% (18/68) The following is based off SWD students enrolled in 17-18 SY: Total SWD% Commanding = 7.7% Total SWD% Expanding = 53.8% Total SWD% Transitioning = 15.4% Total SWD% Emerging = 15.4% Total SWD% Entering = 7.7% Total SWD % Receiving ICT = 84.6% (11/13) Total SWD % Receiving Stand Alone = 0% (0/13) Total SWD % Receiving BOTH ICT & Stand Alone = 0% (0/13) The following is based off SWD students enrolled in 17-18 SY Total SWD% Cohort S Receiving Services= 41% Total SWD% Cohort T Receiving Services= 28% Total SWD% Cohort U Receiving Services= 14% Total SWD% Cohort V Receiving Services= 33% Total SWD% Cohort W Receiving Services= 29% More than 50% of our overall population are challenged with the financial burden of assisting with family needs. Thus, the challenge to accumulate credits, attend school and graduate is the ownership of the entire school community. It is our belief that teachers academically kindle the teenage mind, nurture efforts towards growth and inspire academic ambition. Our teachers are progressing to ensure that all students are cognitively engaged and moving towards new and improved outcomes. Our guidance and support staff are invested in the social and emotional development of each student and collaborates with all stakeholders to determine the best practice that will foster an environment conducive to success. Our key areas of focus for last school year was developing a common language in the are areas of speaking, listening, reading and writing. Curriculum revisions were based on data analysis, compiled from various sources, school-wide 2018-19 SCEP-FL 12  assessments, common assessments, teacher assessments / inquiry and Regents Exams . For the 2018-2019 school year we will refine these areas along with strengthening the instructional core around curriculum and pedagogy, with a laser lens on questioning, assessments and rigorous instruction. Our curricular adjustments are aimed at improving student outcomes and consistent teacher collaboration to strengthen instructional coherence. We have added AP courses to provide the college level academic rigor for ALL students. We offered AP Language and Composition, AP Environment Science, AP Literature and AP US History. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. BCC Prep is in its eight year of operation and this year we made the most progress in the areas of strong family and community ties and supportive environment. We are committed to ensuring that students are cognitively engaged, fully valued and have a strong voice in the growth of our school. As a community school our strengths are steeped in the fact that there is constant communication of high expectations, our students are all connected to a person or persons of beneficial influence and there is reciprocity between the community and the school which aids in the development of the whole child. For the upcoming school year we will continue to strengthen these areas, along with a focus on rigorous instructions. We are planned and dedicated to reaching our goal of 75% of BCC Prep students experiencing an AP for course by the senior year. AP for All skills are threaded throughout our entire curriculum in order to achieve our goal. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 13  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 12X479 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 254 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 10 8 7 7 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 8 7 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 88.0% % Attendance Rate 86.2% % Reduced Lunch 17.3% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 1.2% 56.7% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 1.2% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 3.13 8% 19% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 43% 38% 39.5% 0.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No No Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups Black Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A YSH N/A N/A NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient N/A NO N/A YES No N/A 129 110 1 78.7% 3.1% 23.6% 37.8% 2.8% 1.6% 2 46% 5.2 N/A N/A 43% 40% 53.4% 8% N/A No Yes N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 14  Economically Disadvantaged NO ALL STUDENTS NO 2018-19 SCEP-FL 15  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed X x x x Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on Principal Performance (PPO) and faculty feedback, we have identified the following strengths during the 2017-2018 school year: * Ensuring coherent curricula in all subject areas, accessible for a variety of learners and aligned to the common core learning standards. * 77% of BCC Prep students feel that their school offers enough variety of programs, classes and activities to keep them interested in school. * As a third year community school our partnership with the Children’s Aid Society has already yielded encouraging results such as extracurricular programming, 1 to 1 tutoring, College tours, internships and social emotional support for many of our students. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 16  * Uses resources to make organizational decisions that support the school's programming, instructional goals and long term action plans. As per the 2017-2018 IIT State visit and the Superintendent’s observations reported on the PPO, improvements are needed in the following: * Use a coherent system to check for understanding and self assessment so that teachers make effective adjustments to meet the needs of all learners and are aware of their next learning steps. Teachers will develop student friendly, easily understood checklists and rubrics that clearly define and deconstruct the specific skills students need to successfully master a task. * Increase credit accumulation for student’s performing in the lowest third . Less than 20% of our lowest performing students in their second or third year earned ten or more credits. Additionally, less than 50% of all students in their second or third year earned ten or more credits. Develop stronger home to school partnerships that enable parents to support their child's learning. This initiative will begin with our incoming 9th and current 10th grade students, whereby, each family will be provided with a special invitation beginning July 2018 to meet with school community members that impact that student's success. We will meet to discuss academic and social emotional findings, needs and goals along with progress monitoring of next steps to ensure student's success. * Continue developing teacher pedagogy from a coherent set of beliefs about how students learn best that is informed by the instructional shifts and Danielson Framework for Teaching, aligned to curricula, engaging and meets the needs of all learners so that all students produce meaningful work products. Develop a protocol to advance accountable talk initiative to assess opportunities for students voice and quality student discussion in classrooms. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the students in the lowest third of cohorts V and W, will engage in rigorous CCLS aligned performance tasks along with school-wide baseline assessments which will be used to modify curriculum embedded with our school-wide instructional focus that will result in a 10% increase of students earning at least 10 credits as measured by the June 2019 scholarship reports. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 17  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Advisory Teams will monitor student progress on baseline assessments, performance task and classroom assignments and reach out to parents twice per month to discuss performance and next steps. * The schedule will be structured so that advisory teams have arranged opportunities for collaboration and communication both with parents and with other team members. Students and Parents Sept. 9, 2018 – June 21, 2019 Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Teachers, Guidance Counselors, Social Workers and Administrators * The advisory team structure will ensure that students with special needs, English language learners and other high- need student sub groups are connected to teams of teachers that will focus on developing systems of support. * The SLT will meet monthly to craft and deploy strategies that foster parental engagement and help move the school forward towards reaching specific outlined goals. Supervisors will conduct formative or evaluative observations and provide feedback to teachers every month with a focus on differentiated instruction through rigorous tasks and complex texts, with a focus on engaging all students including ENL’s, SWD’s and students in the lowest third. * Supervisors will structure observation schedules and balance administrative tasks to ensure a consistent cycle of observation and timely feedback. Teachers October 1, 2018- May 31, 2019 Admin Team 2018-19 SCEP-FL 18  * Supervisors will guide teachers to use item analysis when analyzing exam results to compare performance between varied student groups. * The consistent cycle of observation will deepen trust between teachers and supervisors by fostering increased opportunities for corrective action planning. * Supervisors will work in consultation with department chairpersons twice per month to plan professional development opportunities based on classroom observations and what is shared in professional learning communities. * Regularly scheduled meetings will occur between teachers who are trained in a content area and teachers who are trained to support students with special needs or English language learners so that they may co-craft pedagogical approaches that will support all students. Teachers will receive ongoing series of professional development on how to conduct effective data analysis and how to design research based rigorous student assessments and performance tasks. Teachers October 1, 2018- May 27, 2019 Admin Team, Department Chairpersons, Teachers * Baseline Assessments are aligned to AP standards and will be administered in September, January and May. The data will be analyzed to identify a minimum of 5 skill gaps. Curriculum will be modified and performance task will be developed to address the instructional gaps. * Midterms will contain content specific regents leveled questions across all content areas based on data analysis for prior skills growth from baseline assessment. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 19  * January Regents and March/April Mock Regents will be analyzed to identify the gaps from the initial five skills identified from the baseline assessment. * All teachers are connected to a Stem or Humanities Team and provided time in their schedule to partner and develop interdisciplinary curricula that include the arts, technology and other enrichment activities. A School Implementation Team (SIT) inclusive of supervisors, guidance counselors, a special education teacher, a general education teacher, the student activities coordinator, the transition coordinator, the program chairperson, the social worker and other support team members, will collaborate with classroom teachers to insure all students at-risk for class failure are identified and provided with individualized academic supports in a timely fashion through the lens of school-wide goals. * The Jupiter Grades system will be used as a structure to ensure that students, parents, teachers, and other stakeholders can both initiate or add to a student’s tiered intervention plan. * Academic supports will be implemented based on individual needs assessment. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Teachers October 1, 2018- June 21, 2019 Admin Team, Counselors, Teachers How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Activity Target Group Timeline Key personnel It is important for us to engage our families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and the Common Core in order to support their children at home. This work will have three components: (1) Needs Assessment, (2) Partner Organization Provider and (3) School based provider. N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 20  Parents (1) We will conduct a needs assessment by gathering information about the current situations and specific needs of our parents, families, the school and staff, of the services and programs currently offered to parents and the activities and programs that might potentially be provided. This needs assessment will allow us to: * Learn more about the needs and interests of parents and families. * Discover what skills, talents and abilities parents might have and be willing to contribute to activities. * Determine a baseline from which changes can be monitored over time. * Begin to garner support for parent involvement activities and programs. *Help us make informed decisions about future actions around family involvement. July 16, 2018-June 21, 2019 Admin Teachers Social Workers (2) Parents form a vital link between effective classroom instruction, and the formation of lasting academic habits. There will be a semester workshop for parents about the importance and process of AP for ALL ACCESS. The purpose of these workshops is to arm parents with the understanding of college readiness. Our plan is to work closely with the Elevate (CBO) to provide semester workshops for parents that helps families learn to support effective study habits at home, creating an immersive experience for students. We also partner with Children's Aid Society(CAS) to present the Parent Family Life & Sexuality Education program and Financial Literacy parent workshops designed to help parents engage in conversations with their children about sexuality and money. Parents August, 2018-May Admin 2019 Teachers COSA CBO (Children's Aid Society) Elevate trainer AP for ALL ACCESS parent trainer 2018-19 SCEP-FL 21  Parents November 2018 -May 2019 Admin Teachers CBO (Childrens Aid Society) Elevate Admin (3) We will provide monthly school-based content centered parent workshops that help parent and child learn together. Parents and students will be given tools and materials to make access to the content accessible to everyone. October 2018-May Teachers Parents 2019 CBO(Childrens Aid Society) Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Renew School Messenger broadcast system to ensure the continuation of communication of information to parents. Semester News Letter to parents about important dates and school events.  Partner with additional non-profits to secure classroom resources.  The use of Circular 6 to include structured time for department level meetings.   Teacher Led Professional Development.  Per session activities geared toward instructional supports, career and college experiences..  After school and Saturday School Programming, geared towards Regents and AP preparations.  Software programs geared toward individualized student achievement: i.e castle learning and iReady. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA P/F Set-aside 21st Century C4E 2018-19 SCEP-FL 22  Title I 1003(a) X Title III X PTA Funded SIG Grant School Achievement X Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, at least 70 percent of students in Cohorts V and W will have the first three marking periods successfully completed demonstrating progress towards earning 10 or more credits for the school year as measured by our scholarship reports, as we are annualized. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. As evidenced by STARS scholarship reports. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 23  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. x x x x SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? After review of the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide, the 2017-2018 IIT State visit we identified the strengths regarding our school’s culture as follows: * The 2017-2018 School Quality Guide reflects the fact that 90% of students agreed or strongly agreed that their teachers treat students from different backgrounds and cultures equally. * Student governance is strong and students actively participate as a decision-making body. * School leaders establish a culture for learning that communicates high expectations to staff, students and families, and provide supports to achieve those expectations as they prepare for college and career. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 24  *As evidenced by 2017-2018 OORS Suspension reports, incidents of suspensions decreased by 40%. It is our goal to decrease the number of suspensions even further by supporting the students with a well structured advisory program that will systematically implement character development and restorative practices. Area of Focus: Increased Parent involvement As evidence by the IIT State Review Recommendations 2017-2018 one of our focus areas is parent outreach. We will align our parent outreach efforts to effectively engage parents in the school community as decision makers. In an effort to develop stronger home-school partnership and enable parent support and advocate for their child's learning; we will develop a process for conducting one-on-one meetings with every in-coming ninth grade family to discuss their child's academic, social emotional goals and progress. Our focus is to involve them in the process of setting goals based on their needs. We will empower parent liaisons to help provide a welcoming environment for all. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools –Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 as a result of a structured advisory program that support social emotional needs of our students and targeted guidance support there will be a reduction in the number suspensions as measured by our OORS reporting by 10% from 48 to 38. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 25  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Conduct bi-monthly AAA meetings to evaluate weekly and Students daily trends in attendance  AAA team members will meet with the principal/assistant principal, director of student affairs and community coordinator in order to survey progress and potential needs. The meeting will also focus on strategies to better improve attendance and school culture.  AAA team members will meet with teachers and advisors on a bi-monthly basis to discuss students in jeopardy based on the New Visions Data Tracker (two grades will be targeted each month on a rotating basis). Oct. 1, 2018 – June 14, 2019 Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Principal/Assistant Principal, Community School Coordinator, Community Coordinator, Social Workers, Guidance Counselors, Programmer, Attendance Teacher, IEP Coordinator, Pupil Secretary, Teachers Students Parents October 2018 – May 2019 Community School Coordinator, CBO, Teachers, Students  Student government will promote non-violence, anti-bullying and Respect for All to further advance our school culture for safety and support.  Community School Coordinator will work with school staff to coordinate academic support for students after school and on weekends so as not to interfere with the core instructional program.  Through the partnership with our CBO The Children’s Aid Society, the Community School Coordinator will provide training for parents on teen pregnancy prevention, sexual health, financial literacy and study skills. These courses will be available in sessions of 3 on Tuesdays and Saturdays. Spring Saturday Academy will be designed to support language development as well as high academic achievement in math, and other core academic areas for ENLs, SWDs and lowest third students. Students will earn extra credit in the core content courses they attend for Saturday Academy.   Through our partnership with the CBO The Children’s Aid Society, the Community School Coordinator will implement the community school work plan crafted by the CBO, school community coordinator and the principal. Students, parents, staff, October 15, 2018 – May 31, 2019 Community school coordinator, CBO 2018-19 SCEP-FL 26 Sept. 6, 2018 – June 11, 2019 Teachers, Guidance Counselors, Social Workers  Work plan will be targeted at weekly meetings, after school academic enrichment, community empowerment, socio-emotional needs, internships and English as second language learner needs.  Extra–curricular academic enrichment and empowerment opportunities will be provided after school such as tutoring and skill/information acquisition classes in the areas of academics, health/wellness, and career and college readiness. Community at large  Advisory structure will include daily contact for each student Students   with his/her advisor. Student will meet first period each day to provide adequate time for advisors to check in and conduct daily tasks based on our advisory curriculum. Students will participate in non-violence, anti-bullying and Respect for All assemblies with their advisors and will build on those discussions throughout the year when issues are brought up by students on ways to de-escalate conflict and strategies to avoid violence.  Advisors and instructional staff will use Jupiter grades to communicate to parents and monitor trends in student success. During parent teacher conferences stations will be set up for access to Jupiter grades along with training sessions.  Guidance Counselors and Social Workers, along with 100 School Project staff will create a school-wide protocol for student referrals and case reviews. They will facilitate staff PD trainings on strategies that can be used to create environments in the classroom and school that allow for optimum safety and learning. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. School Town Hall Meeting is an opportunity to meet parents and introduce them to the school community in a warm and welcoming way. This also an opportunity to survey information on their needs and expectations of the school. Activity Target Time Key Personel Guidance staff will conduct quarterly hands-on parent workshops where they give parents practical examples and strategies that they can implore at home with their children to foster closeness and safety. These workshops will include resources available to the parents in their community. Parents Students October 2018- May 2019 2018-19 SCEP-FL 27 Parents Students Family Day A College Trips will occur each semester that include Juniors and their Parent or Guardian Freshman Parent/Guardian Orientation September 2018 Parents Students Faculty Parents Junior students Parents Freshman students November 2018 CBO Coordinator Community Coordinator October 2018 & April 2019 Guidance Counselor Community Coordinator August 2018 Community Coordinator Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Per session activities geared toward instructional supports and extra help as needed.  Workshops, Professional Development.  After school and Spring Saturday School Programming.  Principal and a minimum of one assistant principal will adjust schedules to ensure appropriate supervision for after-school programming.  Resources and trainings that support Life Skills and Interventions.  Resources and materials to increase study skills and support student organizational growth. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, as a result of the implementation of a structured advisory program, there will be a 10% decrease in the number of suspensions and incidents, as measured by the OORS report for the period of September 2018 to February 2019, compared to the number of suspensions and incidents, as measured by the OORS report for the period of September 2017 to February 2018. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 28  Progress will be OORs Reporting system. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 29  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by SOP(s) Addressed X x X x using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on data from the 2017-2018 School Quality Review (SQR), PPO and feedback from teacher leaders meetings, we identified strengths regarding teacher collaboration as follows: * Our Department Chairpersons serve as full time teachers and understand the strengths and challenges of the daily classroom environment. * During regularly scheduled department meetings, teachers develop data action plans based on school-wide common assessment and June 2017 Regents results. This plan is used to plan daily lessons, revise assignments and develop assessments that align with the units of study in curriculum maps developed prior to the beginning of the school year. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 30  * The data action plan is a tool used to close the content gap, based on the Regents data findings teachers adjust their curriculum to address the necessary units of challenge. This practice will yield a higher Regents pass rates in across all content areas. Additionally, the baseline data highlight the skill gaps that need to be addressed in order for students to access the content. These skills are used school-wide (annotation for reading, CEEAS for writing and accountable talk for speaking and listening). These skills are access tools for all students that will result in higher credit accumulation. * All teachers collaborated after the IIT State Review in May 2018 in order to strengthen instructional coherence and support student progress toward mastery of learning goals as evidenced by performance task at end of each unit of study. * Professional development sessions are often led by teachers who have demonstrated excellence in an area or field of practice. * Common planning time is set aside daily for teachers to review student work using the Tuning Protocol, identify trends in student data, plan instruction and work together to improve instructional practice. Feedback from our School Quality Review 2016-2017 and IIT State Review helped us to understand and agree as a community that the use of ongoing checks for understanding, formative and summative assessments of instruction are yet to be implemented across all classrooms. This uneven practice of using checks for understanding to adjust lessons on the spot hampers teachers’ ability to support all students’ learning needs. As a result we will focus on the following: * Teachers will develop student friendly self-assessment checklist and rubric for all subject areas. The rubrics will clearly define and deconstruct the specific skills students need to successfully master a task. * Cycles of peer evaluation regarding collaboration efforts to utilize Levels of Understanding (LOU) to inform student groupings to guide checks for understanding to make instructional adjustments during the lesson using differentiation strategies. ( Danielson 3D) * Cycles of inter-visitation will also be held for Depth Of Knowledge (DOK) levels used within a lesson period for effective questions and discussion. (Danielson 3B) Teachers will then attend workshops that addresses their current level of questioning technique and how to progress forward in order to engage all learners. Part 2 – Annual Goal 2018-19 SCEP-FL 31  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, as a result of collaborative teacher teams participating in professional development and walk-throughs focused on school-wide instructional strategy, there will be a 67% graduation rate, as measured by the June 2019 ATS Graduation Cohort School Report (RGCS). 2018-19 SCEP-FL 32  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) The administrative team and Peer Collaborative Teacher (PCT) leader will conduct a non-evaluative walk-through focused on school-wide instructional strategies and will give teachers specific and actionable feedback to improve their instruction and introduce the SWIS (School-Wide Instructional Strategy) Rubric within 24 hours. The Peer Collaborative Teacher Leader will provide targeted support and professional development to Collaborative Teacher Teams during Common Planning Time to support alignment of SWIS with CCLS, Content & Language Objectives, Assessments, and Instructional Activities in teacher lesson plans. Teachers September 2018 – October 2018 Principal, Assistant Principals, Peer Collaborative Teacher LEader Teachers October 2018 – March 2019 Peer Collaborative Teacher Leader, Department Chairpersons, Teachers,  This series of professional development will be ongoing  throughout the year. Support will be delivered to teachers in the STEM department and Humanities department during their Common Planning Time every-other Thursday to provide ongoing support throughout the year.  A structure will be in place to ensure that professional development and support provided during CPT PDs will directly correlate with SWIS and School-Wide Goals.  Each cycle will consist of a brief mini-lesson, modeling, and/or exploration of SWIS/CCLS/Danielson, followed by an opportunity to apply the information into upcoming lessons and receive feedback from the team/PCT based on the School-Wide Instructional Strategies Rubric. Specific attention will be given to addressing the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups by the ENL Coordinator and Special Education Teachers throughout the cycle.   Beginning with the second installment, sessions will also include an opportunity for teachers to share successes/struggles with the previously targeted lessons and share best practices/next steps based on the School-Wide Instructional Strategies Rubric.  Teachers will have the opportunity to conduct inter-visitations with the PCT to further explore best practices 2018-19 SCEP-FL 33  around SWIS and reflect on the implication for their individual teaching and planning. o Supervisors will coordinate coverage plans to ensure that teachers are provided with time to conduct inter-visitations.  At the end of each marking period, the team will engage in a reflective discussion of SWIS/student performance as a pulse check to make adjustments needed to reach the 67% graduation rate in June 2019. Each Collaborative Team will participate in one non-evaluative walk-through with administration focused on school-wide instructional strategies and will give teachers specific and actionable feedback to improve their instruction using the SWIS (School-Wide Instructional Strategy) Rubric within 24 hours. Teachers February 2019 – June 2019  Supervisors will coordinate coverage plans to ensure that teachers are provided with time to participate in the walk-through. Principal, Assistant Principal, Peer Collaborative Teacher Leader, Department Chairpersons, Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will be invited to a Town Hall Meeting in September 2018 to discuss ways to collaborate with BCC Prep faculty. Parents will also complete a survey to determine interest in attending college trips, assisting with school community-building functions, and CBO-facilitated workshops. This process will be facilitated by our Community Coordinator and CBO, who will work to meet parent needs as identified in the survey. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Schedule modifications that allow for teachers to meet during the school day to engage in Common Planning and discussions around data. ● Coverage plans to ensure that teachers have opportunities to participate in walk-throughs as well as observe one another as needed. ● Use of teacher teams, lead teachers, mentors, peer-collaborative teacher and specialized consultants for professional development focusing on addressing the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA P/F Set-aside 21st Century C4E 2018-19 SCEP-FL 34  Title I 1003(a) Title III PTA Funded SIG Grant School Achievement X Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 67% of students will be on track to graduate, as measured by the STARS Progress to Graduation Tracker (PTGT). Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Analyze January 2019 STARS Progress Report Card. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 35  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). x x x x SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on the Superintendent’s feedback from the 2017-2018 Principal’s Performance Observation (PPO), the 2017-2018 School Quality review, and common practices, we identified the following effective leadership practices: · “The principal continues to make strategic organizational decisions and allocation of resources to support the schools instructional goals. The budget has been strategically utilized to provide resources for student achievement. The principal promotes excellence and holds herself, staff and students to high standards. (PPO and MOLP) Evidence of student to student discussion and higher order thinking was not evident across all classrooms, we will ground our instructional strategies in a set of beliefs on how students learn best. Checking for understanding and feedback to students were inconsistent across all classrooms. This process will monitored via classroom observations and lesson plans. (PPO, IIT State Recommendation) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 36  · Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART– Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, as a result of school leaders' professional development activities, at least 80 % of all teachers will receive end of year MOTP ratings of Effective in Danielson Framework for Teaching components 3b and 3d, as measured by 2018-2019 end of year MOTP ratings in Advance. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 37  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) * A structure is in place so that non-classroom based faculty participates in regularly scheduled Monday meetings to develop and implement action plans that will improve student Non-classroom based faculty September 2018 and June 2019 Principal attendance. * Non-classroom based faculty participate in school-based and off-site professional development opportunities that support them to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and parent involvement and a positive school culture. * Non-classroom based faculty are responsible for creating a welcoming environment for parents and families and are assessed on their ability to do so using survey response data given at Parent Teacher Conferences. The principal and assistant principal will conduct formal and informal observations of all faculty members and provide written feedback and next steps. Teachers October 1, 2018 – May 31, 2019 Principal and Assistant Principal * A system of observation and feedback is in place so that teachers receive formative and evaluative observations and 2018-19 SCEP-FL 38  are provided with actionable feedback within five business days. *A system of non-evaluative observations take place once per semester. * The school’s lowest third performers are identified and action plans will be created to measure progress across all subgroups. The principal will participate in professional development on a monthly basis regarding strengthening effective leadership strategies. Principal August 2018-June 2019 Business Manager, Principal * The Principal’s calendar is managed by the School Business Manager so that appointments can be set readily and as requested. The principal receives professional development outside of her normal work-day on a monthly basis in order to improve her ability to support the needs of at risk students. * The principal attends all School Leadership Team meetings in order to directly address parent concerns. * The principal acts as an active participant in teacher-led professional development and models a willingness to learn and grow professionally. The principal will discuss improvement strategies on a monthly basis with other school based supervisors. Principal and Assistant Principals Sept. 2018 – June 30, 2019 Principal * The principal has structures to check in with other school leaders on a monthly basis to ensure coherency regarding 2018-19 SCEP-FL 39  the mission and vision of the school via district meetings and PLC groups. * The principal fosters trust and open communication by welcoming parents into the school community each semester for breakfast and a spring walk-through and provides her phone number and email information so that she can be contacted easily. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Families will be provided with SLT meetings dates for the entire school year on September 26, 2018 and mailed home by October 15, 2018. Parents will be provided volunteer opportunities at our Town Hall Meeting on September 26, 2018. Parents will have the opportunity to embark on a college trip with their child in the Fall 2018 and an classroom walk-through in the Spring 2018. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● New visions data tool will be used to find attendance trend for all students below an 90% attendance average and Jupiter grades will be used to assess the academic impact due to low attendance. ● Non-Classroom based faculty (guidance counselors, social worker, programmer, dean and CBO) will choose a range of students (case load) to meet with on a weekly basis to access their needs, develop a plan, contact the parent to inform them of the plan and monitor student progress. Progress monitoring of non-teaching staff takes place at bi-monthly Attendance, Academic, Achievement (AAA) meeting led by the Principal. Phone calls will be made daily by our school aid and CBO assistant for students that are absent by 11:00am. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring 2018-19 SCEP-FL 40  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, as a result of school leaders' professional development activities, at least 80 % of all teachers will receive at least 2 MOTP ratings of Effective or Highly Effective in Danielson Framework for Teaching components 3b and 3d, as measured by Advance.observations for the period of September 2018 to February 2019. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance rating system and teacher scholarship reports from STARS . Non-classroom staff will be assessed based on their caseload of students for attendance improvement. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 41  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. X x X X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on the 2016-2017 School Quality Review (SQR), teacher, student, and parent focus groups via the School Leadership Team (SLT), we identified strengths around family and community ties as follows: · Over 90% of our parents indicated one of the most important reasons they feel their children are experiencing success at the school is due to trusting and respectful relationships with teachers and administrators. (2017-2018 SQR) · As a community school partnered with the Children’s Aid, BCC Prep will continue to provide resources that strengthen opportunities for elevated student outcomes · Over 90% of our parents agree that that they are made aware of their child's social and emotional needs. They are satisfied with the response they get when they contact the school. (SQR 2017-2018) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 42  · Over 90% of our parents parents agreed that BCC Prep helps keep their child on track for college, career and success in life after high school. (2017-2018 SQR) · BCC Prep’s career based internships enable reciprocity between the school and the community. · Our community partnerships with St. Barnabas, Bronx Net, Opening Act and BUILD provide students with career readiness experience. · Students are connected to at least one adult at school and feel safe, valued, supported, and heard. (2017-2018 SQR) When analyzing data from the Periodic Attendance Report (PAR) we identified that attendance rates between the 2016-2017 school year and the 2017-2018 school year increased. However, when comparing this year’s attendance to that of our 8 year high, of 87.24 in 2009 we continue to be challenged by decreased participation rates. Teachers, students, parents, and the SLT analyzed the above data and are in consensus that we must take the following action: · Continue to leverage our partnership with the Children’s Aid to bring more resources to our students, parents and enhance our community presence · Support parents who participate as decision-making stakeholders in the school and spread awareness around college-ready expectations. · Provide at-risk students with on-site access to counseling and academic intervention services to support their varied needs. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, as a result of school-wide attendance improvement efforts and the support of Children's Aid (CBO) there will be a 5% overall increase in students' average monthly attendance from 78% to 83%, as measured by 2018-2019 ATS RSAL reports, compared to the 2017-2018 ATS RSAL report. . 2018-19 SCEP-FL 43 Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Sept. 26, 2018 – May 31, 2019 Community School Coordinator, SLT, Student Government, Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Engage the school leadership team and parent members to solicit feedback for continued growth as a community school. Students, Parents * Work with the CBO to structure the school to include resources provided by community centers where academic, physical and artistic activity can occur to greater meet the needs of at-risk and academic lowest third students. · Design and implemented programs based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, with English Language learners needs in mind. · Faculty will systematically reach out to parents during weekly Tuesday extended parent outreach and other digital messages to communicate college-ready expectations both over the phone and in Jupiter grades. *Twice a year (September and May at the Parent Forum) survey the parents for the needs they feel the school can help with. The SLT in consultation with parents and students will explore the current community school work plan to create potential additional support opportunities and improve school culture. Students Sept. 26, 2018 – May 31, 2019 Community School Coordinator, ELL Coordinator, · Design and implemented programs based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, with English Language learners needs in mind. Ensure clear and consistent communication around college-ready goals and expectations. Students, Teachers, Parents Sept. 26, 2018 – May 31, 2019 Community School Coordinator, parents 2018-19 SCEP-FL 44  · Develop a structure to systematically give incentives to both students who have met expectations and students who have shown tremendous growth. · Ensure that lowest third and ELL students are supported in the advisory program with access and information regarding supports that will assist them with achieving college-ready goals. · Hold monthly parent meetings on Saturdays and calendar events where parents will have opportunities to deepen knowledge around expectations while engaging in enrichment activities. Develop an innovative instructional program that engages students and helps to increase student participation during the regular school day. Students Parents Sept. 26, 2018 to May 31, 2019 · Collaborate with Children’s Aid full time Community School Coordinator to develop program options for students that include both extra-curricular activities and academic supports, during after-school and Saturday Academy. · Encourage and support parents to participate as a decision making body by utilizing Advisory Delegates and student government for fund raising and strengthening school culture and family ties through activities like, family day, community give back and college trips that include parents. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Children's Aid Society (CBO) Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The resources used to leverage achievement of this annual goal through the CBO is:  human resources- teachers funded by our CBO to staff the Saturday test preparation/After-school enrichment programs instructional resources-impact on students attendance and academic achievement of attending students. schedule adjustments-Spring Saturday Academy and after school enrichment programs   2018-19 SCEP-FL 45  Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, average monthly attendance percentage will reach at least 83%, as measured by ATS RSAL reports for the period of September 2018 to February 2019. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. ATS daily attendance report and New Vision's Data Tool Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 46  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Level 1 on Grade 8 ELA exam, lowest third, and scores from 9th grade orientation assessment, recommendation by parent, teacher, student, or advisor; OR a score of 70% or less on the Common Core English Regents Exam Level 1 on Grade 8 Math exam, lowest third, and scores from 9th grade orientation assessment recommendation by parent, teacher, student, or advisor; OR a score of 74% or less on either the Common Core Algebra Regents Exam Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Students will be programmed for an additional literacy period, separate from the NYS required ELA course. And/or Special Education Teacher Support Services using Rewards Program; modification of instructional program(change in program to allow for individual student need to support learning). Students will be programmed for a 2 year Algebra cycle or problem solving course. And/or Special Education Teacher Support Services;modification of instructional program. Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Small group, tutoring, When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During the school day, After-School Program and Spring Saturday Academy. Small group, tutoring, During the school day, Last period AIS, Spring Saturday Academy and Online Castle Learning and Tomorrow's Genius Prep Support 2018-19 SCEP-FL 47  Science Social Studies Level 1 on Grade 8 Science exam, lowest third or recommendation by parent, teacher, student, or advisor; OR a score of 64% or less on the Living Environment Regents Exam Level 1 on Grade 8 ELA exam, lowest third or recommendation by parent, teacher, student, or advisor At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Students have completed at least one year in high school and is no longer on track for graduation in their cohort year. Students will be programmed for 2 year cycle of Living Environment with a focus on application and analysis And/or Special Education Teacher Support Services US History Workshop capped at 20 students per class that provides innovative instructional strategies including Castle Learning And/or PM School small group intensive for Global Studies, capped at 20 students At RiskCounseling Sessions, PM school Program Small group, tutoring Small group, tutoring During the school day, Last periodAIS, Spring Saturday Academy and Online Castle Learning and Tomorrow's GeniusPrep Support During the school day, Last periodAISfor Global Studies, Spring Saturday Academy and Online Castle Learning and Tomorrow's Genius ENL Prep Support Small group instruction During the school day and Spring Saturday Academy 2018-19 SCEP-FL 48  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) AS of June 15, 2018 there were 23 students in temporary housing. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. We are planning to provide the necessary school supplies to increase academic readiness and provide access to a successful academic experience for all students. Students will be provided access to counseling services to attain support with the emotional stress that may accompany the status of instability that they are facing. Children's Aid will provide two social workers to support this students in needs of mental health services. Students will be offered extended learning time through after school and Saturday classes. Our CBO will provide academic mentors to support students in class. Support with transportation will be provided to attend additional academic meetings. On an as needed basis, students will have access to support with maintaining and adhering to the schools uniform policy. In addition parent meetings and resources will be offered to parents to provide support for the whole child. Outreach will be performed to support students that have been identified as being "unaccompanied youth" in order to connect them with resources outside in the community and within the school community. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 49  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 50  Section 8: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. We have employed several strategies for ensuring staff is highly qualified. Recruitment: 1. Existing staff members are made aware of vacancies and assist in the recruitment of new staff. 2. Attend the City-wide and Borough-wide Hiring fairs to interview possible candidates. 3. Network among other principals/schools for possible ATR, new or excessed staff Retention: 1. Peer Collaborative Teacher assist with mentoring new teachers receive support from administration during the mentoring process. 2. Teachers set goals based on improving effectiveness and reflect on those goals throughout the year. 3. Allow for distributed leadership opportunities. Some HQT teacher become department leaders, meet with the principal weekly to receive guidance on leading their department and advocating for additional department and professional development needs. 4. Allow teachers to be experts and lead professional development on best practices in their classroom or department. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 51  Assignment: 1. The staff completes a preference sheet where they can outline what they would like to teach and when. 2. Teachers are given opportunities to design and teach elective courses/extended day/clubs of their choice. Support 1.Each new teacher is assigned a mentor in their content area to partner with for the first/second year. 2. Teachers are scheduled for department meetings to plan together for vertical and horizontal teaching. 3. Principal and Assistant Principals provide clear and specific feedback to assist teachers in improving instructional practices. 4. Teacher’s effectiveness and growth will be documented based on the Danielson rubric of teacher practice and shared with teacher during inter-visitations. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Teacher/Paraprofessionals will 1.Participate in professional development sessions designed to build mastery in Danielson Domain 2 & 3 2. Drive professional development activities via consultation with Department Chairpersons, and Administration. 3. Reflect on practice and set goals for improvement. Teachers will: 1. Share best practices with colleagues in share fair sessions. 2. Teachers will engage in inter-visitations and receive feedback based on the Danielson rubric of teacher practice from one or more peers. Teachers will reflect on feedback and improve practices. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 52  3. Participate in weekly inquiry work with their department using the Tuning Protocol to look at best practice strategies for student improvement towards mastery of the CCSS. Principal will: 1. Participate in a monthly professional development with the Superintendent team around a problem of practice inquiry study. 2. Will set aside observation or “coaching” days specifically to monitor and provide feedback on teacher practice. 3. Use ADVANCE to monitor the number of times teachers were observed and provided with feedback based on the Danielson rubric of teacher practice and keep track of the feedback and next steps for each teacher. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments 2018-19 SCEP-FL 53  Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. There are several processes in place for teachers to participate in the use and selection of appropriate assessment measures: Teachers are scheduled to have weekly common planning periods five days a week. During the weekly common planning period teachers present lessons and then they design assessments based on feedback given by their peers using the "Tuning Protocol". Teachers also design assessment based on their departmental data action plans and student needs that have been identified. Modifications to this plan occurs based on students' Regents results, mid-terms and school-wide baseline assessments. Administrators review performance tasks and mid-terms with department chairs at team meetings and provide feedback. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (SCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Title I Part A (Basic) Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 258,432.00 16,979 42,727 0 11,200.00 0 2,731,318.00 NA NA NA NA NA NA NA Column B Section Reference(s) 5A 5B 5C NA 5E NA 5A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 54  1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/SCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 55   Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG or SIF funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 56  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Bronx Career & College Preparatory,High School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Bronx Career & College Preparatory (BCC Prep) High School’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. Our school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of our school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Our school will support parents and families of Title I students by: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 57   providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and  decision making in support of the education of their children; fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress through Jupiter grades, parent outreach;  providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments;  sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand;  providing professional development opportunities for school faculty with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of our school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent-Teacher Association, as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, our school will:  actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact;  engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to schools to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills;  ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and  strategies as described in our Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent-Teacher Association, and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills;  maintain a dedicated staff person to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Community Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend our school and will work to ensure that our school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Community Coordinator or dedicated staff member will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations, literacy, accessing community and support services, and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home;   provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g.,ESSA /State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report;  host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act. schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student’s academic skill needs and what parents can do to help;    2018-19 SCEP-FL 58  Provide a monthly report of student attendance or progress. BCC Prep will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement · Provide calls that updates families on school events and activities. · Hold an annual Curriculum night during our 1 st round of Parent/Teacher conferences. · Host educational family events which may include, but not limited to Family Day, Career day, Winter Talent Show, FASFA night and financial literacy workshops. · Encourage meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent-Association, and Title I Parent Committee; · Provide translation services for parent teacher conferences, IEP meetings and intake families · Encourage more parents to become trained school volunteers. · Provide monthly progress reports that are given to keep parents informed of their child’s progress · Develop and distribute a quarterly newsletter designed to keep parents informed about how to better support their child’s high school experience. · Develop a school website to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress. · Provide parents with written occurrence reports for any of their child’s disciplinary incidents, through Jupiter Grades. · Provide school information to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact School-Parent Compact (SPC) Bronx Career & College Preparatory High School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: · Use academic learning time efficiently; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 59  · Respect cultural, racial and ethnic differences; · Implement a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; · Offer high quality instruction in all content areas; · Provide instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act. I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: · Conduct parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; · Convene an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; · Arrange additional meetings at flexible times, e.g., morning, evening. · Respect the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; · Provide information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; · Involve parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; · Provide parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; · Ensure that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to faculty by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff · Ensure that faculty will have access to translation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; · Notify parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher and/or other school staff members; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 60  · Arrange opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their teenager’s class, and to observe classroom activities; · Plan activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences and school-wide events · Ensure access to communicate via email, internet based text messaging and student focused discussion groups in Jupiter Grades I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ·Create a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; · Assist parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their teenager’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); · Share and communicate best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; · Support parental involvement activities as requested by parents from the parent survey · Ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; · Advise parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Every Student Succeeds Act.Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; Parent/Guardian Responsibilities: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities · Monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my teenager arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my teenager is absent; Ensure that my teenager comes to school rested by setting a schedule for sleep time based on the needs of my teenager and his/her age; · Check and assist my teenager in completing homework tasks, when necessary; · Read to and with my teenager and/or discuss what my teenager is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); · Regulate limits to the amount of time my teenager watches television or plays video games; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 61  · Promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; · Require my teenager to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my teenager; · Volunteer in my teenager’s school or assist from my home as time permits; · Participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my teenager’s education; · Communicate with my teenager’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by promptly reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; · Respond timely to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; · Become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; · Participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; · Take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; · Share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my teenager; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities Adhere to the following standards detailed in the Student handbooks: · Adhere to the Standards of Professionalism · Uphold the school’s core values · Attend school regularly and arrive on time; · Complete homework and submit all assignments on time; · Follow all school rules and be responsible for my actions; · Show respect for myself, others, school property and the property of others; · Make efforts to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully with or without school staff assistance; · Always put forth my best effort to learn and participate in my own learning by using accountable talk. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 62  Addendum: Community School Partnerships Directions: The Community School (CS) strategy is directly aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. Community Schools bring schools and community partners together and integrate academics, health, youth development, and family engagement to provide students with the tools and opportunities they need to succeed. The Core Services in Community Schools are Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness. Part 1 – Community School Partnerships Goal(s) How is the CS strategy integrated into academic instruction at your school, and what impact has it had on student academic outcomes? Children Aid is our affiliate CBO, the educational director mentors and manages 4 content tutors that support our students during class instruction and after-school. During the Fall semester they will be assigned students from our Sophomore Cohort. During the Spring semester they will be assigned students in danger of not earning 10 credits. Their responsibility will be to call the student when they are absent, support them during class and provide after-school tutoring. The team of social workers, 2 of which are provided by CBO, support the health and wellness of the student body. They meet and assess the needs of all students in grades 9-11. The attendance of students has had an increase from 76% in 2016-17 to 78% end of the 2017-2018 school year. Also the graduation rate is up from 43% in the 2016-2017 school year to 56 in the 2017-2018 school year. Indicate the summative goal(s) of the Community School for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. By June 2019 75% of each cohort of student will earn 10 or more credits. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Community School Annual Goal(s): How will achieving your Community School Goal(s)--in Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness--support your academic goals for students? To support the goal of students earning 10 or more credits each students will be connected with a social worker. The social worker works with the guidance counselors to provide 1:1 quarterly meetings that support academic and social-emotional needs for every student. They also work as a team to provide attendance incentives for the students. Part 2 – Community School Partnerships Core Services Action Plan Part 2a. Identify the Community-based Organization (CBO) partnerships that you will develop in ELT, Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness, their target student population(s), and scope of the services provided. As well as supporting schools’ supportive environment and attendance work, CBOs should be helping to support your school’s instructional focus. CBO Partnership Children Aid Society Target Population 200 Scope of Service Academic/Social Emotional SY18-19 SMART Goal By June 2019, 75% of each cohort of student will earn 10 or more credits. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 63  Part 3 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 3a. Indicate resources your Community Partnership will leverage to achieve your summative SMART goal(s) and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The resources are: A community school director, educational director, 4 success mentors/tutors, 2 social workers. Part 3b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 3c. Describe how the school will partner with the Lead CBO to do the following: 1. Community Schools are expected to partner with a community-based partner organization (CBO) and together with members of the School Leadership Team, hire a Community School Director. The Director will lead implementation of the asset and needs assessment process, and other critically important coordinating activities. Indicate how you will leverage this aspect of the work. Community Schools are expected to personalize the needs of all students, through strategic programming and services, as determined by the asset and needs assessment, and must also offer Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and mental health programming. In completing this section, ensure that you think about how: (1) the right services are provided to the right students and families at the right time; and (2) how you will seamlessly coordinate services with instructional programming happening throughout and outside of the school day. Indicate how you will implement this work, and describe other programming you anticipate to be in place to strengthen this initiative. Community Schools are expected to emerge as Partnership Schools, which are places where parents and families feel welcome, actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. Monthly meetings and Community School Forums engaging families and community stakeholders will be a critical part of this family engagement strategy. Describe how you will implement this aspect of the work. Community School Principals are expected to meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. Data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter - and training will be available for schools to use. Indicate how you will implement this aspect of the work. 2. 3. 4. We will leverage the work of implementation and needs assessment with the Community School Director in our yearly cycle of review. Steps include assessing the need, designing programming for identified students and their needs, implementation of the services and then in our end of the year meeting we analyze what worked and what didn't for the students. We discuss any new needs of the school and make adjustment to the plan and programming for the upcoming year. The new plan is sign off on and put into place for the following September implementation. Childen's Aid provide the necessary school supplies to increase academic readiness and provide access to a successful academic experience for all students. Students are identified and provided access to counseling services to attain support with the emotional stress that may accompany the status of instability that they are facing. Children's Aid has provided two social workers to support the students in needs of mental health services. Students are offered extended learning time through after school and Saturday classes. Our CBO provides academic mentors to support 2018-19 SCEP-FL 64  students in class. Support with transportation will be provided to attend additional academic meetings. On an as needed basis, students have access to support with maintaining and adhering to the schools uniform policy. In addition parent meetings and resources will be offered to parents to provide support for the whole child. Outreach is performed to support students that have been identified as being "unaccompanied youth" in order to connect them with resources outside in the community and within the school community. Our Community Forum offers an opportunity for us as a school to gather the opinions and needs of the parents and then include them in our planning of the school year's activities. There has been a Community School Director in place for 3 years. The work plan is targeted at monthly meetings, where we refine our after school career internships, academic enrichment and extra-curricular activities. Internships and academic enrichment has been scheduled on students program as their 9th period class for 10th and 11th grade students. Ninth grade students have an entrepreneurship course funded by CAS as a course. Additionally, some students programs were adjusted to allow for additional support in the classes where a success mentors/tutors were available. They are involved with bi-monthly attendance meeting and monthly academic meeting to discuss student progress along with a team of staff from the school( Guidance counselors, programmer, teacher, community worker, AP, dean, Attendance worker and social worker) . The data sorter is used to track attendance. This information is used to provide academic and social emotional support to students and families through outreach and home visits. Part 4 – Community School Partnerships Oversight Part 4a. Key Staff and Partners 1. Name and describe the scope of involvement of all community partners working in the school (include partners supporting ELT, counseling, enrichment, etc.) 2. Name the members of your Community School Team and how meetings will be organized and structured to engage all stakeholders and be focused on results. 3. Explain data strategies including the use of the data sorter, and steps that the school will take to ensure that the appropriate interventions are provided to the right students One of our Community Partners is with The "Children's Aid" Society. They have provided the school with: A school based Community School Director who oversees all operations at the school as well as internships, college trips, academic intervention while building the bridge between school and family by provided external resources and family workshops and trainings . Her team consist of: A program assistant that provides weekly after-school clubs and enrichment. An Educational Director who oversees and trains the 4 Success Mentors/Tutors that push into the classrooms to provide support to our students in the lowest third. Two Social Workers who support the social emotional aspect of the program that helps develops the whole student and prepares them for their future goals. They are involved with bi-monthly attendance meeting and monthly academic meeting to discuss student progress along with a team of staff from the school( Guidance counselors, programmer, teacher, community worker, AP, dean, Attendance worker and social worker) . The data sorter is used to track attendance. This information is used to provide academic and social emotional support to students and families through outreach and home visits. Data is also used to provide monthly incentives around improvement in attendance. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 65  Part 4b. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the Community School program. We made schedule adjustments to student's programs. Students were placed in content classes with a success mentor to provide additional support in their high needs content area. Part 4c. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. October 1, 2018 to June 12, 2019 Part 4d. Mental Health Work Plan Separate from this S/CEP, schools will complete a Mental Health Work Plan that will become an addendum to this document. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 66  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): K 6 1 7 2 8 3 9 4 10 5 11 12 2018-19 SCEP-FL 67  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: <!--{cke_protected}%3Cmeta%20charset%3D%22utf-8%22%20%2F%3E--> An analysis of ELL achievement at BCC Prep using the EDAT, which revealed that we have 8 seniors who have failed the ELA, math, global, US history, and/or living environment Regents exam(s).. It also showed that we have 15 juniors who have not taken or failed the ELA, math, global, US history, and/or living environment Regents. Additionally, it identified 11 sophomores who have not taken or failed the math, global and/or living environment Regents exam(s). Finally, it identified 4 freshmen who have failed the math and/or living environment Regents exam(s). As such, two programs will be offered to students. A fall afterschool program will be offered to these students with a focus on providing English language support in the identified content subject areas. The duration of the program will be from November to January, 4 days a week for 1 hour each day. There will be 5 service providers, 1 ENL teacher, and 4 content teachers.The ENL teacher will team-teach with each of the content teachers for one hour. We are going to use our Common Core aligned texts, NYS Regents materials, and teacher-made materials. Additionally, a spring Saturday program will be offered to these students with a focus on providing English language support in the identified content subject areas. Instruction will be provided in English with strong native language support on Saturdays from 9am-1pm. The duration of the program will be April to June for 10 Saturdays. There will be 5 service providers, 1 ENL teacher and 4 content area teachers. The ENL teacher will team-teach with each of the content teachers for one hour. Teachers will use Common Core aligned texts, NYS Regents materials, and teacher-made materials. The following is a breakdown by grade of the number of students who failed the NYS Regents Exam in the specific subject area: Seniors (8) ELA - 7 Math - 7 Global - 8 US History - 6 Living Environment - 7 Juniors (15) ELA - 13 Math - 13 2018-19 SCEP-FL 68  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Global - 14 (5 failed and 9 have not taken) US History -13 (12 failed and 1 has not taken) Living Environment - 15 (3 failed and 12 have not taken) Sophomores (11) Math - 10 Global - 11 Living Environment - 11 (6 failed and 5 have not taken) Freshmen (4) Math - 4 Living Environment - 3 We will also offer an intensive Regents instructional program for our ELLs in the areas of Algebra, Global History, US. History and Living Environment in the spring for the same targeted students, working in collaboration with the Tomorrow's Genius Program which is an approved DOE vendor. Through this program, we are able to employ certified bilingual teachers to provide targeted instruction in a small group of 6:1, alongside additional support from a certified ENL instructor and a Special Education teacher in order to meet the specific needs of each student with an Individualized Education Plan. Through the use of this program, students are able to receive support in their native language as well as English to complete rigorous instructional tasks aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards. This program runs for 10 weeks, in 2-hour blocks on Saturday. Based on individual student need, some students may stay for 4 hours on Saturday to attend two different sessions. This program will begin in late March/early April (based on the NYCDOE calendar/scheduled vacations) and will continue until mid-June (until the NYS Regents Exams begin). In order to create the student roster, we will be focusing our attention to seniors first, and then students in grades 9-11 based on their core class performance, whether or not they have previously attempted the exam, the EDAT tool, RTI interventions used, and graduation requirements. We plan on filling each class to capacity in order to maximize student achievement through personalized instruction. The materials for this program include both physical and online Common Core aligned texts, NYS Regents materials, teacher-made materials, and individual student laptops (at no cost). The cost of this program will be in excess of $13,000, however, BCC Prep will compliment the Title III funding with other funding sources. All student records, such as attendance, assessments, as well as teachers' attendance will be kept in the school's Title III Binder. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 69  Part C: Professional Development <!--{cke_protected}%3Cmeta%20charset%3D%22utf-8%22%20%2F%3E-->Our ENL coordinator will attend a minimum of 1 workshop a month to stay current with trends, policies, and compliance issues surrounding our ELLs. In addition, we will send her to training sessions as they are announced throughout the year to support her in her differentiation, integrated co-teaching, and scaffolding support for our ELLs. Our ENL coordinator will facilitate professional development workshops for our teachers (both in the Title III Program as well as our regular staff) on best practices, scaffolding/differentiation strategies, vocabulary development, and will also provide support during department meetings and co-planning sessions to ensure that all of our ELLs receive the support they need to succeed. These professional development sessions will happen during our mandatory professional development on Mondays.We are looking to develop a partnership with Fordham University- Fordham's ELL Institutes and workshops provide administrators and teachers with the most effective teaching strategies, so that they in turn, can provide coherent, rigorous ELL programs. All records, such as agendas, attendance, and products compiled will be kept on file in the school's Title III Binder. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: <!--{cke_protected}%3Cmeta%20charset%3D%22utf-8%22%20%2F%3E--> Researchers have extensive evidence for the positive effects of parent involvement on children, families, and school when schools and parents continuously support and encourage the children's learning and development. Children from diverse cultural backgrounds tend to do better when parents and professionals work together to bridge the gap between the culture at home and the culture in school. High school students whose parents remain involved usually make better transitions and are less likely to drop out of school. Additionally, parents are more aware of, and become more active regarding policies that affect their children's education when parents are requested by school to be part of the decision-making team.In order to help our parents to become more active participants in their children's education, we will be partnering with the Children's Aid Society to provide our ELL parents with a Parenting & Financial Aid class that meets once a week for the spring semester (approximately 15 sessions) from 2:30-4pm at no cost to Title III. During these classes, we will focus on strategies to support students at home with their work, resources available to help these students go to college, and internships available for these students. During these classes, translation will be provided to facilitate parent engagement and participation. We will also be collaborating with the Children's Aid Society to offer our ELL parents the opportunity to attend ESL classes, which will ultimately help them support their children to become proficient in the English language, at no cost to Title III. These classes will meet each Saturday for 2 hours, beginning in October, and run for the entire year, and will focus on language development and academic vocabulary that they may encounter while assisting their children with their Common Core aligned tasks. We will invite our ELL parents to kick-off the 2018-19 SCEP-FL 70  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities new school year with a Family Celebration Dinner at the end of September, as well as a Fall Cultural Heritage Celebration in mid-October, during which they will co-present with their children about their cultural heritage. Students will work on this project both in school (during their ENL classes) and at home with their parent(s)/guardian(s) as a way to start the year off with positive collaboration. We will be inviting parents for a Family Night in November, where students and parents will have the opportunity to participate in a variety of activities that support college and career readiness. We will also be hosting a FAFSA night in November, where students and families will have support in their native language to not only complete the FAFSA application, but to discuss how to navigate the college application process, and what supports are available to ELLs in college. In December we will be inviting students and parents to participate in our service day, where they will work together to give back to our community. We also hope to host a Winter Talent show, where we will be inviting both students and parents to showcase their skills and build a stronger school community. In the spring, we will be holding a Parent Paint Night, during which we will build the parent community at our school. Finally, we will be hosting a Spring Cultural Heritage Celebration, during which they will co-present with their children about their cultural heritage. Students will work on this project both in school (during their ENL classes) and at home with their parent(s)/guardian(s) for students to share with their parents the growth they have made in language development. Parents will be notified of these opportunities in multiple ways, including phone calls, letters mailed home, letters backpacked-home, and emails/reminders through Jupiter Grades, our electronic grade-book/interface for parents and students in the parents' preferred language. All records, such as agendas, attendance, and products compiled will be kept on file in the school's Title III Binder. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) NA  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, NA NA Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. NA NA NA 2018-19 SCEP-FL 71  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA 2018-19 SCEP-FL 72  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 12 School Name Bronx Career & College Preparatory High Borough Bronx School Number 479 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Julia Baly Coach xxxx ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Julie Seda Teacher/Subject Area Femala Fleming/Special Educati Teacher/Subject Area Mark Catanzaro/English Related-Service Provider xxxx Superintendent Paul Rotondo Assistant Principal Pamela Lee Coach xxxx School Counselor Michelle Encarnacion Parent Diana Patterson Parent Coordinator Mercedes Tavarez Field Support Center Staff Member Anita Bushi Other (Name and Title) Fletcher Fernau/Special Educat C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 3 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 2018-19 SCEP-FL 73  D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 265 Total number of ELLs 52 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 19.62% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 2 4 3 K Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? The formative assessments and curriculum-embedded assessments currently being used to guide instructional planning for our ELLs include the NYSITELL, Spanish Lab, NYSESLAT, EDAT, Base-/Mid-/End-line Assessments, Bi-Monthly Performance/Writing Tasks, Mock Regents, iReady, End-of-Unit Assessments, Midterm Exams, Final Exams, NYS Regents Exams, Levels of Understanding (LOUs), Student Self-/Peer-Reflections, and 1-1 conferences. Students are given exams/assessments in their home language whenever possible, and are given glossaries in their home language as well for use on both state exams and in the classroom. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 74  As students enter the NYCDOE, our ENL teacher administers the NYSITELL to determine the student’s current proficiency in English, as well as in Spanish when applicable via the Spanish Lab. This information, along with the student’s transcript are used to create a program that ensures the student will receive the mandated number of ENL instructional minutes each week. Students who are already being serviced in the NYCDOE system receive a program based on their most recent NYSESLAT level of proficiency, ensuring that they receive the mandated number of ENL instructional minutes each week. Their program also ensures that they are programmed to prepare for the NYS Regents exams they are missing, or have attempted and failed, as described in the EDAT, which allows programming to maximize instructional grouping to best meet the individual needs of each ELL. After each NYS Regents Examination period, the EDAT is updated, and the programs of each ELL is reviewed, to ensure that their program is supporting them in the subject areas they are struggling with based on failed Regents attempts and successes, and changes are made as needed. At the end of each year, the NYS Regents Exam scores, Endline Assessments, Final Grades, projected NYSESLAT scores, and an updated EDAT are used to create a program for all ELLs (and SWDs) to ensure that the school is able to meet their individual needs prior to placing other students. The combined use of these state reports ensure that our ELLs receive programs that meet state guidelines in terms of ENL service as well as college and career readiness. Throughout the year, a number of periodic assessments are administered to provide teachers with up-to-date information about each student’s progress in regards to modalities, skills, and content. Base-/Mid- Year/End-line Assessments are given in each subject, which allow teachers to identify which skills/content to focus on, and provides feedback on how students are advancing towards those items of mastery. In addition, Mock Regents and Midterm Exams are given intermittently to measure student performance towards the college and career benchmarks. This also allows teachers to tailor lessons to the development of specific skills/content, and enables them to provide multiple entry points and modalities into each activity to ensure that the ELLs are able to access and master the skills/content. For our ELLs who also have an IEP, iReady is used as both a diagnostic and intervention program in Reading and Math that identifies strengths and weaknesses in reading and math comprehension skills, and provides targeted student-paced intervention throughout the year. End-of-Unit Assessments and Monthly Performance/Writing Tasks allow teachers to get an accurate account of student mastery using real-world applications and activities that challenge students to apply what they have learned under new conditions. This also provides additional data for both revision of the previous unit, as well as identifying what skills/content should be spiraled into the next unit to best support student growth and achievement. For more immediate feedback, teachers use LOUs 2-3 times during each lesson to constantly gauge student understanding and mastery during each individual activity, which enables the teacher to make changes on the spot, if necessary, and also provides in-the-moment data which can be used to group students for remediation and/or enrichment in the next activity of the lesson. Many teachers also use 1-on-1 conferencing with students throughout the course of each unit, as well as student self-/peer-reflections to increase student accountability and ensure that students are playing an active role in monitoring their progress towards the identified goals/skills/content.The analysis of these various quantitative data helps to inform the school’s instructional plan and provides a guide as to what interventions and next steps need to be taken to ensure student success. The constant monitoring of the data aids in creating and revamping the targeted instructional intervention plans throughout the year. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? There are a number of structures in place to support this effort. There is Common Planning Time (CPT) built into the schedule for all teachers, to ensure that there is time for data analysis, descriptive reviews of students, inquiry work, articulation, curriculum review/revision, etc. The Humanities (English & Social Studies) and STEM (Science & Mathematics) meet two times a week, and individual departments meet an additional one day a week. During these periods, the departments review their common assessment data; create a data-action plan for the department; conduct tuning protocols to share instructional strategies and get feedback on upcoming lesson plans; discuss the needs of individual students as well as the inquiry target group as determined by the baseline; and create/revise performance tasks, unit plans and curriculum maps as needed. Each teacher has two additional common-planning periods built into their schedule for the entire department, during which time they meet and conference with their co-teachers to pre-plan activities, create and review co-taught lesson plans and 2018-19 SCEP-FL 75  differentiated materials, grade and analyze co-assessments, and reflect on their co teaching practices. During these times, the ENL teachers are also available to conference with teachers to provide support in tailoring lesson objectives, activities, and assessments to the needs of each individual ELL. Department Chairpersons also meet with the administration once a week after-school to articulate needs/progress/successes of each department with the principal, and share that feedback with the department on a routine basis. The ENL coordinator attends monthly ELL Liaison training workshops provided by the Bronx BFSC, focusing on the co-teaching cycle, compliance, and sharing best practices among all high schools in the Bronx. The ENL coordinator then turnkeys this information to individual departments and the whole staff during the Monday Professional Development (PD) cycle. In addition to the needs of ELLs and topics presented at the monthly liaison meetings, the principal creates the remainder of the School’s Professional Development calendar based on feedback from PPOs, the Quality Review, Advance, SCEP, teacher surveys, and student data. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Throughout the year, a number of periodic assessments are administered to provide teachers with up-to-date information about each student’s progress in regards to modalities, skills, and content. Base-/Mid-Year/End-line Assessments are given in each subject, which allow teachers to identify which skills/content to focus on, and provides feedback on how students are advancing towards those items of mastery. In addition, Mock Regents and Midterm Exams are given intermittently to measure student performance towards the college and career benchmarks. This also allows teachers to tailor lessons to the development of specific skills/content, and enables them to provide multiple entry points and modalities into each activity to ensure that the ELLs are able to access and master the skills/content. For our ELLs who also have an IEP, iReady is used as both a diagnostic and intervention program in Reading and Math that identifies strengths and weaknesses in reading and math comprehension skills, and provides targeted student-paced intervention throughout the year. End-of-Unit Assessments and Bi-Monthly Performance/Writing Tasks allow teachers to get an accurate account of student mastery using real-world applications and activities that challenge students to apply what they have learned under new conditions. This also provides additional data for both revision of the previous unit, as well as identifying what skills/content should be spiraled into the next unit to best support student growth and achievement. For more immediate feedback, teachers use LOUs 2-3 times during each lesson to constantly gauge student understanding and mastery during each individual activity, which enables the teacher to make changes on the spot, if necessary, and also provides in-the-moment data which can be used to group students for remediation and/or enrichment in the next activity of the lesson. Many teachers also use 1-on-1 conferencing with students throughout the course of each unit, as well as student self-/peer-reflections to increase student accountability and ensure that students are playing an active role in monitoring their progress towards the identified goals/skills/content.The analysis of these various quantitative data helps to inform the school’s instructional plan and provides a guide as to what interventions and next steps need to be taken to ensure student success. The constant monitoring of the data aids in creating and revamping the targeted instructional intervention plans throughout the year. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? There are a number of structures in place to support this effort. There is Common Planning Time (CPT) built into the schedule for all teachers, to ensure that there is time for data analysis, descriptive reviews of students, inquiry work, articulation, curriculum review/revision, etc. The Humanities (English & Social Studies) and STEM (Science & Mathematics) meet two times a week, and individual departments meet an additional one day a week. During these periods, the departments review their common assessment data; create a data-action plan for the department; conduct tuning protocols to share instructional strategies and get feedback on upcoming lesson plans; discuss the needs of individual students as well as the inquiry target group as determined by the baseline; and create/revise performance tasks, unit plans and curriculum maps as needed. Each teacher has two additional common-planning periods built into their schedule, during which time they meet and conference with their co-teachers to pre-plan activities, create and review co-taught lesson plans and differentiated materials, grade and analyze co-assessments, and reflect on their co teaching practices. During these times, the ENL teachers are also available to conference with teachers to provide support in tailoring lesson objectives, activities, and assessments to the needs of each individual ELL. Department Chairpersons also meet with the administration once a week after-school to articulate 2018-19 SCEP-FL 76  needs/progress/successes of each department with the principal, and share that feedback with the department on a routine basis. The ENL coordinator attends monthly ELL Liaison training workshops provided by the Bronx BFSC, focusing on the co-teaching cycle, compliance, and sharing best practices among all high schools in the Bronx. The ENL coordinator then turnkeys this information to individual departments and the whole staff during the Monday Professional Development (PD) cycle. In addition to the needs of ELLs and topics presented at the monthly liaison meetings, the principal creates the remainder of the School’s Professional Development calendar based on feedback from PPOs, the Quality Review, Advance, SICEP, teacher surveys, and student data. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] N/A 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. As students enter the NYCDOE, our ENL teacher administers the NYSITELL to determine the student’s current proficiency in English, as well as in Spanish when applicable via the Spanish Lab. This information, along with the student’s transcript are used to create a program that ensures the student will receive the mandated number of ENL instructional minutes each week. Students who are already being serviced in the NYCDOE system receive a program based on their most recent NYSESLAT level of proficiency, ensuring that they receive the mandated number of ENL instructional minutes each week. Their program also ensures that they are programmed to prepare for the NYS Regents exams they are missing, or have attempted and failed, as described in the EDAT, which allows programming to maximize instructional grouping to best meet the individual needs of each ELL. After each NYS Regents Examination period, the EDAT is updated, and the programs of each ELL is reviewed, to ensure that their program is supporting them in the subject areas they are struggling with based on failed Regents attempts and successes, and changes are made as needed. At the end of each year, the NYS Regents Exam scores, Endline Assessments, Final Grades, projected NYSESLAT scores, and an updated EDAT are used to create a program for all ELLs (and SWDs) to ensure that the school is able to meet their individual needs prior to placing other students. During this time, the EDAT is critical in helping to determine which content area(s) will have ENL ICT classes for the following year, in order to best support students who have attempted and failed NYS Regents Exams, or are going to be attempting it for the first time. The combined use of these state reports ensure that our ELLs receive programs that meet state guidelines in terms of minutes of ENL service as well as college and career readiness. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? There are a number of structures in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to our program. The first is the initial review of the EDAT and final grades for students to create tentative ENL ICT classes for the coming year, created by the ENL Coordinator and ENL teacher. Those proposed classes are then reviewed by a programming team, including the Principal, Program Chair, and ENL Coordinator, to ensure that the students are placed in classes to help keep them on track to graduate, are receiving the mandated number of ENL instructional minutes each week, and are grouped in an ENL ICT based on previous attempts on the NYS Regents Exams. These two processes both happen in June/July. Once the spring NYSESLAT scores, and August NYS Regents scores, are received in late August, the team will revisit the program and make any necessary adjustments based on changes in proficiency levels or passed NYS Regents Exams. Finally, this program will be reviewed and explained to students in September, and again in February (after the January NYS Regents scores are received) during small group conferences during which students will review their transcript and graduation progress ensuring that they are correctly programmed and on track. Part IV: ELL Programming 2018-19 SCEP-FL 77  Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. The instruction for ELLs in the Freestanding ENL program is delivered homogeneously in our standalone ENL class (only EN and EM proficiency levels) and heterogeneously in our Integrated ENL ICT classes. As per CR Part 154.2, all students are programmed for the mandated number of ENL instructional minutes each week. All students who score at the Entering or Emerging levels are programmed for 1 Standalone ENL unit of study per week. All EN students are programmed for an additional two Integrated ENL classes, one of which is an Integrated ENL/ELA class. All EM students are programmed for one Integrated ENL/ELA class. All TR, EX, and CM students are programmed for one Integrated ENL/Content Area class, based on their individual needs as defined by the EDAT, specifically in the content area they have struggled with based on failed attempts on NYS Regents Exams, or based on missing/needed NYS Regents Exams. As a result, some of the students will end up traveling in a blocked group to their core content classes, especially if they have failed the same NYS Regents Exams, or need to pass the same exams. Each Standalone and Integrated ENL/Content Area class will be taught by a teacher who holds ESOL certification (and a certified content area teacher, when applicable). The Freestanding ENL program at our school emphasises language skills which are differentiated for each proficiency level across content areas using the NLAPs, PLDs, and ToMs as guides for differentiating instruction. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? To ensure that each student is programmed for the mandated number of instructional ENL minutes, the ENL Coordinator begins the process by printing the RLAT and using the EDAT and final grades to determine a suggested program, including the tentative number of Integrated ENL/Content Area classes for each grade level/department. The ENL Coordinator then meets with the programmer and principal to review the EDAT to confirm that individual students needs by subject area were targeted and used to create the groups for each Integrated ENL/Content Area Class. This information is then entered into STARS. Each class will be offered for 40-minutes a day, 5 days a week, which will give students 200 minutes of ENL instruction for each Standalone/Integrated ENL class they are enrolled in. EN students will receive 600 minutes of ENL instruction each week between the single standalone class and the two integrated ENL ICT classes, exceeding the 540 minute requirement. EN students will receive 400 minutes of ENL instruction each week between the single standalone class and the single integrated ENL ICT class, exceeding the 360 minute requirement. TR and EX students will receive 200 minutes of ENL instruction each week in a single integrated ENL ICT class, exceeding the 180 minute requirement. CM students will receive 200 minutes of ENL instruction each week in a single integrated ENL ICT class, exceeding the 90 minute requirement. Even though these programs will exceed the number of instructional minutes for each level of proficiency, it will support student growth and achievement through a consistent program each day. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 78  3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. The instruction for ELLs in the Freestanding ENL program is delivered in English for both the Standalone ENL class and the various Integrated ENL/Content Area Classes. In order to meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards, teachers create high-quality instructional environments that foster academic success by creating opportunities for teachers and students to produce together, developing language and literacy across the curriculum through meaningful lessons, teaching complex thinking, and teaching through conversation. In the service of jointly constructing knowledge, teachers and students producing together provides students with opportunities to positively engage with one another and with their teacher around rigorous content, which boosts academic development and academic motivation. Language development is fostered through purposeful, deliberate conversations between teacher and students, and among students. Reading and writing is taught both as specific curricula, and integrated into each content area. Teachers make lessons meaningful by leveraging students’ funds of knowledge and skills as a foundation for new knowledge, and then linking students’ background knowledge and daily lives to the content at hand, which provides experiences that show abstract concepts drawn from, and applied to, the everyday world. Teachers target academically rigorous and challenging instructional goals, while simultaneously providing students with the instructional supports they need to achieve success. Teachers use instructional conversations including dialogue, questioning, and sharing ideas and knowledge to build students’ abilities to form, express, and exchange ideas, and enables the teacher to listen carefully, make guesses about intended meaning, and adjust responses to assist students’ efforts. The following Integrated ENL/Content Area Classes are being offered during the 2017-2018 school year, including the number of sections of each, when applicable: There will be an Integrated ENL/ELA class on every grade level (9-12). In addition, there will be 1 Integrated ENL/Global History class, and 1 Integrated ENL/US History class. There is Common Planning Time (CPT) built into the schedule for all teachers, to ensure that there is time for data analysis, descriptive reviews of students, inquiry work, articulation, curriculum review/revision, etc. The Humanities (English & Social Studies) and STEM (Science & Mathematics) meet two times a week, and individual departments meet an additional one day a week. During these periods, the departments review their common assessment data; create a data-action plan for the department; conduct tuning protocols to share instructional strategies and get feedback on upcoming lesson plans; discuss the needs of individual students as well as the inquiry target group as determined by the baseline; and create/revise lessons, performance tasks, unit plans and curriculum maps as needed. Teachers also use this time to adjust their instructional activities, lesson outcomes, and assessments based on student data in alignment with the CCLS. Each teacher has two additional common-planning periods built into their schedule, during which time they meet and conference with their co-teachers to pre-plan activities, create/review/revise co-taught lesson plans and differentiated materials, grade and analyze co-assessments, and reflect on their co teaching practices. During these times, the ENL teachers are also available to conference with teachers to provide support in tailoring lesson objectives, activities, and assessments to the needs of each individual ELL. These instructional activities are differentiated in various ways, including multiple entry points, student choice, varied levels of text, varied level of scaffolding questions, chunked text, modified process, modified product, collaborative work, using their proficiency levels, classwork, and individual ability as data to align the best materials to individual student needs. Co-Teachers will also attend workshops throughout the year on Integrated ENL Co-Teaching Best Practices. A variety of instructional approaches and methods are used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. There are many instructional strategies and approaches that are used to support oral language development including, but not limited to: Building background knowledge starts with exposure to rich text and big ideas so students encounter and study abstract language and abstract concepts, and learn about the world. This also allows students to preview key concepts and challenging vocabulary while reviewing their understanding of important points. Teachers also draw on and use students’ home languages when possible. Making explicit connections to community and content also helps to solidify understanding for students as they see the connections and relationships between skills and strategies across various content areas. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 79  Close, interactive reading aloud provides opportunity to frontload vocabulary, sentence structures and concepts, and provides a perfect vehicle for engaging students in discussion and dialogue about a big idea in the text through open-ended questions throughout the text. Storytelling using wordless books and/or photographs helps students to develop oral fluency and prepare for the Speaking portion of the NYSESLAT. It can also support English Language Arts, History, and Science lessons if the media is aligned to the current unit of study, or is focusing on the same content/literary elements. Collaborative discussion and debate aligns to both CCLS and Danielson, which encourages students to pose open-ended questions and keep the conversation going, especially when instructional planning and class time is devoted to student projects that are discussion-based, including oral presentations and debates. Teachers can also provide language frames for speaking and listening, to support students in this process. Multifaceted and intensive (explicit) vocabulary instruction is critical to developing readers who are college and career ready. Teachers can help students study words, word parts, and word families as part of the content-based literacy instruction, build words and knowledge at the same time, and includes a focus on words with multiple meanings. Teachers can also employ specific vocabulary learning strategies such as visual cues, total physical response, realia, mnemonic devices and graphic organizers to assist students in bolstering their academic vocabulary. There are many instructional strategies and approaches that are used to support written language development including, but not limited to: Patterned way of reading, writing, and talking uses open-ended, text-based questions about texts that have multiple responses that are based on evidence from the text. These open-ended, text-based questions are sequenced to move learners from literal comprehension to higher-level thinking about a text. The number of readings depends on the complexity of the text and the lesson’s academic purpose. Each time we ask students to reread the text, we also ask them to construct a response to the open-ended, text-based question that guides that reading. After they have read the text and responded to the question, we engage students in discussion. The talk formats we use and the amount of time spent on each discussion vary based on the students’ ability, the difficulty of the text and question, and the instructional purpose.There are a number of advantages to using open-ended, text-based questions. Open-ended, text-based questions: Allow multiple entry points for students. Students are able to answer the question from their perspective. Provide teachers with a window into students’ thinking and comprehension of a text. Allow students to construct an overall understanding of a text. Mirror the kinds of questions proficient readers ask themselves about a text. Proficient readers rarely concern themselves with the insignificant details that are often the subject of close-ended questions. Teach the writing process (i.e., developing ideas, writing them down, getting feedback, editing, producing the final draft, and publishing): During the first stages of the process, focus writing instruction on communication and meaning construction, as opposed to mechanics and correctness. Many ELLs may struggle with editing their own writings when correctness obscures the expression of meaning and the development of complex ideas. During the latter stages of the process (i.e., editing, producing the final draft, and publishing) support ELLs as they edit their own writings. Try using writing rubrics and the traits model to guide students. Bear in mind, most writing rubrics do not account for the bilingual strategies that ELLs often use when they write. Encourage ELLs to focus on conventions (e.g., spelling, grammar) as the last step in the editing process. Celebrate writing! Have students read their finished works aloud for their peers as each takes a turn sharing their writing during their writing celebration. Be sure to incorporate appropriate social, cultural, and linguistic adaptations. Connect the ways in which students and their families use literacy at home and in the community (e.g., topics, styles, and cultural knowledge) with classroom writing themes Provide different types of writing tools in the classroom including graphic organizers, sentence starters/prompts, accountable talk stems, English-Home Language content-specific glossaries, bilingual dictionaries, and exemplars. Promote different types of writing purposes, genres, and formats Model writing activities using the language experience approach: Write students’ dictations about a shared classroom experience. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 80  Use the text produced from students’ dictations as the basis for refining students’ writing abilities. Interact with students (and have students interact with each other) through written communications: For example, use dialogue journals. These journals are written conversations between the teacher and individual students. Although the purpose of dialogue journals is not to correct students’ errors, it is recommended to recast them and use the correct model in your responses as a way to advance students’ language proficiency. Integrate oral language and vocabulary instruction into writing instruction by having students: verbalize their thinking before putting it into writing, and share aloud after they have both thought and written about the topic use new vocabulary and language structures in their writing In addition to supporting oral and written language development, there are many instructional strategies and approaches that are used to support reading comprehension. When implementing the following reading comprehension activities, teachers draw on students' existing knowledge, build students’ background knowledge, focus on key vocabulary [including transition words (e.g., therefore, first, however), content-specific words (e.g., petri dish, robber barons, hypotenuse), and all-purpose academic words (e.g., culture, impact, contribute, research)](e.g., )], ask questions to promote understanding and prompt critical thinking and analysis, and provide students with multiple ways to show what they are understanding and learning (oral, written, role play, drawing). These strategies include, but are not limited to: Reading thematically related texts, across genres (i.e., text sets): reading aloud, modeled and shared reading Modified guided reading (select books according to stage of development): use guided reading format to model and build the multiple components of reading comprehension (e.g., background knowledge, vocabulary knowledge, word-reading skills, comprehension monitoring) Reciprocal teaching (i.e., the teacher models using reading strategies when reading aloud, then leads students in a text-related discussion. As students become more proficient at applying the strategies, they take turns leading discussions about text content.) Scaffolded retelling (i.e., students share and compare their retellings of text and provide feedback at the whole story level, at the phrase and individual word levels, and back to the whole story level; students use visual cues such as graphic organizers to clarify and consolidate their thinking.) Literature circles (i.e., small groups of students who read or listen to the same book—or text set related to the same theme—and meet to discuss their understanding with others.): include quality literature in which the children can see themselves Reading responses incorporating art, music, drama, poetry Bilingual dictionaries are ordered each year using NYSTL funds based on the current population/language needs of the students. Bilingual glossaries are printed out at the beginning of each year and distributed to all NYS Regents-bearing classes in all of the languages needed by the students to familiarize the students with potential vocabulary they will encounter throughout the year and on the NYS Regents Exam. Additionally, the school will be creating and implementing a new vocabulary curriculum for each subject area to increase students’ overall academic vocabulary and build continuity and consistency into the way that students are exposed to new vocabulary. Students who require additional translation will receive materials in their Home Language when available, and will also have access to a tablet for more thorough translation during class instruction. Our ELLs will be grouped into the same section of each subject, and will end up traveling in a blocked group to their core content classes, especially if they have failed the same NYS Regents Exams, or need to pass the same exams. In each class, students will receive scaffolded materials, including visual aids, graphic organizers and templates, accountable talk stems and sentence starters, translated materials, and will also receive varied products/tasks for assessment based on their proficiency level, as dictated by the New Language Arts Progressions (NLAPs) and Performance Level Descriptors (PLDs). 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? 2018-19 SCEP-FL 81  All students who enter into the NYCDOE system and are newly identified as ELLs are given the NYSITELL to determine their proficiency level in English. All students who identified Spanish as their Home Language will also be given the Spanish Lab to identify whether or not they are proficient in their Home Language, as this will help inform teachers on the methods they use to scaffold and supplement instruction throughout the year. The new lense is used to identify SIFE status for incoming ELLs as well during the initial onboarding process. The NLAPs and PLDs are used to create assessments, lessons, performance tasks, and instructional activities to meet the individual learning needs of our ELLs at all proficiency levels. All students are given exams and assessments in their Home Language whenever possible, including the NYS Regents Exams. In addition, students are also given bilingual glossaries in their Home Language for use on both state exams and in the classroom when available. When the student’s Home Language is not available for the NYS Regents Exams and is considered a Low Incidence Language, a translator is requested to orally translate the NYS Regents exam to them using Title III funding. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. SIFE SIFE students are identified using a detailed questionnaire. These students receive above the mandated minutes of service to expedite their acquisition of student skills and literacy skills necessary to function within the general education classrooms. In the ENL standalone class, these students are given targeted instruction to develop academic and social vocabulary, as well as the opportunity to create background knowledge that will serve as the basis for further knowledge expansion in other content area classes. These students also receive content-specific bilingual glossaries and cognate guides in their Home Language to keep with them as they transition from class to class in order to facilitate their understanding of each subject. SIFE students are also targeted for our Title III Saturday program in the spring, as well as afterschool interventions, including iReady to build their basic reading and math skills. These students are also programmed for advisory with a teacher who speaks their Home Language when available to provide additional support and guidance as the student becomes acclimated to the school culture. Newcomer Newcomers are ELLs who have been receiving ENL services for 1-3 years. These students are given the opportunity to use their Home Language in accordance with the NLAPs and PLDs, in order to provide time for the student to develop his/her English vocabulary. In the ENL standalone class, these students are given targeted instruction to develop academic and social vocabulary, as well as the opportunity to create background knowledge that will serve as the basis for further knowledge expansion in other content area classes. These students also receive content-specific bilingual glossaries and cognate guides in their Home Language to keep with them as they transition from class to class in order to facilitate their understanding of each subject. Newcomer students receive a schedule that has one or more “buddy” students in their classes, to foster a sense of community, ensure that there is at least one student that he/she can communicate with in their Home Language, and also as a method of grouping, helping to provide access to the curriculum for these students in a safe, welcoming learning environment. These students are also programmed for advisory with a teacher who speaks their Home Language when available to provide additional support and guidance as the student becomes acclimated to the school culture. Newcomer students are also targeted for our Title III Saturday program in the spring using the EDAT to determine which content area will best support their individual learning needs. Developing Developing ELLs have been receiving ENL services for 4-6 years. These students, depending on their level of English Proficiency, are given the opportunity to use their Home Language as appropriate based on the NLAPs and PLDs. In addition, these students serve as “buddy” students for some of the Newcomers. This gives them the opportunity to both assist their 2018-19 SCEP-FL 82  peers in social and academic vocabulary, but also forces them to practice speaking in English as they teach their peers, and the repeated instruction. Developing ELLs receive content-specific bilingual glossaries and cognate guides in their Home Language to keep with them as they transition from class to class in order to facilitate their understanding of each subject, and while they have the opportunity to take their NYS Regents Exams in their Home Language, many prefer to take them in English. Developing students are also targeted for our Title III Saturday program in the spring using the EDAT to determine which content area will best support their individual learning needs. Long Term Long Term ELLs have been receiving ENL services for 7 or more years. These students, depending on their level of English Proficiency, are given the opportunity to use their Home Language as appropriate based on the NLAPs and PLDs. In addition, these students serve as “buddy” students for some of the Newcomers. Long Term ELLs receive content-specific bilingual glossaries and cognate guides in their Home Language to keep with them as they transition from class to class in order to facilitate their understanding of each subject, and while they have the opportunity to take their NYS Regents Exams in their Home Language, many prefer to take them in English. Long Term ELL students are also targeted for our Title III Saturday program in the spring using the EDAT to determine which content area will best support their individual learning needs. Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Former ELLs are students who have tested out of the ENL program via the NYSESLAT with a CM score, or via the NYS English Regents Exam and an EX score on the NYSESLAT in the same year. These students receive 90 minutes of instruction each week in an Integrated ENL/Content Area Class using the EDAT to determine which content area will best support their individual learning needs. These students still have access to content-specific bilingual glossaries and cognate guides in their Home Language to keep with them as they transition from class to class in order to facilitate their understanding of each subject, and while they have the opportunity to take their NYS Regents Exams in their Home Language, many prefer to take them in English. Former ELL students are also targeted for our Title III Saturday program in the spring using the EDAT to determine which content area will best support their individual learning needs. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Teachers of ELL-SWDs use a variety of instructional approaches and methods are used to make content comprehensible to foster and accelerate English language development and provide access to academic content areas, while simultaneously meeting the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Individual student IEPs are reviewed at the beginning of each year to ensure that teachers and service providers are aware of the student’s individual learning goals, instructional needs, and this information is used to inform differentiation practices throughout the year. There are many instructional strategies and approaches that are used to support oral language development including, but not limited to: Building background knowledge starts with exposure to rich text and big ideas so students encounter and study abstract language and abstract concepts, and learn about the world. This also allows students to preview key concepts and challenging vocabulary while reviewing their understanding of important points. Teachers also draw on and use students’ home languages when possible. Making explicit connections to community and content also helps to solidify understanding for students as they see the connections and relationships between skills and strategies across various content areas. Close, interactive reading aloud provides opportunity to frontload vocabulary, sentence structures and concepts, and provides a perfect vehicle for engaging students in discussion and dialogue about a big idea in the text through open-ended questions throughout the text. Storytelling using wordless books and/or photographs helps students to develop oral fluency and prepare for the Speaking portion of the NYSESLAT. It can also support English Language Arts, History, and Science lessons if the media is aligned to the current unit of study, or is focusing on the same content/literary elements. Collaborative discussion and debate aligns to both CCLS and Danielson, which encourages students to pose open-ended questions and keep the conversation going, especially when instructional planning and class time is devoted to student projects that are discussion-based, including oral presentations and debates. Teachers can also provide language frames for 2018-19 SCEP-FL 83  speaking and listening, to support students in this process. Multifaceted and intensive (explicit) vocabulary instruction is critical to developing readers who are college and career ready. Teachers can help students study words, word parts, and word families as part of the content-based literacy instruction, build words and knowledge at the same time, and includes a focus on words with multiple meanings. Teachers can also employ specific vocabulary learning strategies such as visual cues, total physical response, realia, mnemonic devices and graphic organizers to assist students in bolstering their academic vocabulary. There are many instructional strategies and approaches that are used to support written language development including, but not limited to: Patterned way of reading, writing, and talking uses open-ended, text-based questions about texts that have multiple responses that are based on evidence from the text. These open-ended, text-based questions are sequenced to move learners from literal comprehension to higher-level thinking about a text. The number of readings depends on the complexity of the text and the lesson’s academic purpose. Each time we ask students to reread the text, we also ask them to construct a response to the open-ended, text-based question that guides that reading. After they have read the text and responded to the question, we engage students in discussion. The talk formats we use and the amount of time spent on each discussion vary based on the students’ ability, the difficulty of the text and question, and the instructional purpose.There are a number of advantages to using open-ended, text-based questions. Open-ended, text-based questions: Allow multiple entry points for students. Students are able to answer the question from their perspective. Provide teachers with a window into students’ thinking and comprehension of a text. Allow students to construct an overall understanding of a text. Mirror the kinds of questions proficient readers ask themselves about a text. Proficient readers rarely concern themselves with the insignificant details that are often the subject of close-ended questions. Teach the writing process (i.e., developing ideas, writing them down, getting feedback, editing, producing the final draft, and publishing): During the first stages of the process, focus writing instruction on communication and meaning construction, as opposed to mechanics and correctness. Many ELLs may struggle with editing their own writings when correctness obscures the expression of meaning and the development of complex ideas. During the latter stages of the process (i.e., editing, producing the final draft, and publishing) support ELLs as they edit their own writings. Try using writing rubrics and the traits model to guide students. Bear in mind, most writing rubrics do not account for the bilingual strategies that ELLs often use when they write. Encourage ELLs to focus on conventions (e.g., spelling, grammar) as the last step in the editing process. Celebrate writing! Have students read their finished works aloud for their peers as each takes a turn sharing their writing during their writing celebration. Be sure to incorporate appropriate social, cultural, and linguistic adaptations. Connect the ways in which students and their families use literacy at home and in the community (e.g., topics, styles, and cultural knowledge) with classroom writing themes Provide different types of writing tools in the classroom including graphic organizers, sentence starters/prompts, accountable talk stems, English-Home Language content-specific glossaries, bilingual dictionaries, and exemplars. Promote different types of writing purposes, genres, and formats Model writing activities using the language experience approach: Write students’ dictations about a shared classroom experience. Use the text produced from students’ dictations as the basis for refining students’ writing abilities. Interact with students (and have students interact with each other) through written communications: For example, use dialogue journals. These journals are written conversations between the teacher and individual students. Although the purpose of dialogue journals is not to correct students’ errors, it is recommended to recast them and use the correct model in your responses as a way to advance students’ language proficiency. Integrate oral language and vocabulary instruction into writing instruction by having students: verbalize their thinking before putting it into writing, and share aloud after they have both thought and written about the topic use new vocabulary and language structures in their writing 2018-19 SCEP-FL 84  In addition to supporting oral and written language development, there are many instructional strategies and approaches that are used to support reading comprehension. When implementing the following reading comprehension activities, teachers draw on students' existing knowledge, build students’ background knowledge, focus on key vocabulary [including transition words (e.g., therefore, first, however), content-specific words (e.g., petri dish, robber barons, hypotenuse), and all-purpose academic words (e.g., culture, impact, contribute, research)](e.g., )], ask questions to promote understanding and prompt critical thinking and analysis, and provide students with multiple ways to show what they are understanding and learning (oral, written, role play, drawing). These strategies include, but are not limited to: Reading thematically related texts, across genres (i.e., text sets): reading aloud, modeled and shared reading Modified guided reading (select books according to stage of development): use guided reading format to model and build the multiple components of reading comprehension (e.g., background knowledge, vocabulary knowledge, word-reading skills, comprehension monitoring) Reciprocal teaching (i.e., the teacher models using reading strategies when reading aloud, then leads students in a text-related discussion. As students become more proficient at applying the strategies, they take turns leading discussions about text content.) Scaffolded retelling (i.e., students share and compare their retellings of text and provide feedback at the whole story level, at the phrase and individual word levels, and back to the whole story level; students use visual cues such as graphic organizers to clarify and consolidate their thinking.) Literature circles (i.e., small groups of students who read or listen to the same book—or text set related to the same theme—and meet to discuss their understanding with others.): include quality literature in which the children can see themselves Reading responses incorporating art, music, drama, poetry Bilingual dictionaries are ordered each year using NYSTL funds based on the current population/language needs of the students. Bilingual glossaries are printed out at the beginning of each year and distributed to all NYS Regents-bearing classes in all of the languages needed by the students to familiarize the students with potential vocabulary they will encounter throughout the year and on the NYS Regents Exam. Additionally, the school will be creating and implementing a new vocabulary curriculum for each subject area to increase students’ overall academic vocabulary and build continuity and consistency into the way that students are exposed to new vocabulary. Students who require additional translation will receive materials in their Home Language when available, and will also have access to a tablet for more thorough translation during class instruction. Our ELLs will be grouped into the same section of each subject, and will end up traveling in a blocked group to their core content classes, especially if they have failed the same NYS Regents Exams, or need to pass the same exams. In each class, students will receive scaffolded materials, including visual aids, graphic organizers and templates, accountable talk stems and sentence starters, translated materials, and will also receive varied products/tasks for assessment based on their proficiency level, as dictated by the New Language Arts Progressions (NLAPs) and Performance Level Descriptors (PLDs). 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? In order to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment, our school uses curricular, instructional and scheduling flexibility. Depending on the program recommendation in each student’s individual IEP, students are placed in the least restrictive environment to facilitate student growth. Students who have an ICT program written into their IEP are placed in an Integrated ENL/ICT/Content Area Class, during which they receive support from a Special Education teacher, an ENL service provider, and the Content Area general education teacher. These teachers use flexible grouping based on individual student need in each specific unit of study using a variety of formal and informal assessments. These teachers also use the backwards design of planning to account for these students, ensuring that there are multiple entry points in both individual lessons and performance tasks. The teachers also attend PD throughout the year around curricular modification for these students to meet their individual needs. This Integrated ENL/ICT/Content Area 2018-19 SCEP-FL 85  Class programming ensures that students are given support towards both language and content area learning objectives in the least restrictive environment. Students who have a SETSS program written into their IEP will receive Academic Intervention Services five days a week in the specific subject areas they need based on the EDAT and current grades in each class. When the schedule allows, block scheduling and parallel scheduling of content area classes enable students to fluidly move between classes based on individual success and ability for each unit. Additionally, selected students are programmed for a Regents Prep class during the 9th period to meet their individual needs as described in the EDAT and their IEP. Throughout the year, “kid talks” or descriptive reviews are held to discuss the student’s schedule and identify successful strategies being used across all classes to increase student success and modify instructional approaches as needed. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. One of the targeted intervention programs for ELLs in Math, Science, and Social Studies content areas is the Tomorrow’s Genius Program. Using Title III funding, we run a Saturday program in the spring using the EDAT to determine which content area will best support each student’s individual learning needs and increase their ability to pass the NYS Regents Exams. These classes are offered to all subgroups of ELLs, including SIFE, Newcomers, Developing, Long-Term, Former, and ELL-SWDs, with priority given to seniors and juniors based on the EDAT. Each of these classes is offered in the students’ Home Language of Spanish as well as English and is taught by a bilingual teacher to a group of 6 students. This not only provides Home Language support, but ensures individualized instruction. In addition to the Title III bilingual classes offered in partnership with Tomorrow’s Genius, students are also invited to attend Saturday School in preparation for the NYS English Regents Exam. This instruction will be delivered in English. These classes are offered to all subgroups of ELLs, including SIFE, Newcomers, Developing, Long-Term, Former, and ELL-SWDs, with priority given to seniors and juniors based on the EDAT. Additionally, students will also have the opportunity to take Regents Prep Classes in their 9th period of the instructional day, which will be offered to all subgroups of ELLs, including SIFE, Newcomers, Developing, Long-Term, Former, and ELL-SWDs, with priority given to seniors and juniors based on the EDAT. This instruction will be delivered in English, and students will be provided with the NYS bilingual glossaries, cognate resources, and bilingual dictionaries as needed. In addition, when available, students will receive NYS Regents and prep materials in their Home Language. In each class, students will receive scaffolded materials, including visual aids, graphic organizers and templates, accountable talk stems and sentence starters, translated materials, and will also receive varied products/tasks for assessment based on their proficiency level, as dictated by the New Language Arts Progressions (NLAPs) and Performance Level Descriptors (PLDs). Finally, ELL-SWD students will use the iReady program to support basic math and reading skills during their SETSS/AIS classes. This instruction will be delivered in English to all students with an IEP (ELL subgroups vary based on SpEd population each year). 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Based on recent data collected, the school has identified a need for increased vocabulary. As a result, the school will be creating and implementing a new vocabulary curriculum for each subject area to increase students’ overall academic vocabulary and build continuity and consistency into the way that students are exposed to new vocabulary. Due to the success of recent school-wide shifts of using accountable talk stems, we will build on this structure and identify content-specific vocabulary for each class to focus on throughout the year by means of explicit instruction. This will be measured periodically throughout the year to measure student understanding as well as the various instructional strategies being implemented. Individual departments will share strategies among its members and with the entire staff to increase the effectiveness and to share best practices. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All ELLs have equal access to all school programs. Notices for clubs and sports are provided in both English and Spanish, and are translated into other languages based on our population needs each year using the Language Preference survey given to 2018-19 SCEP-FL 86  both parents and students. Permission slips for school trips are also provided in both English and students’ Home Language. Our school offers and variety of sports and clubs including cooking club, music, engineering, chess, dance, soccer, baseball, basketball and volleyball. In order to stay true to our name, we have a number of Career Houses within our school that all students, including ELLs and SWDs have access to. Within each Career House, students have the opportunity to gain real-life experience in the field of their choice. Students in the Medical Career House participate in an internship with Montefiore Medical Center. Students in the Entrepreneur Career House work with the BUILD NYC program to create their own companies, develop their own products, pitch them to investors, and sell them if they received funding. Students in the Law Career House participate in mock trials, review cases, and visit courthouses to experience the justice system in action. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Bilingual dictionaries are ordered each year using NYSTL funds based on the current population/language needs of the students. Bilingual glossaries are printed out at the beginning of each year and distributed to all NYS Regents-bearing classes in all of the languages needed by the students to familiarize the students with potential vocabulary they will encounter throughout the year and on the NYS Regents Exam. These glossaries are available in 10 languages for the following content areas we offer: Mathematics (Algebra, Geometry, Trigonometry), Social Studies (Global, U.S. History), Science (Living Environment, Earth Science, Chemistry), and English (Cognates, False Cognates, Literary Elements). These glossaries were created by NYS and are also provided to students for use during each NYS Regents Exam. Students who require additional translation will receive materials in their Home Language whenever available, and will also have access to a tablet for more thorough translation during class instruction. They will be able to check these out on a daily basis, and will be offered to our Newcomers and students whose proficiency is at the EN/EM level. Students will also have the ability to sign out a laptop to facilitate the completion of written assignments. In each class, students will receive a variety scaffolded materials, including visual aids, graphic organizers and templates, accountable talk stems and sentence starters, translated materials, and will also receive varied products/tasks for assessment based on their proficiency level, as dictated by the New Language Arts Progressions (NLAPs) and Performance Level Descriptors (PLDs). Classroom teachers will also make use of SmartBoards, ENO Projectors, and document cameras to provide students with visual and audio support. These resources are often used to complete shared writing and revision exercises, and can be very useful in the analysis of exemplar performance tasks across all subjects. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? All students who enter into the NYCDOE system and are newly identified as ELLs are given the NYSITELL to determine their proficiency level in English. All students who identified Spanish as their Home Language will also be given the Spanish Lab to identify whether or not they are proficient in their Home Language, as this will help inform teachers on the methods they use to scaffold and supplement instruction throughout the year. The new lense is used to identify SIFE status for incoming ELLs as well during the initial onboarding process. Using the NLAPs and PLDs to guide our instruction and assessment, students in our Freestanding ENL program are given the opportunity to submit assignments in their Home Language, which is then graded by a staff member who is fluent in that language. Whenever possible, students are programmed for classes taught by teachers who are fluent in their Home Language. When this is not available, teachers utilize the Language Line and The Big Word to ensure that information is provided to students and their parents in their Home Language. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. The school ensures that all required services and resources support and correspond to ELLs ages and grade levels. We also use their IEP to ensure that they are receiving materials on their individual level based on assessments and as indicated in their IEP. Student transcripts are reviewed by guidance staff to determine the needs of the ELL students regarding scheduling and services. Students are placed in classes based on their individual need and current grade level, based on current information available in the EDAT. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 87  15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? As part of a shared-space building, Principals from each school meet every summer and throughout the year to discuss what resources are shared, and to coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met. Each year, an ESL class is offered to all ELL parents in the building, across schools, to foster a sense of community and help our parents to better support their students as they learn English together. In addition, ENL Coordinators from each of the schools meet throughout the year to share instructional resources and best practices to ensure that the schools are in compliance and that individual student needs are met. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Our school assists newly enrolled ELL students before the beginning of the school year by providing them and their families with welcome kits in their home languages, providing them with bilingual dictionaries and glossaries, lists of useful websites: Google translate, K12.org, etc., visual representations of classroom locations, as well as materials to support their transition. In addition, an orientation is held in the summer for these students to have the opportunity to meet with their teachers, tour the building, ask questions, and learn the norms and expectations of our school. This meeting is orally translated into the home language of our ELLs during the meeting to ensure understanding, and any written communication provided at this orientation is also provided to students in their home language whenever available. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Our school offers Spanish I, II, and III. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? In order to support ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards, the ENL Coordinator and ENL teacher will attend monthly professional development workshops provided by the ELL Services Administrator at the Bronx Borough Field Support Center. These monthly meetings will be supplemented by additional professional development opportunities identified by the ENL teacher and administration using a variety of data sources including the EDAT, Quality Review, PPO, Individual Teacher OBservations, to best support the needs of each individual ELL. The ENL Coordinator will turnkey this information to all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff that work with the ELL population throughout the year, and will conduct follow-up visits with teachers to ensure that the material covered in these meets are put into practice. Some of the topics that will be addressed during Professional Development include the Language Acquisition Process, Integrating Language and Content Instruction for ELLs, Using the NLAPs and PLDs to Create Accessible Lessons for ELLs, Content Objectives Versus 2018-19 SCEP-FL 88  Language Objectives, the Patterned Way of Reading, Writing, and Talking, Modifications and Differentiation for ELLs and SWDs, Questioning and Discussion Techniques, Culturally Responsive Instruction, Building Relationships with Students, Creating Assessments for ELLs and SWDs, Making Curriculum Accessible to All Students, and the Co-Teaching Cycle. Also, we will be reaching out to The NYC RBERN at Fordham University and the ELL Services Administrator at the Borough Field Support Center to assist us with planning staff development which will have an impact on our staff by strengthening the skills, knowledge and competencies of pedagogues working with ELLs. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. In order to ensure that our school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development, we plan a rigorous professional development calendar for the staff. To meet the 50% criteria for bilingual education/ENL teachers, the ENL Coordinator and ENL teacher will attend monthly professional development workshops provided by the ELL Services Administrator at the Bronx Borough Field Support Center. These monthly meetings will be supplemented by additional professional development opportunities identified by the ENL teacher and administration using a variety of data sources including the EDAT, Quality Review, PPO, Individual Teacher OBservations, to best support the needs of each individual ELL. To ensure that the 15% benchmark is met for all teachers, The ENL Coordinator will turnkey this information to all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff that work with the ELL population throughout the year, and will conduct follow-up visits with teachers to ensure that the material covered in these meets are put into practice. Some of the topics that will be addressed during Professional Development include the Language Acquisition Process, Integrating Language and Content Instruction for ELLs, Using the NLAPs and PLDs to Create Accessible Lessons for ELLs, Content Objectives Versus Language Objectives, the Patterned Way of Reading, Writing, and Talking, Modifications and Differentiation for ELLs and SWDs, Questioning and Discussion Techniques, Culturally Responsive Instruction, Building Relationships with Students, Creating Assessments for ELLs and SWDs, Making Curriculum Accessible to All Students, and the Co-Teaching Cycle. Also, we will be reaching out to The NYC RBERN at Fordham University and the ELL Services Administrator at the Borough Field Support Center to assist us with planning staff development which will have an impact on our staff by strengthening the skills, knowledge and competencies of pedagogues working with ELLs. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Throughout the year, the ENL Coordinator conducts annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development process, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas. Once the NYSESLAT scores are received in late August/Early September, the ENL Coordinator begins meeting with parents of seniors first, and works backwards by grade to ensure that progress towards graduation requirements is discussed as early as possible in the year. In order to accommodate ELL parent schedules, these meetings are held in person or over the phone, in the language of preference indicated by the parent. Language assistance/translation is provided for each of these meetings as needed. At this time, the ENL Coordinator also reviews with ELL parents the additional methods of communication available to them to track their student’s progress throughout the year and contact staff as needed. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Parents can participate in the Parent's Association meetings which offer translation for every meeting and event. They are also included in parent teacher nights, curriculum night and other yearly activities held at the school. Our school also utilizes Jupiter Grades to communicate up to the minute attendance and grade reports to keep parents informed of their student's 2018-19 SCEP-FL 89  performance. These reports are generated in the preferred language of the parent and parents are able to communicate with staff through this system as well in their preferred language. Additionally, we will be hosting a College Visit Day for both students and parents to create a community that sees college as an attainable and realistic next step in the educational journey of our students. We also offer ESL classes for ELL parents throughout the building, and host a bilingual Financial Literacy workshop for parents in the fall. We recently conducted our first Cultural Night, which will become an annual tradition for us, during which we welcome students and parents to celebrate our individual cultures and teach each other about our traditions and customs. In order to increase ELL Parental involvement, we will be giving an in-house survey needs assessment in parents’ preferred language to determine which language services they would like to receive in the future, as well as feedback for how they would like to be more involved/what ways we can support them in becoming more involved. This information will be factored into the planning of the next meeting in a cycle to ensure that the school is constantly obtaining feedback and acting on it as directed by the data. Next year, we plan will invite our ELL parents to kick-off the new school year with a Family Celebration Dinner at the end of September, as well as a Fall Cultural Heritage Celebration in mid-October, during which they will co-present with their children about their cultural heritage. Students will work on this project both in school (during their ENL classes) and at home with their parent(s)/guardian(s) as a way to start the year off with positive collaboration. We will be inviting parents for a Family Night in November, where students and parents will have the opportunity to participate in a variety of activities that support college and career readiness. We will also be hosting a FAFSA night in November, where students and families will have support in their native language to not only complete the FAFSA application, but to discuss how to navigate the college application process, and what supports are available to ELLs in college. In December we will be inviting students and parents to participate in our service day, where they will work together to give back to our community. We also hope to host a Winter Talent show, where we will be inviting both students and parents to showcase their skills and build a stronger school community. In the spring, we will be holding a Parent Paint Night, during which we will build the parent community at our school. Finally, we will be hosting a Spring Cultural Heritage Celebration, during which they will co-present with their children about their cultural heritage. Students will work on this project both in school (during their ENL classes) and at home with their parent(s)/guardian(s) for students to share with their parents the growth they have made in language development. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 90 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Julia Baly, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 91  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Bronx Career & College Prepara School DBN: 12X479 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Julia Baly Pamela Lee Julie Seda Title Principal Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator ENL/Bilingual Teacher Diana Patterson Parent Femala Fleming/Special Educati Teacher/Subject Area Mark Catanzaro/English Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Michelle Encarnacion School Counselor Paul Rotondo Fletcher Fernau/ Special Educa Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 SCEP-FL 92  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 12x479 School Name: Bronx Career and College Prep. H.S. Superintendent: Paul Rotundo The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No *Michelle Encarnacion School Counselor Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Students are provided with the home language survey during our school's intake process and the emergency contact information is completed. Parents are then interviewed by the ESL teacher and pupil accountant secretary, when English is not the first language in the home. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 93  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral English Spanish Arabic French 296 132 2 4 66.82 29.8 .45 .09 294 135 2 3 66.37 30.47 .45 .68 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. The documents that will be distributed this school year that require translation are: calendars, parent-teacher conference information, chancellor's regulation, state and school-wide testing, after-school enrichment ,behavioral and academic weekly updates and parent-involvement opportunities. These documents will be created and distributed periodically throughout the year. In each instance, they will be mailed home and backpacked home a month in advance, in addition to robocalls and electronic alerts through Jupiter Grades. All communications will be sent to parents in their preferred language as indicated in ATS. These documents are translated in house by staff members who are fluent in the preferred language of the parents. When that is not the case, we use The Big Word or the Language Line for translation and interpretation assistance. NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 94  Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Meetings that will occur throughout the school year consist of parent-teacher conferences both mandated and on a daily bases depending on the need of the students. These meetings maybe academic, behavioral, or IEP related. These meetings happen periodically throughout the year. In each instance, flyers will be mailed home and backpacked home a month in advance, in addition to robocalls and electronic alerts through Jupiter Grades. All communications will be sent to parents in their preferred language as indicated in ATS. interpretation service(s)? These documents are translated in house by staff members who are fluent in the preferred language of the parents. When that is not the case, we use The Big Word or the Language Line for translation and interpretation assistance. NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In the event of an emergency, robocalls will be made to parents in their preferred language to communicate the emergency message. In addition, electronic communication will be disseminated through Jupiter Grades in their preferred language as indicated in ATS. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Our school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-633 as well as the resources available to meet compliance through professional development workshop(s) presented by the Language Access Coordinator at the beginning of the school year. This information will also be posted in our main office for additional reference throughout the year. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Our school consistently notifies parents who prefer a language other than English of their right to receive information. This is done in a number of ways, including robo-calls in the language of their preference, written 2018-19 SCEP-FL 95  communication (flyers, newsletters, notices, brochures, etc.) backpacked home with the student in the language of their preference, electronic written communication via Jupiter Grades in the language of their preference, and mailings home (flyers, newsletters, notices, brochures, etc.) in the language of their preference. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? During parent teacher conferences, summer orientation, open school night, and culture night, parents who prefer a language other than English will be given an in-house survey needs assessment in their home language to determine which language services they receive and what services they would like to receive in the future. This information will be factored into the planning of the next meeting in a cycle to ensure that the school is constantly obtaining feedback and acting on it as directed by the data. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 96 
