 08X537 School Name: BRONX ARENA HIGH SCHOOL Principal: TY CESENE 2018-19 SCEP-FL 1  School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Section 4: SCEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Bronx Arena High School 08X537 320800011537 9-12 School Number (DBN): 1440 Story Ave, Bronx, NY 10473 718-860-5056 718-860-5058 Phone Number: Elaine Almonte Fax: Ealmonte3@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Ty Cesene Andrew Feld Ashanti Butler Ty Cesene MajorieNewman Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: AnneZincke District Information Geographical District: 08 Superintendent: Juan Mendez Superintendent’s Office Address: 1150 East New York Ave RM: 303, Brooklyn 11212 Superintendent’s Email Address: JMendez2@schools.nyc.gov Phone Number: 718) 363-7441 Fax: 718-281-7519 Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 3  FSC: Affinity Group Executive Director’s Office Address: Executive Director: Alexandra Anormaliza 131 Livingston Street, Brooklyn, NY 11201 Executive Director’s Email Address: AAnorma@schools.nyc.gov Phone Number: (718) 935-5618 Fax: 718-935-5941 2018-19 SCEP-FL 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the SCEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Ty Cesene Andrew Feld Ashanti Butler JohananPerez MajorieNewman KeziahDavid ZoilaMedina Anne Zincke Ashley Smith LordesOrtiz LateceMcCassling TyesseRodriquez Ethan Knecht *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Student Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ CBO Assistant Principal 2018-19 SCEP-FL 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 SCEP-FL 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) is a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. The process of developing and implementing the SCEP is aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding SCEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and SCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 7  In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement 2018-19 SCEP-FL 8  NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the SCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the SCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for SCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 9   Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 5: Build consensus around activities, strategies and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 6: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 7: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 10  Section 4: SCEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Our school is based on the Framework's belief that trust encompasses all success within a school. To achieve this, we believe high quality student-teacher relationships coupled with student-centered learning and personalized educational experiences are the essential components of a successful 21st century educational community. A school that focuses on one of the essential components without building capacity in the other two risks alienating a portion of the student population. We maintain that high quality instruction and learning are not substitutes for quality relationships between school staff and students. School staff must come to the table with effective, interpersonal, facilitation and group processing skills to develop positive supportive relationships with each student. Once a caring, supportive school culture is established, staff is able to build a high functioning, high performing group of learners. The Mission of Bronx Arena High School is to support and empower over-aged, under-credited students to achieve academic success so they can earn a high school diploma and graduate prepared to enter college, post-secondary training, or a career path that matches their personal and professional goals and aspirations. Bronx Arena’s graduates will be self-motivated and confident, allowing them to expand and express their own talents. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Bronx Arena is a transfer school located in the Soundview Campus of the the Bronx. The school is in its 8 th year of existence. Bronx Arena High School is a collaboration between the New York City Department of Education and SCO Family of Services. All partners understand the interdependent relationship between personalized learning communities and academic achievement, viewing both as essential tp enabling all students to both meet high standards and create productive futures for themselves. In summation, the partnership believes that individualizing, personalizing, and humanizing education ensure high levels of academic engagement and student success. Bronx Arena utilizes a 1:1 school model in which each student has full-time use of a laptop computer. Students have 24/7 access to all Arena curriculum, which is housed online within the school's learning management system. The school has developed and refined our LMS as an online competency "Tracker" for teachers/counselors to actively monitor and proactively individualized student's robust academic experience. Bronx Arena students spend the majority of the day in an Arena Block with approx. 28 students.  Each Arena has one Generalist Teacher and one SCO Advocate Counselor who provide personalized academic planning and support in developing goal-driven self-management skills. Content Specialist Teachers push into Arenas to co-teach with Generalist and lead subject- specific blended learning as well as providing pull-out support across Arenas. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. As a transfer school, all of our students are over-age and under-credited. Additionally, we serve students who are homeless, students with disabilities, and ELL students. Consequently, each student who comes through our doors has unique and specific needs of their own. In order to be responsive to these needs, we have structured the school using a primary person/partnership model. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 11  This model allows us to individualized programming, provide all students with targets competency based feedback, design self-paced/asynchronous learning environments, create authentic collaboration between students, and ensure that each student hasthe support of specialized teachers and other staff members (i.e. social workers, internship coordinators, college/career counseling) that are required to achieve academic and social-emotional growth. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. As the Framework for Great Schools highlights collaboration as a critical feature, we have implemented a partnership model, where the Department of Education provides the school’s academic program and SCO Family of Services provides comprehensive social services and supports to Arena students and their families. The aim is to develop students’ core intellectual and behavioral skills to prepare them not just to graduate from high school but also for the learning skills that students will need to succeed in post-secondary education, careers and adult life. To date, we have seen increases in credits, Regents pass rates, and graduation rates. The school received a well-developed on its Quality Review last QR. Additionally the school was appointed a PROSE school and is working with the Department of Education and the UFT to develop competency-based credit accumulation as well as several other unique initiatives. The school has also been featured as part of the TSCCI initiative, The Learning Accelerator, and has been visited by several outside organizations including the Carnegie Foundation, Springpoint, and hosted numerous school visits from national and international schools. As with many schools, attendance continues to be one of our bigger weaknesses. We are constantly trying new approaches to improve attendance, which has been met with mixed results. Additionally, the family involvement at the school is often limited as a result of the population. Many of the parents and guardians are kept well-informed of their child’s progress and achievements, however parent involvement past that of staying informed of a child’s work at school can be difficult since our students are often adults themselves and/or many of our students find themselves parentified (responsible for the care of a parent or younger sibling) as a result of a range of home situations. This year, we are partnering with the Center for Supportive Schools and their Peer Group Connection initiative. This partnership will allow us to leverage student-to-student support in an effort to increase community engagement, attendance, and student's credit-output/academic engagement. Additionally, we will continue to utilize our New Visions partnership, and their advanced data tools, to define/refine targeted attendance initiatives. We will also utilize a similar process to monitor our 6th year cohort data to design initiates targeted toward supporting and increasing our students 6th year graduation rate. The capacity of staff has continued to grow and the rigor and quality of the curriculum has also improved. Like past years, we are always looking to refine and revise the curriculum to best meet all students' needs. This year, our focus is on continuing to revise our math and ELA curriculum as we better understand the rigor of the common core standards as it corresponds to Advance Placement course requirements. In our progress as an AP for All school, we will utilize the knowledge gained from creating AP courses to increase both AP pathways in each department and increase the overall rigor of our curriculum. Additionally, our work with the Learning Partners Program will continue to increase our capacity for designing self-paced, high level STEAM courses (e.i. Design Lab, Coding, Graphic Design, Acting). 2018-19 SCEP-FL 12  We are aligning PD with the teachers to this goal and working through a series of activities to review common-core/AP standards and the best practices for teaching the skills needed for college success. We have also created a teacher leadership, Peer Collaborative Teacher position within our school to support AP transitions and collaborate with teaches/departments as we transition into higher levels academic rigor across our school. Ensuring that coursework is aligned to the CCLS/AP is an on-going priority in the school. We have also made initiatives to improve the collaboration of staff around students in more formal settings and have implemented a series of new structures and meetings to accomplish this. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 13  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 08X537 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 226 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 1 1 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 8 3 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 89.0% % Attendance Rate 85.4% % Reduced Lunch 4.4% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.4% 58.4% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 1.8% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 7.26 0% 21% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 55% 23% 10.0% 0.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No No Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups - Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A YSH N/A N/A NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YSH N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient N/A NO N/A N/A No N/A 24 21 50.6% 3.5% 8.0% 38.1% 0.9% 0.9% 2 7% 4.5 N/A N/A 52% 27% 35.6% 0% N/A No Yes N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 14  Economically Disadvantaged YES ALL STUDENTS YES 2018-19 SCEP-FL 15  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed X X X X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. Using the Quality Review and our monthly data reviews with the Data Team to guide our process, we conducted a series of meetings with staff to explore the data and the anecdotal evidence collected. We then used the outcomes of the meetings to then create an action plan to increase rigor and alignment at our school. 2. The outcomes of our needs assessment were the following: a. Customization – We identified customization as an area strength through facilitation plans of teachers, individualized programming, and an asynchronous curriculum and credit accumulation that allows use to offer students a program that suit their individual needs. Teachers are also designing individual objectives and goals for students which is noted as both a strength and area for continued improvement and sharpening. However, we also identified a need to enhance the customization through more specific feedback to students. Our competencies need to be revised to allow for more specific competencies. b. Inclusive – Again this was identified as an area of strength as student choice is built into nearly every aspect of the curriculum and offers a range of modalities and outputs for students to demonstrates skills and knowledge. However given that our population is 55% Hispanic and 45% black, we have identified that there is a need to create more diverse and culturally responsive curriculum. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 16  c. Motivating – This was targeted as an area of need. Through our evaluation we discovered a lack of truly tight alignment that creates the motivation students need to succeed. Additionally it was noted that while we have many structures that support student self-management skills, that more structures are needed to include a sense of belonging and value through more community involvement. d. Aligned to Common Core/Advance Placement – This was identified as an area of need for the math and social studies departments to align to Common Core in the next year. In our last year, we have worked to develop a set of interdisciplinary competencies that are directly aligned to common core. In order to target student growth in high leverage skills, we have identified the need to revise our curriculum to target and assess the skills and sub-skills identified in our Common Core aligned competencies and to begin to align ELA to Advance Placement pathways. Through our unique school-wide asynchronous curriculum, we are able to set consistent high standards and engage students in activities to develop their critical thinking skills. Sources: Credit data, Quality Review, attendance data, graduation rate data, student work samples, surveys of students and staff, Regents pass rates, and School Environment survey. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 90% of teachers will be improving rigorous instruction by using cross-discipline competencies to create lesson/facilitation plans, assess student work, and provide individualized feedback to students. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 17  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). School leadership will meet with teachers to review current competencies and identify strengths and gaps. Small groups of teachers and school leadership will revise a set of cross discipline competencies and rubrics incorporating the identified areas for improvement/research-based frameworks. These leadership teams will also gather feedback on rubrics from teachers and students and incorporate feedback into finalized rubrics. Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) School leadership, teachers July 2018 - October 2018 School leadership, Eskolta, Dept. Chairs and CDT lead Teachers Align curriculum and performance tasks to the new rubrics through Curriculum Design Teams comprised of teachers and students. Teachers, students Teachers, students  Create and provide professional development for teachers  around the use of the rubrics and providing feedback. School leadership will also review facilitation/lesson plans with teachers and provide feedback with respect to their incorporation of the competencies.  Additionally, department chairs and school leadership will  review curriculum to ensure alignment and use of the competencies and rubrics. Finally, student work and the feedback for students will be reviewed by school leadership to ensure that all students, including those in specific subgroups, are able to engage and use the rubrics and competencies. October 2018-June 2019 October 2018-June 2019 School leadership, CDT facilitating teachers School leadership, Eskolta, department chairs Trust is the key component to ensuring success on the goal. We will establish trust in the following ways: ● Creating systems and structures to inform and get feedback from community stakeholders ● Transparency in expectations and goal benchmarks ● Gathering input and feedback in an on-going back and forth that culminates in shared knowledge Creating safe space through modeling learning, clear expectations, and establishing school-wide norms that include encouragement of innovation and trying new things 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Ongoing School leadership, teacher leaders, PROSE committee, SCO staff Teachers, support staff, SCO staff, students, parents and families 2018-19 SCEP-FL 18  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. On the first scheduled NYC DOE family night, all teachers will engage with families in conferences to discuss academic growth plans for students and introduce curriculum scopes and sequences. The teachers will provide parents with an overview of how to access and navigate the school's online curriculum. This scheduled time will be the initial point of communication that will build support for parents' understanding of rigorous instruction and the common core. Teachers and advocate counselors will continue to call parents and schedule appointments on an as needed basis and during conference nights to support parents in supporting their children at home. Students in our Peer Group Connection will also host Family Night in the Spring to inform parents about various avenues of academic support. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. 15 Teachers 2. SCO Family of Services 3. School administration 4. Eskolta Consultants 5. New Visions professional development 6. Student tracker 7. Per session for curriculum design teams (43 hours for each of eight teachers) 8. Asynchronous programming and block scheduling 9. Laptop computers 10. Tech on staff 11. Data specialist Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal.  By end of October 2018 a draft of rubric descriptors tied to competencies be created and ready for review with teachers and students.  By December 2018, descriptors will be finalized and CDTs will review alignment to curriculum  By March 2019, 50% of teachers will be actively providing student's targeted feedback using the competencies/descriptors in response to student work and within facilitation and lesson plans.  By June 2019, 80% of teachers will be actively providing student's targeted feedback using the competencies/descriptors in response to student work and within facilitation and lesson plans. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress.  Rubric descriptors with aligned competencies  Teacher-created facilitation/lesson plans  Classroom observations  Minutes from CDT meetings and department meetings 2018-19 SCEP-FL 19   Feedback on student work Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 20  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. SOP(s) Addressed X X N/A X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? 1. Using the Quality Review and our monthly data reviews with the Data Team to guide our process, we conducted a series of meetings with staff to explore the data and the anecdotal evidence collected. We then used the outcomes of the meetings to then create an action plan to increase rigor and alignment at our school. 2. The outcomes of our needs assessment were the following: 1. The school is strong in this element. According to the School Environment Survey, the school received a 2. 93% satisfaction in the area of Personal Attention and Support with 96% of students reporting that teacher help them catch up if they are behind and 96% of students state that teachers give them specific suggestion about how they can improve their work. In addition, counselors also conduct daily attendance outreach and both parents and students spoke of regular occurrences of home visits after a student missed two days of school. In the classroom the advocate counselor known as the AC, serves as co-facilitator in learning and is available to support students who may face ambiguity and frustration in their learning process. The counselor meets regularly with arena teachers to discuss classroom dynamics, environment, individual progress and how they can support students reaching their goals. The internship coordinator and career counselor also 2018-19 SCEP-FL 21  work with the students to ensure their learning-to-work experiences are meaningful and relevant to their personal goals and aspirations post-high school. 3. Every student is known by multiple adults, and there are community based partners that work with the school to support students' individual needs and lifestyle. These include Mount Sinai Adolescent Health Center, which provides free confidential medical, dental, vision and mental health services, Bronx Nurse Family Partnership provides pre- and post-natal care for the seven expectant mothers and their infants through age two, and the Bronx Fatherhood Initiative provides information and supports young fathers as they encourage participation with their children. Access Vocational Rehabilitation (VR), formerly known as Vocational and Educational Services for Individuals with Disabilities (VESID) provides career and continuing education for adults with special needs. College related supports and services include: City University of New York (CUNY) Accelerated Study in Associate Programs (ASAP), College Now, Options Institute, Bronx and Manhattan Educational Opportunities Centers, and New York (NY) Cares, an organization that provides financial aid workshops for students and their families as they deal with the cost of paying for college. The students spoke of Bronx Arena being a second family where they feel safe and respected by all adults, and discussed candidly how very appreciative they were of this unique second opportunity to learn in an environment where people care about them as individuals. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools –Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. To create a Supportive Environment, 80% of students will conference with either a teacher, Advocate Counselor or Peer Mentor at least once a month to set personal and/or academic goals by June 2019. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 22  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Center for Supportive Schools, Peer Group Connection team will focus on creating an inclusive culture of peer to peer support . PGC Team will implement lessons, curriculum, tools, protocols for a group of 8-10 student leaders that will then provide 40 students with peer support. 1 generalist teacher, 1 advocate counselor, school leadership, Conferencing Team Expand Peer Group Connection to include family outreach, attendance outreach, and credit interventions. Teachers and Counselors Supportive Environment and Trust will be established through teachers, ACs, and Peer Mentors conducting regular goal-setting meetings and check-in meetings. Transparent expectations, opportunities for students to develop and customize goals, and regular follow-ups by adults will continue to build the relationship between the students and adults. All Students 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) August 2018 – June 2019 School leadership will select staff, SCO/DOE will lead groups. PGC Team PGC Team Administration September 2018 – June 2019 October 2018 – June 2019 September 2018 – June 20189 How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Engagement of families and providing support of understanding Supportive Environment will begin upon enrollment of the student with the advocate counselor. On the first scheduled NYC DOE family night, teachers will engage with families in conferences to discuss growth mindset development plans for students and begin to establish a culture of value and belonging, not only for the student but also for the family. Our community assistant will also establish monthly workshops after school for parents and families to further support families and their children at home. This scheduled times will be opportunities for communication that will build support for parents' understanding of Supportive Environment. Teachers and advocate counselors will continue to call parents and schedule appointments on a as need basis and during conference nights to support parents in supporting their children at home. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 2018-19 SCEP-FL 23  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. Teachers 2. School administration 3. Student Tracker Software 4. Regular meeting time built into schedule 5. Per-session (approx 1 hour every other week for consultation team) Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding X C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. We will monitor Supportive Environment progress through metrics used in the implementation component of our Peer Group Connection participation and pilot in the following timeline:  By October 2018, the implementation team will identify mentor student leaders, student mentees and familiarize themselves with the lessons, curriculum, tools, protocols of the CSS PGC. The team will present a plan for roll-out to staff by mid-October.  By December 2018, All teachers and counselors will identify at least 25 students to pilot PGC protocols with.  By March 2019, the implementation team will review the work being done by students through feedback surveys given to students and staff. They will also review data from students participating in pilot including credits, Regents pass rates, and attendance.  By June 2019, implementation team will review data on students and teachers participating and make recommendations to school leadership for program continuation and revision. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Feedback surveys   APBI Metrics  Attendance rates  Credit accumulation rates  Regents pass rates Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 24  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. SOP(s) Addressed X 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards N/A (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. X 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. x 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. In order to conduct a comprehensive assessment of the collaborative practices of teachers we looked at data from the 2017-2018 school survey, anecdotal reports from teachers, year-end meetings and feedback with teachers, and the school professional development objectives from previous years. We also examined the findings from the QR which focused on teacher development and community engagement. 2. Based on the assessment of the school, Bronx Arena is strong in providing opportunities for teachers to collaborate and many teachers work together to solve instructional problems. According to the school survey, 100% of teachers say that at their school teachers make a conscious effort to coordinate their teaching with instruction at other grade levels. 100% of teachers say that at their school the principal, teachers, and staff collaborate to make the school run effectively. (Q8c) and 100% of teachers say that they talk with one another about instruction. (Q8d) According to the Quality Review the collaborative hiring process allows for the teachers and staff to participate in shared leadership to hire new staff and welcome new staff into the community. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 25 By June 2018, 100% of teachers will participate in at least one class that includes co-teaching and collaboration. Additionally, 100% of teachers will participate in a minimum 30 collaborative or PD experiences. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 26  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). The schedule will include regular meeting times for Project Design, departments, collaborative Curriculum Design Teams, Arena Team meetings, and professional development. Weekly in-house professional development will be provided to teachers aligned to their professional goals. Teachers will be selected for curriculum design teams and asynchronous "Project Design" professional learning/collaboration opportunities (see Section 5a for details about curriculum design teams). Teacher leaders will facilitate professional development, individualized projects, Arena Team meetings, department meetings, and Curriculum Design Teams. Protocols will be established for meetings and PD to ensure all teachers have opportunities to participate, ask questions, highlight strengths, and get support on weaknesses. All staff will pitch, plan, prototype, and present individualized projects. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) teachers teachers teachers teachers September 2018– June 2019 School leadership, SCO director and assistant director. September 2017 – June 2018 School administration, teacher leaders September 2017 – June 2018 School administration, Staff developer, teacher leaders September 2017 – June 2018 School administration, Staff developer, How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Engagement of families and providing support of understanding Collaborative Teachers and Strategies will begin upon enrollment of the student with the advocate counselor. Additionally, the first scheduled NYC DOE family night, teachers and advocate counselors will engage with families in conferences to discuss teacher-parent collaborations in order to support their children at home. These scheduled times will be opportunities for communication that will build support for parents' understanding of Collaborative Teachers and Strategies to promote teacher-parent communication. Teachers and advocate counselors will continue to call parents weekly to discuss student progress and communicate next steps for academic and personal behaviors. Teacher and advocate counselors will also schedule appointments on an as need basis and during conference nights to further support parents in supporting their children at home. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 27  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. Teachers Per-Session 2. School administration 3. Teacher leaders 4. Eskolta Consultants (8 days) 5. New Visions professional development opportunities 6. Per session for course development 7. Schedule changes Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 1. By September 2018, schedules will include time for the above mentioned meetings 2. By January 2019, teachers will have participated in at least 5 PD sessions 3. By January 2019, at least 50% of teachers will be involved in Curriculum Design Teams/Project Design Teams 4. By January 2019, at least 1 department meeting will have been facilitated by a teacher leader using a consistent protocol Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress.  CDT Documents  Curriculum reviews  Feedback surveys from students and staff Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 28  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). na na na x SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. For the needs assessment we looked at teacher MOTP data from last year, the school survey, feedback from the CLR, and from PPO visits. MOTP results show that while all teachers were effective, questioning remains an area of need. CLR results showed all indicators as "areas for celebration." PPO results focus on a need for supportive environment improvement (specifically around attendance). Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART– Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2018, 100% of teachers will be evaluated and developed using the Citywide Framework based on the Danielson Framework. School leadership will develop PD and post observation debriefs with the teachers aligned to the 2018-19 SCEP-FL 29 framework. Feedback from observations will focus on improving teacher practice, narrowing to specific and actionable feedback for each teacher based on need. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 30  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Conduct a series of professional development sessions to assist teachers in giving timely and actionable feedback to students that promote growth in a given competency/skill. All Teachers September 2018 – June 2019 Admin School leadership norms feedback and observations through a series of non-evaluative observations of teachers. Admin provides baseline to teachers around initial observations. Admin Admin September 2018 – June 2019 Admin will conduct formal and informal observations and hold in-person post observations to go over post-ob feedback form and the observed lesson in the context of the framework. Teachers and admin will discuss strengths and next steps in teacher’s development. Professional development will then be aligned to the observations and post-ob reflections. All Teachers September 2018 – June 2019 Admin Twice a year, conduct upwards feedback interviews with teachers to identify the effectiveness of the support provided by administration and suggestions for improvement for future. All Teachers Admin January 2018– June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will schedule SLT monthly meetings to promote parent leadership and engagement. We will also have open communication structures such as the tracker which displays students academic progress, an open door policy for parents to reach leadership, town halls, and parent night. Additionally, we will have Title I parent meetings. The leadership team will be responsible for implementation and oversight. Students in the Peer Group Connection will plan, organize, and implement their own Family Night in the Spring. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. Teachers 2. School administration 3. Teacher leaders and master teacher 4. New Visions professional development opportunities 2018-19 SCEP-FL 31  5. Schedule changes for inter-visitations 6. Schedule with in-house PD time Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding X C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 1. By the end of October 2018, school leadership will have normed observations and PD will have been completed with staff on framework. 2. By Novermber 2018, initial feedback sessions will be conducted with teachers. 3. By the end of Novermber 2018 teachers will have identified professional goals for the year. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress.  Danielson Rubric  MOTP ratings Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 32  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school X N/A N/A SOP(s) Addressed community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. As indicated by the School Survey and CLR, our school’s strengths include: ● Regular and proactive attendance outreach calls and texts ● Transparent communication between student, parent, AC, and generalist As indicated by the School Survey and CLR, our school’s needs include:  Clear intake communication tools for families (there is a lot of information to absorb at and about the intake process and we are looking for ways to make this more scaffolded) Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. To increase Strong Family -Community Ties, by June 2019, 95% of all intakes will include a family member or adult in the process. 80% of all intakes will continue with the Advocate Counselor that interviewed the student and parent/primary 2018-19 SCEP-FL 33 adult. Attendance and academic expectations will be clearly shared and explained to family members so that they understand pathways to supporting their child's academic and social/emotional growth. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 34  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Systems and structures involving intake will be altered through a student and transcript review prior to the interview stage so that ACs and Generalist teachers can be matched with students based on apparent needs. All students and parents September 2018 – June 2019 Advocate Counselors and Generalists Teachers in each Arena Students with disabilities will matched will with a Generalist teacher who has a SPED credential. Families where the primary language is Spanish will paired with advocate counselor who speaks Spanish where possible, or a Generalist who speaks Spanish if the AC does not. SPED students and parents, Multi-lingual families September 2018 – June 2019 SCO Family of Services and DOE admin Structures will be developed to ensure regular communication with family members. Regular check-in conversations will occur between the parent and AC and Generalist. A progress report on student achievement will be developed this year to send home regularly (monthly once the report is developed). A policy of positive phone calls home for when students reach certain progress benchmarks will be established. Additionally, when a student is not reaching set goals, a policy will be established so that communication between all stakeholders is required element. In this way students will not be able to slip through the cracks without the adults in the student’s life being in regular communication. Home visits will also be conducted as needed. A college/career counselor will create workshops and conduct parent outreach targeted post-secondary. All students and parents September 2018 – June 2019 Advocate Counselors and Generalists Teachers in each Arena and College/career counselor Supportive Environment will be established through regular and transparent communication structures. All students and parents September 2018 – June 2019 Advocate Counselors and Generalists Teachers in each Arena 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. SCO Family Services, Eskolta, CSS/PGC. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 2018-19 SCEP-FL 35  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  8 Advocate Counselors  8 Generalist Teachers  1 college/career counselor  1 working phone system (not to be taken for granted),   Staff schedule that includes time for phone calls and parent outreach Student tracker data system software Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 1. A transcript review process will be established between DOE and CBO during intake to ensure matching of the generalist and Advocate Counselor is as targeted as possible based on the information available. 2. Regular phone conversations will take place between Advocate Counselors and parents to ensure parents have access to up to date information regarding student progress as well as maintaining regular contact with the school community. 3. By mid-February, every Advocate Counselor will have conducted a minimum of 3 home visits. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress.  Attendance rates   Graduation rates iLogs Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 36  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Overage/ undercredited – our program is modeled to provide AIS services to every student Mathematics Overage/ undercredited – our program is modeled to provide AIS services to every student Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) ● One-to-one support During and after the school day ● Small group mini-lessons ● Whole-group lessons ● Peer interaction ● Conferences ● Small group discussions ● Circulation ● Tutoring ● One-to-one support During and after the school day ● Small group mini-lessons Pre-assess students’ reading levels during intake, pre-assess students’ reading and writing within first month of attending school, create individualized plan based off Arena competencies and student performance. Individual plans include: ● Use of leveled text ● Student choice options ● Self-paced curriculum ● Mastery-based grading and feedback Individualized programming Pre-assess students’ math levels during intake, pre-assess students’ reading and writing within first month of attending school, create individualized plan 2018-19 SCEP-FL 37  Science Overage/ undercredited – our program is modeled to provide AIS services to every student based off Arena competencies and student performance. Individual plans include: ● Whole-group lessons ● Peer interaction ● Conferences ● Multiple methods of input ● Small group discussions ● Student choice options ● Self-paced curriculum ● Circulation ● Tutoring ● Mastery-based grading and feedback ● Individualized programming Pre-assess students’ reading levels during intake, pre-assess students’ reading and writing within first month of attending school, create individualized plan based off Arena competencies and student performance. Individual plans include: ● Multiple methods of input ● One-to-one support During and after the school day ● Small group mini-lessons ● Whole-group lessons ● Peer interaction ● Conferences ● Small group discussions ● Circulation ● Student choice options ● Tutoring ● Self-paced curriculum ● Mastery-based grading and feedback 2018-19 SCEP-FL 38  Social Studies Overage/ undercredited – our program is modeled to provide AIS services to every student At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Overage/ undercredited – our program is modeled to provide AIS services to every student Individualized programming Pre-assess students’ reading levels during intake, pre-assess students’ reading and writing within first month of attending school, create individualized plan based off Arena competencies and student performance. Individual plans include: ● Multiple methods of input ● One-to-one support During and after the school day ● Small group mini-lessons ● Whole-group lessons ● Peer interaction ● Conferences ● Small group discussions ● Circulation ● Student choice options ● Tutoring ● Self-paced curriculum ● Mastery-based grading and feedback Individualized programming Every student is provided with an Advocate Counselor and a group advisory of 25:1. Students are also provided with a college and career advisor and paid internships. ● One-to-one support During and after the school day ● Small group mini-lessons ● Whole-group lessons ● Peer interaction ● Conferences ● Small group discussions ● Circulation 2018-19 SCEP-FL 39  ● Tutoring 2018-19 SCEP-FL 40  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 17 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Sth population supports will include:  A social worker at a 28:1 student:counselor ratio  Provide referrals for students when appropriate  Arrange for transportation needs  Purchase and provide clothing and basic supplies as needed Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 41  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 42  Section 8: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified.  Work with New Visions to identify highly qualified candidates for recruitment.  Develop talent criteria and hiring process with rubric to select highly qualified personnel.  Develop and hold summer training for both new and returning staff to further develop best practices.  Interdisciplinary collaboration between science, math, social studies, and English courses to allow students to apply modeling skill outside math and ELA classes and allows HQT to engage in professional collaboration opportunities.  HQT will be encouraged to utilize technology in the classroom including digital, student-centered lessons, to deliver differentiated content. We will provide PD opportunities to assist teachers in developing their skills in this area.  Weekly Arena Team Meetings to examine student work across content areas in regards to the modeling standard will allow HQT to engage in professional conversations to improve their own practice and work with other colleagues to improve each other’s practices.  Regular meetings of Curriculum Design Team allows HQT to collaborate and design rigorous and engaging curriculum for the students. It also provides another opportunity for HQT to collaborate with their peers in a professional setting.  Multiple formal and informal leadership opportunities are available for teachers, which provides HQT with opportunities to be involved in the school and school programs on multiple levels. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). ● In-house professional development embedded in the school schedule. ● Participation in the Transfer School Common Core Institute ● Partnerships with Teacher’s College Inquiry programs ● Participation in New Visions CCLS PD Series for Math, Social Studies, ELA ● Bi-weekly feedback on facilitation and lesson plans for teachers Part 3: TA Schools Only 2018-19 SCEP-FL 43  3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. N/A 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (SCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 44  Title I Part A (Basic) Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 165,287 16979 27,295 0 0 0 1,618,426.00 X x X na na na X 1-5, 7 5 5 na na na 1-7 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH). 2018-19 SCEP-FL 45   Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/SCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 46  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Bronx Arena High School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Bronx Arena High School will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students  Providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology;  Providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and  decision making in support of the education of their children; Fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress;  Providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments;  Sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand;  Providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 47  Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will:  Actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact;  Engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills;  Ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and  strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; Support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills;  Maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.;  Conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home;  Provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report;  Host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; Schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions;   Translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed;  Conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement 2018-19 SCEP-FL 48  The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by:  Holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference;  Hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year;  Encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; Supporting or hosting Family Day events;   Establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents;  Encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers;  Providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress;  Developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress;  Providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) Bronx Arena High School in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum  Using academic learning time efficiently;  Respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences;   Offering high quality instruction in all content areas;  Providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required Implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by:  Conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 49  Convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved;  Arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting;  Respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education;  Providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; Involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact;   Providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information;  Ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff  ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents;  notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff  member; arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities;  planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents  Creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians;  Assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); Sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; Supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents;   Ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as  described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy;  Advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 50 II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities   Monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent;  Ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age;  Check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary;  Read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes);   Promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports Set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; and/or quality family time;  Encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child;  Volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits;  Participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education;  Communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district;  Respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested;  Become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact;  Participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible;  Take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; Share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child;  Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities  Attend school regularly and arrive on time;  Complete my work and submit all assignments on time;    Resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully;  Always try my best to learn. Follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; Show respect for myself, other people and property; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 51  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 8 School Name Bronx Arena High School Borough Bronx School Number 537 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Ty Cesene Coach Grace Ahn ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Sandra Begley (trained not cer Teacher/Subject Area Heather Maki/ ELA Teacher/Subject Area Evelyn Rebollar/ ELA Related-Service Provider N/A Superintendent Juan Mendez Assistant Principal TBD Coach type here School Counselor NA Parent Ms. Kardash Parent Coordinator Anne Zincke Field Support Center Staff Member Alexendra Anormaliza Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] D. Student Demographics 2018-19 SCEP-FL 52  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 294 Total number of ELLs 7 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 2.38% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 0 1 2 4 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? To assess the early literacy skills of our ELLs, we use customized assessment tools with New York State and Common Core assessment questions. To begin with, during enrollment, all new student are given a reading/writing diagnostic and a math diagnostic aligned to the NYS Regents examinations. In addition, all new students take an introductory course for both competency baselines in academic skills and academic and non-academic behaviors. We track resulting data (the level at which competencies are met, grades, etc.) in an online tracking system to which all of a student's teachers have access. Teachers use data from the tracker to structure academic arcs for students, such as choosing specific focus competencies, and to individualize a student's education plan as needed. The data has shown that all of our ELLs read below 2018-19 SCEP-FL 53  grade level and need support in writing longer essays and works. However, they are strong in verbal discussions of content and can create verbal arguments. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Individualized programming, self-pacing, and competency based 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Like all programs, we examine both quantitative and qualitative data around the subgroup. This data includes graduation rates, Regents pass rates, credit accumulation, NYSESLAT results, attendance, and overall student experience. We will also be reviewing the AMAO to track gains and progression on goals and proficiency. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Data team and leadership team reviews, long and short planning reviews with school leadership coach, leadership team, and lead teachers. Systems and structures are then planned, trained, and implemented. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] N/A because we are a transfer high school 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Data reveals that our students progress in proficiency levels as they progress in grade level. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? New Visions data tools, Tracker, and DOE systems collect findings and we use staff teams, meetings, and PDs to disseminate, monitor, and revise. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. a. All of our students are assigned to a primary classroom, with one generalist teacher and advocate counselor, where they work for a four-hour block of the day. Generalist classrooms are mixed grade level. During this time, content and ESL teachers both push-in to instruct students and also pull-out in small groups, as needed. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? 2018-19 SCEP-FL 54  a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? The ESL teacher provides targeted support to ELL students during push-in and pull-out times. All of the ELL students other teachers also provide targeted and individualized one-on-one and small group instruction to support the students' development. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. All students have access to the curriculum in which they are working online, for all of their content areas. All of these classes are designed to meet competencies that are aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards. ELL students work in the same curriculum as non-ELL students. Content area teachers then work to individualize, differentiate, and scaffold lessons and materials as needed, providing one-on-one support, small-group mini-lessons and discussions, and conferencing. Also as needed, teachers are able to provide student wth native language materials, both print and online, for enrichment and support. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? As a result of individualized programming and the blended instructional model, teachers are able to assess students' needs for evaluation in their native language. ELL students are offered all state exams and standardized tests in their native language and in English. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. SIFE students are targeted for 360 minutes of ESL instruction. Teachers of SIFE students meet regularly to discuss additionally needed support strategies for SIFE students. b. ELLs in US schools for less than three years would receive 360 minutes of ESL instruction and targeted pull-out instruction for literacy skills. We would also based their instructional program and decisions on their NYSESLAT proficiency level as well as data from other assessments, such as the level at which they are meeting our Common Core-aligned academic competencies and their Regents results. c. ELLs receiving service 4-6 years receive an instructional program that is individualized as needed based on their NYSESLAT proficiency level as well as data from other assessments, such as the level at which they are meeting our Common Core-aligned academic competencies and their Regents results. d. Long term ELLs receive an individualized instructional program that is individualized as needed based on their NYSESLAT proficiency level as well as data from other assessments, such as the level at which they are meeting our Common Core-aligned academic competencies and their Regents results. e. Former ELLs receive an instructional program that is individualize as needed based on their NYSESLAT proficiency level as well as data from other assessments, such as the level at which they are meeting our Common Core-aligned academic competencies and their Regents results. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Students are individually programmed into courses that they then complete at an individualized pace as determined by both the student and the teacher. Students are block-scheduled into a generalist classroom to allow for flexibility in the length of 2018-19 SCEP-FL 55  time they spend on different subject areas. Furthermore, all ELL-SWD students are scheduled within co-taught classess with non-ELLs and students without disabilities. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Students are individually programmed into courses that they then complete at an individualized pace as determined by both the student and the teacher. Students are block-scheduled into a generalist classroom to allow for flexibility in the length of time they spend on different subject areas. Furthermore, all ELL-SWD students are scheduled within co-taught classess with non-ELLs and students without disabilities. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. The ESL teacher is also the ELA teacher. While she is not certified in ESL, she is trained and holds a certificate from another state. She is in the process of applying for reciproity. She plans differentiated lessons, activities, and support for ELL students. In all other content areas, students consistently have access to one-on-one support and small-group instruction from their content teacher. The ESL teacher provides support to the content teachers as needed. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? A new program and improvement for this school year is our online tracker. The tracker is an online system that tracks student progress through all current classes (including grades for course tasks and the level at which course competencies are met) and that contains students' transcripts. Students each have access to their own tracker, and all teachers of a student have access to the tracker as well. The tracker allows teachers and students to set focus competencies and individualize instruction. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? Not applicable. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All students, including ELLs, have after-school enrichment available to them. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Native language support is delivered through the ESL model through native language print materials, internet resources, and bilingual teachers and advocate counselors. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? nstructional materlas that support ELL students include online coursework, access to a computer with translation software, native language print materials, as well as access to translation dictionaries from home language to English. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Since we are a transfer high school, students at Bronx Arena have instructional programs designed to meet their specific credit and skill needs. All students, including ELLs, are enrolled in courses that are designed to meet their specific instructional and credit needs. This structure ensures that the services ELL students receive correspond to ELLs' ages and grade levels. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Native language support is delivered through the ESL model through native language print materials, internet resources, and bilingual teachers and advocate counselors. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 56  16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Before the beginning of the school year, newly enrolled ELLs with meet with their assigned counselor for a one-on-one session. As a group, they will participate in a formal orientation and interview with their parents. They will receive one-on-one and group counseling throughout the rest of the year. Members of the committee listed in Section B are the primary people to assist with this. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? PFrench is offered to all students, including ELLs. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Not applicable Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? We provide professional development twice a week during faculty conferences on scaffolding strategies, cooperative learning, differentiated instruction, Understanding by Design, the Legacy Project Learning Cycle, Design for Knowledge Evolution, and questioning techniques to improve instruction and support the development of our ELL students. We provide differentiated supervision to each teacher to ensure that curriculum and teaching are aligned to our goals and that our ELL students are succeeding. Our school's online curriculum is aligned to Common Core Learning Standards, and our weekly professional development sessions regularly center around strategies to differentiate and scaffold the curriculum so that it supports and is accessible to our ELL students. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Not applicable See response to #1 Records are maintained by the school secretary who updates the principal. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 57  Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? 1. Parents will be involved from the beginning of the student's career at our school, starting at the intake process. Our bilingual staff members will provide translation in Spanish and we secure DOE translator services as necessary to support in other languages. Intake documents, welcome letters, and orientation materials are made available in the home language. A Parent Orientation Meeting for all parents will take place prior to the beginning of the school year. Teachers and advocate counselors regularly communicate with parents around both student struggles and successes. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. We hold conferences for parents, make outreach phone calls using someone who speaks the native language, and hold workshops around college for parents. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 58 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Ty Cesene, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 59  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Bronx Arena High School School DBN: 08X537 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Ty Cesene Title Principal Ivelisse Rodriguez Assistant Principal Anne Zincke Parent Coordinator Sandra Begley ENL/Bilingual Teacher Ms. Kardash Parent Lisa Barnshaw Teacher/Subject Area Evely Rebollar Teacher/Subject Area Grace Ahn XXXXXx XXXXXX Juan Mendez Alexendra Anormaliza x x x Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member x Other x Other x Other x Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 06/09/17 06/09/17 06/09/17 06/09/17 06/09/17 06/09/17 06/09/17 06/09/2017 06/09/2017 06/09/2017 11/23/15 11/23/15 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 SCEP-FL 60  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 08X537 School Name: Bronx Arena High School Superintendent: Juan Mendez The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) Elaine Almonte Roy - - Sam - - School Secretary Math Teacher - - no no - - yes yes - - * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. All new students and parents participate in an intake interview process. During this process, students and parents are given the Home Language Identification Survey. Data from the survey and the interview process about the home languages spoken by our students, and the written translation and oral interpretation needs that their parents might have, are recorded. We use the data gathered to determine the language in which written 2018-19 SCEP-FL 61  materials are sent with parents, and in which oral interpretation services are needed for in-person and telephone conversations with parents. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Bengali English Spanish 1 226 73 .33 75.33 24.33 1 224 75 .33 74.67 25 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. na Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. As a practice, we prepare all documents to be sent home in both English and Spanish. The outreach team is also aware of any languages other than Spanish spoken by current students' parents and prepares documents with the help of Google translate and DOE translation services. Ongoing Emergency prep letters Military opt out Sept Sept We will provide language assistance to LEP parents who speak language our school staff does not speak through the DOE translation unit. Additionally, in-house language assistance will be utilized when appropriate. DOE provides translations DOE provides translated letters. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 62  2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to We provide oral interpretation services in Spanish in-house by school staff, including several bilingual teachers and advocate counselors. For languages other than Spanish, we secure oral interpretation services through the DOE translation services. Teachers and counselors regularly call home. In addition to the scheduled parent nights four times a year, parent meetings occur on an individual needs basis. ongoing Parent-Teacher 4 x per year Parent engagement themed evenings 3-5 times per year Referrals/interventions/celebrations as needed provide interpretation service(s)? We will provide language assistance to LEP parents who speak language our school staff does not speak through the DOE translation unit. Additionally, in-house language assistance will be utilized when appropriate. In house by school staff, If not Spanish, Japanese. French, or Malayalam, we will use DOE translation unit. In house by school staff, If not Spanish, Japanese. French, or Malayalam, we will use DOE translation unit. In house by school staff, If not Spanish, Japanese. French, or Malayalam, we will use DOE translation unit. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Bi-lingual staff reach out directly through phone calls, and any letters are translated and printed (usually in-house) but the use of the DOE translation unit will translate for any other languages needed. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 63  Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. 1st day training and ongoing training as needed Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) The school fulfills Section VII of the Chancellor's Regulations A-663 by ensuring that all communications with parents are made in both English and the native language for non-English speaking parents. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? We survey parents in addition to getting regular informal feedback through phone outreach and parent meetings at the school. Surveys will be provided in parent home language as per our in-house translation or through the use of the DOE translation unit. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 64 
