 11X544 School Name: HIGH SCHOOL FOR CONTEMPORARY ARTS Principal: PEDRO CUBERO 2018-19 SCEP-FL 1  School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Section 4: SCEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 2  School Name: Section 1: School Information Page School Information High School for Contemporary Arts 321100011544 School Number (DBN): 11X544 BEDS Code: Grades Served: 9-12 School Address: 800 East Gun Hill Road Bronx New York 10467 Phone Number: 718-944-5610 Fax: 718-944-5650 Pedro Cubero pcubero@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Email Address: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Pedro Cubero Francis Lewis Keith Henry Pedro Cubero Keith Henry Gabriel Gonzalez Erika Nicoleau Maya Doyle District Information Geographical District: 11 Richard Cintron Superintendent: 335 Adams Street, Brooklyn, NY, 11201 Superintendent’s Office Address: Superintendent’s Email Address: RCintro@schools.nyc.gov 718-923-5124 718-281-7519 Phone Number: AffinityGroup FSC: Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Executive Director: AlexandraAnormaliza 2018-19 SCEP-FL 3  Executive Director’s Office Address: 131 LivingstonStreet Brooklyn NY 11201 AAnorma@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: (718) 935-5618 Phone Number: (718) 828-6280 Fax: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the SCEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Pedro E. Cubero Francis Lewis Keith Henry Sandra Roman Keith Henry Gabriel Gonzalez Erika Nicoleau Diane Griffith LinahJacob Elva Santos *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Parent Parent Parent 2018-19 SCEP-FL 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) David Ricaurte Assistant Principal, CSAmember Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 SCEP-FL 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) is a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. The process of developing and implementing the SCEP is aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding SCEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and SCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 7  In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement 2018-19 SCEP-FL 8  NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the SCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the SCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for SCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 9   Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 5: Build consensus around activities, strategies and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 6: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 7: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 10  Section 4: SCEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Collaborative Community Mission: The HSCA family provides students with curriculum that is rooted in 21st century skill development, foundational knowledge and appreciation for the arts. We pay special attention to developing and sustaining the whole-child through social/emotional development that is reinforced by support staff. Our classroom practices and leadership decisions are rooted in building capacity with and among all school stakeholders. To that end, we encourage innovation, support strategic thinking, and challenge every learner to become independent learners, self-sufficient thinkers and productive members of the 21st century. HSCA Theory of Action: When our staff engages in inquiry work that identifies students’ needs, our students become engaged in rigorous academic instruction, are supported by targeted academic and social/emotional interventions in a safe environment; we will create sustained improvements in academic outputs (i.e. credit accumulation, increased attendance, increased graduations with Advanced Designation and a decrease in risky behaviors) and self-efficacy. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Our school is housed inside the Evander Campus in the Bronx along with 5 other schools. High School for Contemporary Arts (HSCA) is characterized as a contemporary art school with traditional classes in fine arts and music. We currently have 454 students enrolled. The population is compromised by 47.8% male and 52.2 % female. The ethnic distribution includes 59.03 % Hispanic, 36.56% Black, 0.88 % white, and 3.53% other. The ENL population is 14.1% and 27.31% SWD. HSCA is a Title I school with a universal free lunch program. Our daily attendance averaged 85.9 % for the 2016-17 SY while our daily average attendance for the 2017-2018 SY averaged 87.3 % which reflects an increase over the previous year's attendance rate. The Evander Campus holds partnerships with Montefiore Clinic, Jewish Board Counseling, Evander Campus Beacon Program and a two Restorative Justice counselors. HS for Contemporary Arts is partnered with New Visions for Public Schools to support our school's need to focus on instruction, data driven decisions and continual improvement. Every two weeks we have a visit from our School Support Facilitator Continuous Improvement Coach from New Visions who meets with the principal, assistant principals and Guidance Counselors regarding data. The scope of the meetings include checking student programs for accuracy, teacher scholarship trends at the end of each marking period, and identifying students for YABCs and/ or transfer schools. Based on the information shared by our School Support Facilitator the Guidance Counselors have better programmed students, assistant principals can provide more targeted supports to struggling teachers and students overall are identified and supported when a need arises. We also have partnered with Lehman College, CUNY through their College Now program. A number of our students are currently enrolled in classes with them. During the 2016-17 School Quality Snapshot HSCA met its target in Student Achievement, Collaborative teachers and Supportive Environment. 8% of students graduated College Ready. Also, according to the 2016-17 School Quality Snapshot 33% of the graduates were enrolled in college or other post secondary program within 6 months. During the 2017-2018 school year our school was a recipient of a College Access for All grant. This enabled our school to partner with NYU Advising Corp. which provided a full time college adviser for our students. By June 28, 2018, 63% of seniors submitted a FASFA application. In all, 854 college applications were submitted by our senior class. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 11  HSCA also participates in the AP for ALL program. We currently offer courses in AP English Language and Composition and AP Spanish Language and Culture. As a campus we share courses with other schools that include, AP English Literature and Composition and Biology. The HSCA stands for: Hard work- Our staff provides students with opportunities to persevere in critical thinking situations both inside and outside of the classrooms. Solidarity- Our staff collaborates in teams to effectively strategize and adjust curriculum to meet the demands of teaching and learning for all populations. Community- We strive to provide a safe environment that promotes character development and commitment to giving back within our community and seeking out partnerships. Artistry- Our school promotes opportunities for students to develop their talents in music, art and theater with excellence and pride. We strive to engage students to take calculated risks and pursue their talents. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Our current student population includes 56% of students who are in the city’s lowest third. In an effort to support academic growth for students to meet and exceed the standards, the HMH Collections Core Curriculum that includes Literature Circles will continue to be implemented in the 2018-19 SY. The strategies will be taught across all content areas. Teacher teams will collaboratively look at the effectiveness of the strategies by implementing a cohesive inquiry process to look at student work. The Math department will use the a2i curriculum from New Visions for Public Schools in addition to NYSED Engage NY Math Modules for CC Algebra I & II and Geometry. Students will also have opportunities to take iLearn classes. 24.77% of the HSCA student population are students with disabilities. The school will address the need for each of these students to graduate with a Local or Regents Diploma, career and college ready. In 10th grade these students begin a transition plan to gear them toward a plan for post-secondary life. 19.88% of our student population is ELL. This school addresses their language acquisition with stand alone and push in services from our licensed TESOL teachers. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. HSCA has been addressing and making progress over the past school year on the elements of the Framework for Great Schools by implementing the following: Rigorous Instruction: During the 2017-2018 HSCA continues to participate in the curriculum from New Visions for Public Schools. In addition to implementing this curriculum in all subject areas, teachers attended Professional Development throughout the school year at New Visions where they collaborated with teachers from throughout the New Visions Queens/ Bronx Affinity. In addition to the work around curriculum, we also implemented a number of actions to increase the rigor students are exposed to. To increase our College readiness index a number of steps have been implemented in programming. Our students continued to participate during the 2017-2018 school year in the AP for All program. Our school offered five Advance Placement classes. These classes were: AP English Language Arts, AP English Literature, AP Biology, AP 2018-19 SCEP-FL 12  Environmental Science and AP Spanish Language. In addition we also offered three sections of Chemistry, one section in Physics and six sections of Algebra II. Traditionally students have taken the Common Core English Language Arts Regents exam June of their junior year. This school year we will once again be administering the CC ELA exam in January of the junior year. Our school has been focusing on closing the gap between our increasing graduation rate and the College and Career Index rate. In 2016-2017 school year our CRI was 8% though our graduation rate was 75%. As of June 28, 2018, for the 2017-2018 school year our CRI was 39% showing an increase of 31% year to year. Stats are as follows: In cohort 2019, as of the end of June 2018, our college and career readiness index are as follows: 35% in English Language Arts 39% in Mathematics In cohort 2018, as of the end of June 2018, our college and career readiness index are as follows: 57% in English Language Arts 32% in Mathematics We also have been working towards increasing Regents passing rates in certain key areas. Our school saw gains in the following areas: Regents results increased on the following Regents exams from June 2017 to June 2018: Global History Regents from 39.74% to 42.11% Earth Science Regents from `19.27% to 59.38% Physics Regents 75% Common Core Geometry from 3.2% to 8% Included in these statistics are Students with Disabilities and English Language Learners. Supportive Environment: The area where HSCA made the most progress was in providing a Supportive Environment. During a Quality Review in March 2017 the reviewer wrote regarding our school, "the school community's approach to culture building, discipline, and social-emotional support results in a safe environment and inclusive culture that promotes progress towards the school's goals. Structures are in place so that each student is known well by at least one adult who helps to personalize attendance supports and coordinate social-emotional learning." 2018-19 SCEP-FL 13  Collaborative Teachers: Professional Development by departments allowed teachers the ability to work collaboratively in unit and lesson design and in creating common department assessments. Teachers engaged in inquiry work around Regents and exam item analysis and looking at student work. In the 2017-2018 NYC DOE School Quality Survey 95% of the teachers say that the professional development experiences this year has been sustained and coherent. 95% of teachers say that they had opportunities to work productively with colleagues at their school on professional development. Effective School Leadership: The Principal and Assistant Principals are supported by the New Visions staff to support data driven decisions. In the 2017-2018 NYC DOE School Quality Survey 100% of teachers say that the principal knows what is going on in their classroom. 95% of teachers say that the principal participates in instructional planning with teams of teachers. Strong Family and Community ties: The parent coordinator, PA, SLT and staff work to build culture for college and career readiness, support student success through regular opportunities to strengthen their knowledge and skills to do so effectively with workshops and two-way, meaningful communication about student learning. In the NYC DOE School Quality Survey 97% of families say that this school communicates with them in a language and in a way that they can understand. 97% of the families say they feel respected by HSCA's principal. 98% of families say that they trust the principal. We have also partnered with the LINCT for All program to increase passing and College Readiness scores in both Math and English. A English and Math teacher were identified and will be attending Professional Development throughout the school year by CUNY resulting with the hopes of more students graduating College Ready. A continued focus for the 2018-2019 school year will be strengthening a college going culture at HSCA. The school has applied and been accepted into the College Access for All grant. Through the grant a team devised a plan to increase our college going culture. The school also has partnered with NYU's College Advising Corps which has provided a college counselor. The counselor's sole focus will be helping students prepare college applications, financial aid and scholarship applications for our Seniors. The counselor will also arrange college trips for freshmen, sophomores and juniors. In addition the six schools on campus have opened a shared College resource room in the campus library. Students will be attending college trips, college fairs starting in 9th grade. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 14  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 11X544 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 446 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 71 66 9 6 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 73 71 9 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 76.0% % Attendance Rate 75.8% % Reduced Lunch 15.5% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.9% 55.8% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 2.2% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 2.84 0% 0% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 78% 44% 70.7% 0.8% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No No Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups ED Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A YSH N/A YSH YSH Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient N/A NO N/A NO No N/A 79 81 6 87.0% 0.2% 25.8% 38.3% 2.2% 1.3% 4 50% 7.4 N/A N/A 61% 55% 68.5% 7% N/A No Yes N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A YSH N/A N/A N/A YSH NO N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 15  Economically Disadvantaged YES ALL STUDENTS YES 2018-19 SCEP-FL 16  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed X X X X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. During the 2016-2017 school year our school underwent a two day Quality Review. The school showed improvement in eight out of the ten Quality Review indicators receiving ratings of Proficient and Well Developed up from ten Developing rating the last time the school underwent a Quality Review. One of the Proficient ratings was around setting High Expectations. The reviewer stated,  "School leaders consistently communicate high expectations based on the Danielson Framework for Teaching to the entire staff. Teacher teams and staff establish a culture for learning that consistently communicates high expectations for all students." Though significant gain was made on this Quality Review as compare to the previous one, there still remains two areas rated Developing that were cited as areas of focus. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 17  In Pedagogy the reviewer noted:  "Across classrooms, teaching strategies, including questioning and the use of scaffolds, inconsistently provide multiple entry points into the curricula, leading to uneven engagement in appropriately challenging tasks. All students are not yet demonstrating higher-order thinking skills in student work products" In Assessment the reviewer noted the following in her report:  "Across classrooms, teachers use or create assessments, rubrics and grading policy that are not yet aligned with the school's curricula. Teacher's assessment practices inconsistently reflect the use of ongoing checks for understanding and student self-assessment." Also, though the school showed growth in Regents passing rates and graduation rates, HSCA still lags below the city in average Regents scores on all Regents exams as demonstrated on the June 2018 examination period analysis. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 HSCA will have used a cycle of data inquiry that will inform and refine learning targets, the use of differentiated pedagogical strategies and professional development as measured by a 3% increase in the number of students graduating College Ready. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 18  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Administration will use, New Visions Data Tools, Mock Regents and common assessments to analyze student achievement. Entire school In the end of each marking period Principal, Assistant Principal, Teacher Inquiry Teams, Network Support Lowest third in each subject Every other Monday Principal, Assistant Principal, Teacher Inquiry Teams, Consultants, Network Support Entire School Once a month Network Support, Principal, Community Associate Entire School Every Monday Principal, Assistant Principal, Teacher Inquiry Teams, Network Support Teachers will receive ongoing professional development to deepen their understanding of the Inquiry Process as a means to analyze student work to revise and differentiate instructional strategies to address the needs of sub-groups, including, but not limited to, students with disabilities, English Language Learners, African American and Latino males. Primary focus will be on raising outcomes in ELA and Math to meet our goals of increasing College Readiness. Training will be provided for parents to work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology;providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress through online resources, meetings and newsletters; Providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments. During their professional period and Department meetings Teachers will focus on how to use data to determine groups for differentiation and scaffold supports determined by learning gaps. Teachers will use the cycle of Inquiry and Protocols for Student Work to determine areas to target. Teachers will use Writing Across the Curriculum strategies. Through department and grade team meetings teachers will be refining their lesson plans based on the data gathered. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 19  Additional resources to support our instructional goals, include the New Visions Literacy Guide and New Visions Curricula in ELA, Math, Social Studies and Sciences. Teachers will participate in ongoing New Visions PD and Affinity PD. ELL students will receive supplemental instruction with translations in their native language. ELL students Wednesday, Thursday and Friday Ms. Tejada, Mr. Florentino, Mr. Zepeda, Ms. Lorenzo 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight.  Families will be invited to a meet and greet with teachers on September 26, 2018 from 5pm to 8pm. Parents will visit each class where teachers will be sharing course syllabus, grading policy and sharing NYS exceptations on passing the Regents exams.  The HSCA parent coordinator will schedule training workshops for parents to work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress through online resources, meetings and newsletters; Providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments. In Parent Association meetings guidance counselors will provide transcript reviews with parents and College Advisor will discuss next steps for college application process.   Teachers will also keep parents up to date on their children's academic progress via the use of Skedula and Kinvolved. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. All teachers are scheduled for the same Professional Activity Period to increase the level of collaboration among departments. The HSCA bell schedule has been modified in conjunction with two other schools on campus: Bronx Aerospace and Bronx Academy of Health Careers to provide teachers the opportunity for inter-school professional development and inquiry. This will include department and grade level meetings not only in HSCA but also throughout the Evander campus. Students will receive 6 hours and 20 minutes of instruction daily. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 20  Teachers will meet on Mondays after 2:32 pm for professional development/ inquiry. Tuesdays teachers will make parental outreach to students with attendance, behavioral and/ or academic issues. HSCA English department has adopted the NYC Core Curriculum to ensure students have sufficient instructional materials to support coherent ELA standards. HSCA Math department will be using the a2i Common Core Algebra curriculum provided by New Visions in addition to Engage NY Modules to ensure students have sufficient instructional materials to support coherent Math standards. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019 all juniors should have taken the ELA regents and show an increase in students scoring above a 75. By February 2019 100% of the teachers will have participated in Professional Development in the Inquiry Process as a means to analyze student work. It will be evidenced by sign in sheets and work produced. It is expected that teacher work products will clearly indicate strategies and tasks implemented to differentiate for varied sub-groups. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. School will administer a number of common assessments to measure progress throughout the school year. Item analysis will be done after each common assessment to determine progress and course of action. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 21  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. X X X X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? During the 2016-2017 HSCA received a two day Quality Review. The reviewer wrote regarding our school, "the school community's approach to culture building, discipline, and social-emotional support results in a safe environment and inclusive culture that promotes progress towards the school's goals. Structures are in place so that each student is known well by at least one adult who helps to personalize attendance supports and coordinate social-emotional learning." Though the school is safer and more supportive, work must continue in student engagement. HSCA has seen an upward trend in student perception of the school and campus. In the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide students were surveyed by NYC DOE. 48% of students responded that, in most or all of their classes, they are challenged. This is an increase of 7% from the previous year. 69% of students agreed or strongly agreed that their classes at their school really make them think critically which is a 5% increase from the previous year. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 22  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools –Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 timely feedback will be fully integrated into instruction as evidenced by 90 % of teachers rated effective in Danielson sub-component 3d ratings. Across classrooms, students will be aware of standards for high quality work and teachers will be observed circulating the room, asking carefully crafted questions to check for understanding, and providing immediate and actionable feedback to individual and groups of students. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 23  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teachers will receive professional development on feedback and assessment strategies. All Teachers September- June All Teachers December- June Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Principal, Assistant Principals Principal, Assistant Principal Classroom lessons will show evidence of checkpoints for understanding throughout the lesson. Classrooms with ENL students and SWD will show evidence of scaffolds, purposeful grouping, background knowledge, extended discussion,valuing linguistic differences. Strategies for SWD include assistive technology such as I-pad minis. The school recently hired an ENL teacher that will provide professional development and push in support for selective teachers with high number of ENL students. The school also will invest in equipping classroom with Spanish to English dictionaries and glossaries. The school recently purchased laptop carts with class sets of laptops and an i-pad cart with a class set of i-pads available for teachers to use. The Special Education teachers will provide professional development to teachers on strategies that can be employed in the classrooms to assist SWDs. The school is also in the process of hiring two additional Special Education teachers to support in push in for team teaching classes but will also work with teachers not in official ICT settings. The English department and Health classes will begin to incorporate discussion protocols, Literature circles and Socratic Seminar. Professional development around these topics will take place on alternating Mondays from 2:32pm to 3:52pm. Skedula will be used as tool to for parents to have access to the student grades, attendance and credit accumulation in a timely manner. Parents will receive a letter with their unique access code and detailed instructions on how to register for Skedula/ PupilPath via USPS mail. Teachers will use cycles of inquiry to identify and progress monitor the use of strategies, learning targets and student groups. Professional Development will take place on alternating Mondays from 2:32pm to 3:52pm. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement All Teachers December- June Principal, Assistant Principal parents Sept- June Skedula point person All Teachers December- June Principal, Assistant Principals, grade team leaders 2018-19 SCEP-FL 24  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. During our Tuesdays Parental Outreach time teachers will share both positive and constructive feedback with parents. This will be done via phone conversations, text message based Kinvolved, or parental face to face meetings with teachers. Teachers will also be using Skedula as a marking/ gradebook allowing parents 24 hour access to up to date student standing in each class. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. HSCA will continue purchasing Skedula and Kinvolved for parental outreach. Our schedule will continue to follow the default times which allow for 75 minutes of parental outreach on Tuesdays. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. The administration will create an observation calendar ensuring that teachers are observed at least twice in Advance by February 2019. Administration will look at Advance ratings of teachers in Danielson 3d. Teachers not trending towards an Effective in that component will receive one on one professional development support from Assistant Principal. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Data from Advance with respect to component 3d of the Danielson Framework for Teaching. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 25  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. SOP(s) Addressed X X X 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. X 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The principal consistently communicates high expectations to the entire staff using the Danielson Framework for Teaching. Professional development on the Danielson rubric has resulted in an increase in teacher ratings for the past three school years. 45 % of teachers were rated effective in the 2014-2015 school. For the 2017-2018 school year, 80% of teachers were rated Effective or Highly Effective on their MOTP. According to the 2017-2018 NYC DOE Quality Guide Survey 95% of teachers say that they had opportunities to work productively with colleagues at their school on professional development. The school also has partnered with co-located schools on campus, in particular with Bronx Academy of Health Careers, to provide interschool professional development. According to the NYC DOE 2017-2018 Survey 91% of teachers say that they have the opportunities to work productively with teachers from other schools on professional development. Teachers programmed with regents culminating classes have been registered to attend professional development workshops at New Visions for Public Schools and Affinity. New Visions has provided web based curriculum to each teacher with accompanying hand-outs and activities. Through grade team meetings teachers will look at item analysis results for the previous years regents results to inform lesson design and areas of focus. New Visions also will provide a mock Regents exam at numerous times throughout the year to take the pulse of where students are in regards to passing the exam and provide strategies on increasing student passing rates. This will result in continued increases in Regents passing rates. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 26  Based on the 2016-17 Quality Review HSCA was rated Developing 1.2 Pedagogy: Across classrooms, teaching strategies, including questioning and the use of scaffolds, inconsistently provide multiple entry points into the curricula, leading to uneven engagement in appropriately challenging tasks. All students are not yet demonstrating higher-order thinking skills in student work products. According to the NYSED School Report Card 2016-2017 our Black and Latino males continue to be outperformed by females on the Math and ELA regents exams. Males also graduated at a lower rate than females. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of teachers will have participated in regularly scheduled teacher led grade team meetings and inter visitations, with a goal of increasing the Algebra I Regents average score from 55.6% to 58.6% for African American and Latino males. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 27  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Administrative August 2018- June 2019.  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Administration and Guidance Counselors will use the NV Student sorter to monitor credit accumulation, cohort matriculation and scheduling students for Regents exams. Each teacher was provided a desktop computer in each classroom. Teachers have been given Tuesdays from 2:32pm to 3:47pm to input on Skedula and outreach to parents. The Principal will monitor teacher and staff training on the use of Skedula. The Principal's secretary will maintain the Skedula Data Extractor and consistently assess technology needs such as computer upgrades and server maintenance. reports will be pulled every three weeks to ensure that the staff is using Skedula. Implement iLearn as a tool for Credit accumulation to accommodate students that are behind in credits. Students will receive training on how to monitor their progress using the Skedula College readiness tracker and monitor their progress to graduation. This year the school has a dedicated Guidance Counselor serving exclusively as a College Adviser tasked with the responsibility to track students for college applications and readiness and provide supports for these students. support staff, guidance counselors, assistant principals and Principal Principal, Assistant Principals, Principal's secretary, teachers Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) The New Visions School Support Facilitator Continuous Improvement September 2018- June 2019 Principal Principal's Secretary staff/students December –iLearn Committee students June December –June Skedula point person Parents will receive training on how to monitor their child's progress using the Skedula to monitor attendance and progress to graduation. Parents December –June Departments have been programmed to have a Common Planning period. Teachers September- June Parent coordinator,administration , teachers Administration 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 2018-19 SCEP-FL 28  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Assistant Principals will monitor school wide and teacher use of Skedula and Kinvolved as a means of informing parents of their children's academic progress. The parent coordinator, in conjunction with the principal, will lead workshops to familiarize parents with regents exams and expectations. Parents will receive training on how to monitor their child's progress using the Skedula to monitor attendance and progress to graduation. In Meet the Teacher night in September parents received course syllabus, expectations and grading policy. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Teachers will work collaboratively during Monday Professional Development from 2:32pm to 3:57pm and every day during period 4 for Common Planning Time. Because of the time devoted to Professional Development during the teachers day, no per-session is involved. Principal will plan trips for team building, building student leadership specifically targeting African American and Latino males. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) Title I SWP Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019 100 % of staff will have participated in regularly scheduled department meetings three times a week and Professional Development every Monday which focus on Effective teaching practice. Danielson components 3b, 3c and 3d will be used to measure success. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Teacher sign in sheets, increase in Effective ratings on Advance specifically in Danielson 1a, 1e and 4e. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 29  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). X X X X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on the Superintendent's Principal Performance Review Measures of Leadership Practice: The principal has created a goal-oriented learning community that is well focused on teacher practice and student outcomes with intentional strategies to accelerate learning. The principal has created structures for collaboration and professional development opportunities for staff, systems of reciprocal communication with parents, and a system of detailed feedback and guidance supports to students. The 2017-2018 School Quality Guide reflects the following data which is above borough and citywide percentages: 95% of families say that the principal encourages feedback from the community and them through regular meetings. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 30  98% of families say that the principal is strongly committed to shared decision making. 98% of parents feel that the principal works to create a sense of community in the school. 100% of teachers say that they trust the principal. 87% of the students say that adults at this school encourage them to continue their education after high school. 92% of students say that SWDs at this school are included in all activities. Being that the school's population is 25% SWDs of our classes follow the Integrated Collaborative Team model an area of continued improvement for team teaching instructional strategies. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART– Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all ICT teachers will participate in extensive professional development around current ICT instructional strategies resulting in a 3% increase in the number of SWD students receiving a 65 or higher on their regents exams. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 31  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teachers will fully participate in professional development provided by special education instructional specialist provided by Affinity. Teachers will participate in class inter visitation to observe different ICT teaching strategies. School inter visitations with Bronx Academy of Health Careers Professional development given by New Visions 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) ICT teachers October 2018- June 2019. ICT teachers November 2018 - June 2019 ICT teachers December 2018 - June 2019 ICT teachers September 2018 - June 2019 Educational Specialists from Affinity. Assistant Principals Principal Assistant Principal How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will continue to be active participants in the development of their child's IEP. SLT will devote a session on Special Education. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Teachers will be released to observe ICT models if it conflicts with their teaching period. Teachers will also be released to attend PDs at New Visions, at Affinity or other Central led Professional Development. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other 2018-19 SCEP-FL 32  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, SWDs will engage in a mock regents with 50% scoring 65% or better on multiple choice. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Through ratings of Danielson 4e teachers will show an improvement and collaboration resulting in improved instructional strategies for teachers. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 33  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. X X X X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Reflecting the Strong Family and Community Ties, parents were polled by the NYC DOE and they responded the following which is reflected on the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide: 97% of parents/guardians agreed or strongly agreed that their child's school communicates with them in a language and in a way that they can understand. 97% of parents/guardians agreed or strongly agreed that they are greeted warmly when they call or visit the school. 98% of parents/guardians agreed or strongly agreed that they feel respected by their child's teachers. 97% of parents/guardians agreed or strongly agreed that they feel respected by their child's principal/school leader. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 34  In an effort to continue to strengthen the college going culture at HSCA, we will continue focusing on educating parents on the importance of FAFSA application process. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 the number of suspensions for African American males will decrease from 15 to 12 and for Latino males from 14 to 11 with the introduction of Restorative Justice strategies. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 35  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Assistant Principal Organization and the Guidance Counselors will introduce Restorative Circles practices to teachers during Grade Team Meetings Teachers October 2018 - June 2019 Assistant Principal Organization New Staff to the school or existing staff that request a full day Restorative Practice Professional Learning will receive the training during Chancellor's Day Professional Learning Days facilitated by Restorative Justice coordinators from The Leadership Program. Students identified by the dean and Guidance Counselors displaying behavior issues during the fall semester will be programmed for a full period Advisory each day in the Spring semester. New teachers. Support staff September 2018 - June 2019 Assistant Principal Organization Students with deans February- June 2019 Assistant Principal Organization 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. N/A Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Grade team meetings bi-weekly during Professional development teacher extended day. Evander Childs Campus Restorative Justice grant with The Leadership program Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 36  By February 2019, suspensions rates from African American and Latino males should be less than they were February 2018. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. OORS reports Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 37  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Test Scores Teacher needs assessments and checks for understanding 8 th grade assessment regents Mathematics Test Scores Teacher needs assessments and checks for understanding 8 th grade assessment regents Science Test Scores Teacher needs assessments and checks for understanding 8 th grade assessment regents Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Using Graphic organizers to scaffold writing – selecting the most effective organizers matched to the texts types from the Common Core Curriculum Standards teachers are working with in their current and future curriculum units. Ways to manage student response rates so that all students are expected to be engaged in the learning and are participating and valued as part of the lesson. Assessment for learning - ways of monitoring student understanding during the instruction rather than after the unit and assessment is completed. Various strategies for checking for understanding and increased writing. Grouping strategies to maximize student engagement and independence as learners. Exploring different question techniques and activities to challenge thinking. Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small group During School Small group During School Small group During School 2018-19 SCEP-FL 38  Social Studies Test Scores Teacher needs assessments and checks for understanding 8 th grade assessment regents Scholarship data At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Small group During School Use of Socratic seminar and question techniques and activities to extended thinking and writing. Use of Graphic organizers to scaffold and promote understanding of reading texts and cite evidence to be used as part of scaffold for writing assignments. Demonstrate the use of different organizers in connection with reading different kinds of informational texts matched to the texts types from the Common Core Curriculum Standards for greater comprehension and text complexity.  Students with IEPs.  ELL Students  Students with low attendance as determined by School Attendance Team.  Under credited students as defined by the New Visions School  All freshmen  College Guidance  College Guidance Counselor: Small groups and one-on-one  Grade Team: One-on-one.  NewVisions School facilitatorwill meet with the Principal, assistant principals and Guidance Counselors. Counselor:supports studentsover four years in their collegeapplication process through pulloutand push-in services toadvise students and to build awareness ofacademic standing  Grade Team Meetings: Information gathering and sharing with staff around high risk students and their needs  New Visions School facilitator:identifies academicallyat-risk students on each gradelevel.  Advisory: Onedaya week in lieu of Health Class.  College Counselor: 1x a month grades 9 to 11th. School Wide push happens in March with school wide College March Madness that focuses on the college admission process. 12th grade has course 1x a week during Fall semester. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 39  Grade Summits: Three times a year (usually mid term)  Grade Team Meetings: 1x a week. SBST: Weekly. Student-run peer mediation program: As needed.    Attendance Team: Monitorsstudent attendance and doeshome visits for LTA students. Student-run peer mediation  program  Intramural after school Basketball club Provide studentsvenue to complete homework in school and then allowed to play basketball. It is open for students that are not eligiblefor PSALbut show interest in basketball. Council for Unity  Mandated Counseling – counselingprovided by adatedcounselorfor IEPstudents with mandatedcounseling 2018-19 SCEP-FL 40  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) School currently has 6 students in Temporary Housing 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. We provide students with all school supplies as well as GYM uniforms and support for Senior trips. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). Not Applicable 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 41  Not Applicable 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. Not Applicable 2018-19 SCEP-FL 42  Section 8: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. ● In the recruitment of a teacher for example, part of the interview process may include teaching of lesson in the subject area. It is essential that a seasoned teacher in the subject area be present during this part of the interview process. The interview questions should include areas of expertise in the use of research-based instructional methods, knowledge of content, scenarios that would reveal knowledge of effective use of classroom management techniques, student learning styles, use of data and parental outreach. ● It is essential that a teacher’s assignment match their skills and expertise. However, a new teacher must be supported in order to ensure professional growth and responsibility. Usually, the teacher is provided with a mentor for support, both in the content area, organizational structure and in leadership skills. ● Teachers, guidance counselors, administrators, and school support staff must feel the sense of belonging in the organization. In order to ensure retention of staff, it is imperative that they feel part and parcel of the organizational structure and decision-making process. They must subscribe to the vision, and feel that the organization makes adequate efforts to encourage mutual respect, professional collaboration and collegiality. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 43  Working with the Affinity Field Support Center's Human Resource, and the New Visions hiring department only fully state certified teachers will be interviewed when appropriate needs arise. Administration will attend borough and city-wide hiring fairs with the three assistant principals and the Principal interviewing the teacher before hiring. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Teachers professional development will include:  Review of CC ELA Regents and data sets to ID specific areas to target for writing, within all content areas  Learning targets will be established for each grade level that will be assessed teachers will write learning targets and share with students o o Use learning targets to involve students in their own learning o Create and analyze informal assessments using learning targets  Link learning targets to strategies – then assess targets o Review assessments through inquiry to target sub groups and create intentional groupings for classroom instruction and identify learning targets as main component of lesson and link to informal and summative assessments  Teachers will work in Inquiry groups to analyze student work that fall into the various student subgroups such as SWD, ELL, Low, Medium and high achieving. PD will include Writing is thinking through strategic inquiry (WITsi)  Teachers will be provided opportunities for reflection and sharing  Weekly and bi- weekly individual conferencing and Mid-year Conference Data will be used to progress monitor areas of continuous improvement for effective implementation.  Administration will attend Google handouts and workshops based on the PD presented to teachers.  ELA teachers will receive on-ongoing training to support HMH curriculum.  Special education teacher will receive ongoing support in quality IEP writing and turnkey strategies for subgroups. ICT teachers will receive professional development on different instructional strategies. Select staff will also participate and turn key professional development in: conflict resolution, Respect for all, progressive discipline and restorative approaches, safety and emergency preparedness, de-escalation, and guidance interventions.   Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). 2018-19 SCEP-FL 44  N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. SLT Weekly Meetings: o Teacher Leaders o Attendance Meeting o Guidance Meeting Safety and School culture School Development Committee MOSL Committee 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (SCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are 2018-19 SCEP-FL 45  Title I Part A (Basic) Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Local Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) 338,182 16,979 50,540 N/A 12,366 N/A 3,110,306 consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) X X X X X Column B Section Reference(s) 5A 5A 5C 5A 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 46   Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/SCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 47  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent Involvement Policy Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. High School for Contemporary Arts , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students High School for Contemporary Arts will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 48  ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 49  ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact School-Parent Compact (SPC) High School for Contemporary Arts , ], in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will 2018-19 SCEP-FL 50  share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 51  Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); 2018-19 SCEP-FL 52  ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; III. Student Responsibilities: Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 53  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): K 6 1 7 2 8 3 9 4 10 5 11 12 2018-19 SCEP-FL 54  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: The High School for Contemporary Arts currently has 71 ELLs, (57 Spanish, 9 Arabic, 3 Bengali, 1 Hausa and 1 Wolof) all of whom participate in a Freestanding ENL program. According to the NYSESLAT proficiency levels, we have 28 students at Expanding level whom receive one unit of integrated ENL/ELA instruction or other content area, 16 students at Transitioning whom receive 0.5 unit of ELA/ENL integrated instruction or other content area and 90 minutes of ENL standalone instruction, and 17 students at emerging level who receives 0.5 unit of ENL standalone instruction and 1 unit of integrated ENL/ELA minutes of ENL instruction. There are 10 students at the Entry level that receive 2 units of standalone ENL, 1 unit of integrated ENL/ELA. HSCA will offer an after school and a Saturday program that will target Ells in all proficiency levels. These students are Ells who did not take or pass the regents in the following content areas: ELA, Math, Living Environment and Global. English language development support will be provided through the content by having a certified ENL teacher team teach with the content teacher (Math, ELA and Living Environment). The certified SS teacher who also holds a TESOL extension would not require the support of the ENL teacher for language development. The title III activities targets ELLs who are in need of passing the following content area: -24 students in Living Environment from cohort 2017-2019 -20 students in Social Studies from cohort 2017-2019 -20 students in ELA from cohort 2015-2018 -18 students in Math( Algebra/Geometry) from cohort 2015-2019 Winter Program Activity 1; -focuses on ELA and Living Environment. This program will start in November 2018 and end in January 2019; and meet on Wednesdays from 2:30-4:00 pm. The ENL teacher will push-in to both content areas for 45 minutes. The 3 participating service providers are certified in ELA, Science. and ENL. Winter Program Activity 1; -focuses on SS and math. This program will start in November 2018 and ends in January 2019, and meet on Thursdays from 2:30-4:00 pm. The ENL teacher will team-teach with the Math teacher since the SS teacher holds a TESOL extension. The 3 participating service providers are certified in SS, Math. and ENL. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 55  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Spring Program Activity 2; -focuses on ELA and Living Environment. This program will start in March 2019 and end in June 2019, and meet on Wednesdays from 2:30-4:00 pm. The ENL teacher will push-in to both content areas for 45 minutes. The 3 participating service providers are certified in ELA, Science. and ENL. Spring Program Activity 2; -focuses on SS and Math. This program will start in March 2019 and end in June 2019 and will meet on Thursdays from 2:30-4:00 pm. The ENL teacher will team-teach with the Math teacher since the SS teacher holds a TESOL extension. The 3 participating service providers are certified in SS, Math and ENL. Saturday Academy -focuses on ELA, Living Environment Math and SS. This program will start in May 2019-and end in June 2019 and meet on Saturdays from 9am -1 pm The ENL teacher will team teach for one hour with ELA, Math and Science content teachers. The 5 participating service providers are certified in ELA, S.S., Science, Math and ENL. There are 71 students in our ENL population. There are 9 (9th graders), 16 (10th graders), 33 (11th graders) and 13 (12th graders). ELLs BY Subgroups All SIFE SWD ELLs (0-3 yrs) 38 6 6 ELLs (4-6 yrs) 12 0 4 ELLs (completed 6 yrs) 21 0 15 Language of Instruction will be in English with a strong native language support. Materials: The variety of instruction materials will be used in support of language acquisition and making content comprehensible. Textbooks in content area; teacher made materials and regent prep materials. NYS approved bilingual glossaries will be used by students to help with comprehension. All student attendance records and assessment records will be kept on file in the Title III school binder. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Teachers will partake in three professional developments workshops with the duration of an hour each. The staff development will focus on best practices and how to include instructional support for a diverse ELL population in different areas. It will focus on scientifically research-based 2018-19 SCEP-FL 56  Part C: Professional Development instructional methodologies that have proven to be reliable and successful with ELLs. It will cover a broad range of topics related to language modalities, different degrees of bilingualism, English proficiency, academic promotion of ELL students, didactic materials for ELLs, NYS regulations for placement of ELL students, inclusion of ELL activities in lesson plans based on the Danielson instructional model, differentiating instruction for ELLs in different subject areas and meeting NYS Regents examinations and high school credit requirements. The rationale is to empower the staff with the new trends and tools needed to accommodate for the implementation of scientifically research-based-methodologies and strategies that meaningfully facilitate the acquisition of a second language and that consider multicultural, socio-economic, psycholinguistic, and educational prior-knowledge factors of the diverse ELL population. All teachers will receive direct teacher consultant support from a NYS ESL Certified consultant approved by the NYSDOE. Teachers who will participate in the professional development program: I. ESL Teacher 1. Ms. Tejada II- English Language Arts Teachers 1- Ms. Lewis 2- Ms. Vertl 3- Ms. Deblasi (ESL-ELA) 4- Ms. Marshall 5. Mr. Cummo III- Content Area Teachers 1- Ms. Rosado (TESOL Extension) 2- Mr. Hubbard 3- Dr. Lara (Bilingual) 4- Ms. Lorenzo 5- Mr. Zepeda 6- Mr. F. Lewis 7- Ms. Guzman (Special Education) 8- Mr. Pierre Noel 9-Mr. Fonfa 10- Mr. Parker 11- Mr. Grullon Part C: Professional Development The first phase of the staff development program will begin at the start of the school year for one entire term to allow enough time for all staff to participate. It will include an assessment piece to allow educators to reflect on their students' performance and response to the methodologies and strategies being implemented and to make instructional adjustments where needed. The second phase will begin in the beginning of the second term to provide staff with additional support based on the reflections of the first assessment conducted at the end of the first school term. An additional general assessment piece will be included for staff to reflect on the success of the implementation of strategies and methodologies for ELLs as evidenced by students' work, language acquisition, and general academic performance leading to meeting the requirements for graduation and substantial English language acquisition. The staff development workshops will be provided by Dr. Romina Carrillo, PhD certified ESL Specialist. Pedro Cubero, Bilingual Licensed. The duration of each session is one full school day to allow for hands-on interactions 2018-19 SCEP-FL 57  Part C: Professional Development among staff members in which new presented strategies can be implemented and evaluated. Consultant services will be paid at an estimated rate of $300 for each session. There will be three full-day sessions estimated at $900.00 for the three sessions. Saturday Classes (Regents Prep) Per-session English Tutors Topics that will be included in the staff development program but not limited to the ones presented: * The different modalities of language acquisition and language development * Different language skills levels by modalities * Differentiated Instruction for ELLs * SIFE Students (students with interrupted formal education) * Age factors in language acquisition * Why students neglect or reject a second language * Learning Styles and ELL instruction * Age factor and meeting graduation requirements * Cultural and Academic Language Proficiency Skills of ELL Students * Fostering a less stressful academic experience for ELLs with specific learning disabilities * Selection of didactic materials that appeal to the age, literacy level, culture, and personal interests of the ELL student. * Pre-reading and vocabulary analysis activities *Cultural and academic fun enrichment activities * Application of multiple intelligences skills of students to the language acquisition experience * Scaffolding language instruction based on students' prior knowledge * Incorporating different language modalities during lesson planning * How the incorporation of different language modalities in lesson planning align with balanced language acquisition expectations. * Alternative language assessment best practices for Special Education ELLs. * College and graduation readiness interventions to empower ELL students to accomplish their goals. * Available NYSDOE and NYCDOE instructional support and resources websites to help educators and students succeed together. All records such as attendance and agenda will be kept on file. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered 2018-19 SCEP-FL 58  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Begin description here: Parents will be included as an extension of the educational process. They will be invited to attend school meetings to receive interactive orientation on the different available resources in the immediate and extended communities to help them acclimate to the processes that will enable them to become empowered in their communities to better help their children academically and to provide the emotional support as they make the transition to interact in a new culture and make the effort to meet the demands of proficiency in a second language and graduation requirements. Four meetings will be schedule during Parent teacher conferences for the duration of one hour on September 26 and November 29, 2018 - March 7 and May 9, 2019. RATIONALE: The rationale of parental engagement is based on the specific needs of families and their children. Many parents immigrate to the U.S.A. in pursuit of better economic opportunities. However, when we say better economic opportunities we must not exclude the educational component. After all we strive to achieve academic success, to be self-sufficient, and self-reliable. Many parents of ELL children are of young age and have the potential to improve their lives economically and emotionally. By engaging parents and providing them with interactive orientations, they can become empowered and better educated to help their children succeed academically. During parents-teachers-students meetings ideas and questions can be shared or exchanged to assist parents in planning measures they can take to improve themselves academically and replicate the same for their children. By meeting with different staff members and engaging in the educational process of their children they can empower their children to be academically successful and to have economic and emotional stability. Schedule and Duration: Parent engagement activities will be scheduled on Saturdays. School attendance records indicate a good parent turnout on Saturdays because most parents have conflicting schedules and cannot make it to the meetings during regular school days. Parent engagement activities will consist of approximately five sessions lasting two hours each and paid at a per-session rate of $50.13 per hour. Parents will be notified by mail and by telephone and given enough time to make sure they are able to plan ahead of time to attend the meeting. In addition, a Language Access Plan has been developed to communicate with parents in various languages in written and oral form. A binder describing a contingency plan according to Section VII of Chancellor's Regulations A-663 is in place to assist parents with language services. All school personnel including security agents at the front desk will follow the procedures outlined in the school's language access plan. The Language Access Plan includes a list of parents with their respective native and preferred languages. Translations and interpretations will be provided by in-service providers within the campus for immediate translation services. In the event translations services are not readily available school staff will consult The Language Access Plan binder to request translation services via the NYCBOE websites and telephone directories. The Language Access binder includes a list of NYCBOE website addresses. Topics to Be Covered: * Immunization requirements and access to school * How parents empower their children to succeed academically * Health resources and aids in the immediate and extended communities for parents and their children * Mandated services for children regardless of their immigration status * Politics of schools, confidentiality, and the law regarding the reporting of undocumented immigrants. * Seeking mandated health services for undocumented children and the law * Educational assistance and programs for parents who want to return to school * Attendance as an important component for academic success and college readiness * Academic services and programs for parents who want to learn English 2018-19 SCEP-FL 59  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities * Sharing empowerment resources with other parents who are new arrivals to the USA *Technology resources to help ELL learners acquire language skills and complete assigned homeworks * Special education services for ELLs * Translation and interpretation services and resources * Student school readiness, (being prepared for work) * NYC Public Library resources (internet, books…) * Internet homework help * Skedula (Staying in contact with the school's administration, teachers, and monitoring academic performance and behavior via the Internet). * Work-study programs * College Partnership programs * Continued education programs for students and parents in their immediate and extended communities. All records such as attendance and agenda will be kept on file. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) 9425.00  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff NA 1,013 and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) 1236 Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Direct Services to Students: After school and Saturday School ELL instructors will provide direct services at the current per-session rate of $50.13. NA 10% Didactic materials: 1- electronic dictionaries 2- composition notebooks 3-hard copy bilingual dictionaries 4- Thesauruses 5- language skills workbooks 6- linguistic activities reproducible 10% Rosetta Stone Program (language reinforcement software) Rosetta 2018-19 SCEP-FL 60 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Stone Interactive Language CD Program na Parent Inclusion Activities: Literature Translation/Interpretation Services Parent Hosting Activities: Food and miscellaneous 12,366 Travel Other TOTAL na 692 12,366 2018-19 SCEP-FL 61  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 11 School Name High School for Contemporary Arts Borough Bronx School Number 544 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Pedro Cubero Coach Heidi Ludwig ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Ms. Tejada Teacher/Subject Area Humberto Grullon Spanish Teacher/Subject Area Helenia Marshall-Special Edu Related-Service Provider J. Cruz Superintendent Juan Mendez Assistant Principal Jacqueline Vieira Coach type here School Counselor Max Petrus Parent David Fonfa Parent Coordinator C. Acevedo Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 2 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 2 3 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 2018-19 SCEP-FL 62  D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 454 Total number of ELLs 64 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 14.10% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 2 4 3 K Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Our school uses three different assessment data tools to determine the early literacy skills of our ENLs, they are the ELA Performance Task, RLAT ATS Report and the NYSESLAT results. The RLAT report provides our teachers with a three year trend of how a student is performing within the specific skills of reading, writing, listening and speaking. The NYSESLAT report helps teachers understand what current level of performance they are at since the exam and the ELA Performance Task data helps teachers with current levels using the writing samples. According to the 2015 NYSESLAT data, only 25% of our students were 2018-19 SCEP-FL 63  rated as expanding (EX) where in the previous year we had 60% of our students scored ADVANCE Ratings. This could be due to the change of the new exam. We will monitor this as the years progress to identify trends. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? The ENL teacher will work closely with ELA teachers to adminster these assessments. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The school analyses the success of the program with previous year graduation and credit accumulation comparisons using NV data tools. Evaluation and assessment of the program will consist of qualitative and quantitative data taking as point of reference previous academic student data (baseline) consisting of language proficiency levels, academic performance across different disciplines, and New York State standardized tests results of Regents Examinations). Other qualitative data will be derived from different assessment sources provided by teachers, parents, and ELL students. Assessment data will include instructional trends and methodologies used by New York State Certified ENL and General Education teachers with ELL students as a means to identify areas of strengths and weaknesses across different content areas and to plan future staff development interventions and collaborative team work to address the academic needs of the students and professional needs of teachers and other staff. In addition, the NYC Periodic Assessment results are analyzed to see areas of strengths and weaknesses for future academic intervention and staff development planning. Analyses of discrepancies among different modalities are graphed and shared with students and teachers as a means to balance instruction so that a particular language-learning modality is not neglected over another, and to let the students know their strengths and weaknesses and with which modality they must work the hardest. The native language arts results are used to compare performance levels among different modalities in English and the target native language. Performance levels comparisons between English and the native language can also be used as indicators of a possible potential or latent learning disability of the target student. This information can be shared with the Special Education School Based Support Team and the parent for special academic intervention if necessary. Percentiles of Language Assessments in English and the native language are used to compare the proficiency levels in both languages and to determine which academic interventions need to be implemented to improve either the native or English language skills. Proficiency level comparison of modalities between the LAB-R and the NYSESLAT reveal that ELL students develop different degrees of bilingualism with a tendency to favor the spoken form over other language modalities. In other words students develop a higher degree of speaking skills before they develop the written, auditory, and reading comprehension skills. It makes educators aware that although a student might become a fluent speaker of English, he or she might not have reached a high degree of performance or fluency in the other language modalities. These comparisons are very useful to plan future academic interventions according to the individual needs of each particular student. Without this factor differentiated instruction cannot take place.Furthermore, the ENL teacher (Ms. Tejada) surveys content area teachers during common planning time. The new Vision tracker and ATS data is used to compare NYSITELL, LAB_R and regents scores with previous scores achieved prior. After the data is analyzed teachers to align ENL instruction to content area scores to adjust and differentiate instruction. Teachers selects leveled literature that includes issues or topics related to social studies (history) and the sciences following a thematic approach. The objective is to build vocabulary related to different subject areas so students are able to make the transition from the ENL class to the other content area classes in a smoother manner. Also, scaffolding instructional methods are presented to allow the students to expand academically based on their prior knowledge and cultural academic proficiency levels. Scores on the different assessments determine other supports needed. All student schedule is tailored to student specific need. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? During our Department and Grade team meetings the ENL teacher will provide the other teachers with the item analysis per student. ELA teachers will use this information to provide tutoring to ENL students, 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] 2018-19 SCEP-FL 64  ELLs data (NYSESLAT Report; RLAT Report) is shared with staff to support with UDL strategies when planning for a lesson. Teachers also use formative assessment throughout their lessons to support planning and instruction. Reading strategies are enforced within classrooms (i.e. annotation of text) to help students engage in reading with difficult text. Our school will also be implementing the Writing is Thinking through Strategic Inquiry model to support our students with writing strategies, this will be done across curriculum and grade levels. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Throughout the years, we had a consistent trend of significant number of ADVANCE students, but with the new exam, our ADVANCE numbers dropped. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Teachers have all received detailed item analysis for all Regents exams taken in June 2017. In September 2017 teacher will begin using the data to inform instruction in their classes. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. The instruction is a self contain model. Students are program according to their level. The students will be expected to reach the proficiency level according to the Commissioner of Education recommendations: Proficiency levels will be determined by analyzing NYSESLAT, LAB-R, English Language Arts Regents Examinations results, and students' portfolios. Beginner Level students will be provided with three units of instruction aligned to the ELA curriculum using ENL instructional approaches. Intermediate Level students will receive two units of instruction, and the Advanced Level one unit of instruction using the same instructional approach. The following table describes how the units of instruction will be implemented in the students' instructional program: b. TBE program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: c. DL program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? The ENL teacher surveys content area teachers during common planning time to align ENL instruction to content area topics and themes. She selects literature that includes issues or topics related to social studies (history) and the sciences following a thematic approach. Her objective is to build vocabulary related to different subject areas so students are able to make the transition from the ENL class to the other content area classes in a smoother manner. Also, scaffolding instructional methods are presented to allow the students to expand academically based on their prior knowledge and cultural academic proficiency levels. Other supports consist of bilingual dictionaries and content area textbooks or workbooks in the students' native 2018-19 SCEP-FL 65  language for beginner and intermediate level students. All student schedule programming is done in consultation with the student programmer to make sure that all students receive the mandated instructional number of minutes to the fullest extent possible. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Instruction is aligned to the New York City and New York State Learning and Performance Standards. This methodology of instruction implements a balanced literacy approach to second language acquisition by implementing a whole language experience that integrates different content area subjects as part of the humanities thematic learning approach and the scope and sequence of the curriculum. Instruction is designed to include different modalities (listening, speaking, reading, and writing) and strategic activities to accommodate for different learning styles. Placement of ELL students is done in consultation with the school’s programmer to make sure that “Beginner” level students are placed with bilingual teachers teaching content area classes, so that the specific language and academic needs of the students are addressed. In addition, lessons are structured and designed to include the Cognitive and Academic Language Proficiency Skills of the students as a means to scaffold instruction based on their prior knowledge and culture. Content area textbooks and work-books are provided in available native languages to facilitate instruction, to prevent students from falling behind academically in content area classes, and to reinforce Regents Examination test-taking strategies in English and/or their native language. The ELL plan also makes the students aware of test-taking options such as taking the test in their native language and using glossaries with literal translations. Individual academic performance portfolios are kept in record to assess and evaluate the students’ progress. The ELL instructional plan also makes accommodations to provide ELL special needs students with testing and instructional modifications. Testing modifications are provided as stated on their Individualized Educational Plan. Instructional modifications consist of differentiated instruction that appeals to the students' learning styles, ESL approaches, and specific academic needs. The program intends to incorporate additional supplementary language services to encourage students to build a strong foundation in their native language. This will be accomplished by providing additional instructional time during the school day, and after-school and Saturday programs. English Language Learners will be programmed to receive native language instruction in an advanced foreign language class with native speakers of English. This instructional and placement approach will provide the opportunity for both groups of language learners to interact in both languages and learn from one another. Current research has proven that this approach accelerates the acquisition of language skills for both groups (ELLs and Native Speakers of English); especially for the beginner level. Many schools at the elementary and middle school levels are now implementing this program with great success. The program will also articulate with the middle schools to make sure that students who arrive to the United States for the first time are programmed during the summer in a "Jump Start Program" during the last two weeks of August prior to the opening of school. The parent coordinator and the principal will inform parents of their responsibilities at least a month in advance. During this time of the year many families travel abroad. Getting this information out on time will help them adjust their traveling plans. An analysis of native language arts assessment results will also be conducted to determine if students are in need of literacy skills in their native language. This information will help the school in developing an intensive literacy program that addresses students' needs or to coordinate instructional strategies with the foreign language teacher. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? The ELL plan also makes the students aware of test-taking options such as taking the test in their native language and using glossaries with literal translations. Individual academic performance portfolios are kept in record to assess and evaluate the students’ progress. The ELL instructional plan also makes accommodations to provide ELL special needs students with testing and instructional modifications. Testing modifications are provided as stated on their Individualized Educational Plan. Instructional modifications consist of differentiated instruction that appeals to the students' learning styles, ENL approaches, and specific academic needs. The program intends to incorporate additional supplementary language services to encourage students to build a strong foundation in their native language. This will be accomplished by providing additional instructional time during the school day, and after-school and Saturday programs. English Language Learners will be programmed to receive native language instruction in an advanced foreign language class with native speakers of English. This instructional and 2018-19 SCEP-FL 66  placement approach will provide the opportunity for both groups of language learners to interact in both languages and learn from one another. Current research has proven that this approach accelerates the acquisition of language skills for both groups (ELLs and Native Speakers of English); especially for the beginner level. Many schools at the elementary and middle school levels are now implementing this program with great success. The program will also articulate with the middle schools to make sure that students who arrive to the United States for the first time are programmed during the summer in a "Jump Start Program" during the last two weeks of August prior to the opening of school. The parent coordinator and the principal will inform parents of their responsibilities at least a month in advance. During this time of the year many families travel abroad. Getting this information out on time will help them adjust their traveling plans. An analysis of native language arts assessment results will also be conducted to determine if students are in need of literacy skills in their native language. This information will help the school in developing an intensive literacy program that addresses students' needs or to coordinate instructional strategies with the foreign language teacher. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status SIFE student are enrolled in a longer school day. Remedial classes are offered after school and Saturday school for students to achieve proficiency. Native language instruction in an advanced foreign language class with native spanish speakers of English. They go over old exams in their language. Also, scaffolding instructional methods are presented to allow the students to expand academically based on their prior knowledge and cultural academic proficiency levels. The students will be expected to reach the proficiency level according to the Commissioner of Education recommendations: Proficiency levels will be determined by analyzing NYSESLAT, LAB-R, English Language Arts Regents Examinations results, and students' portfolios. Beginner Level students will be provided with three units of instruction aligned to the ELA curriculum using ENL instructional approaches. Intermediate Level students will receive two units of instruction, and the Advanced Level one unit of instruction using the same instructional approach. The following table describes how the units of instruction will be implemented in the students' instructional program. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Placement of ELL students is done in consultation with the school’s programmer to make sure that “Beginner” level students are placed with bilingual teachers teaching content area classes, so that the specific language and academic needs of the students are addressed. In addition, lessons are structured and designed to include the Cognitive and Academic Language Proficiency Skills of the students as a means to scaffold instruction based on their prior knowledge and culture. Content area textbooks and work-books are provided in available native languages to facilitate instruction, to prevent students from falling behind academically in content area classes, and to reinforce Regents Examination test-taking strategies in English and/or their native language. Instruction is designed to include different modalities (listening, speaking, reading, and writing) and strategic activities to accommodate for different learning styles. All special education ELL students are identified by retrieving ATS and IEP data to determine if they are mandated to receive ELL instruction. Resource Room instruction in combination with Integrated Co-teaching Services programs are made available to students. ELL special education students receive individualized instruction from a bilingual special education teacher (Ms. Vieira). All programming is conducted in consultation with the school programmer to ensure that students receive ENL instruction and mandated special education services as per their IEP recommendations. An analysis of NYSELAT test performance results by modalities is done to target specific linguistic academic needs in the areas of listening, speaking, reading, and writing. Data is provided to the ENL teacher to plan individualized 2018-19 SCEP-FL 67  instruction in different target areas, and for special education services planning. This data is incorporated into IEP planning as part of the students' academic goals, language needs, or other related services interventions that the students might need. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? The ELL Targeted intervention plan also makes the students aware of test-taking options such as taking the test in their native language and using glossaries with literal translations. Individual academic performance portfolios are kept in record to assess and evaluate the students’ progress. The ELL instructional plan also makes accommodations to provide ELL special needs students with testing and instructional modifications. Testing modifications are provided as stated on their Individualized Educational Plan. Instructional modifications consist of differentiated instruction that appeals to the students' learning styles, ENL approaches, and specific academic needs. The program intends to incorporate additional supplementary language services to encourage students to build a strong foundation in their native language. This will be accomplished by providing additional instructional time during the school day, and after-school and Saturday programs. English Language Learners will be programmed to receive native language instruction in an advanced foreign language class with native speakers of English. This instructional and placement approach will provide the opportunity for both groups of language learners to interact in both languages and learn from one another. Current research has proven that this approach accelerates the acquisition of language skills for both groups (ELLs and Native Speakers of English); especially for the beginner level. Many schools at the elementary and middle school levels are now implementing this program with great success. The program will also articulate with the middle schools to make sure that students who arrive to the United States for the first time are programmed during the summer in a "Jump Start Program" during the last two weeks of August prior to the opening of school. The parent coordinator and the principal will inform parents of their responsibilities at least a month in advance. During this time of the year many families travel abroad. Getting this information out on time will help them adjust their traveling plans. An analysis of native language arts assessment results will also be conducted to determine if students are in need of literacy skills in their native language. This information will help the school in developing an intensive literacy program that addresses students' needs or to coordinate instructional strategies with the foreign language teacher. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. An Advisory Period to address student’s social emotional needs and group counseling services to meet the developmental, preventive, and remedial needs of students is very effective. Furthermore, the advisory period give teachers the opportunity to understand the child, evaluate, and interpret academic performance data and inform student’s parents/guardians, and other staff. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? none 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? All students are offered during the regular school year: o create Students study groups o summer ENL institutes when available to assist students o coordination of Saturday and after-school programs 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Leveled books, dictionaries, online classes, and Books that increase text complexity will be used in the classroom; furthermore, looking at and analyzing student work will be ongoing for the ELL population, and teacher annotations of student products will continuous. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 68  12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Instructional modifications consist of acknowledgement of student background and language to provide differentiated instruction that appeals to the students' learning styles; ENL approaches, and specific academic needs are better addressed if student is approached in their native language. The ENL teacher (Ms. Deblasi) surveys content area teachers during common planning time to align ENL instruction to content area topics and themes. She selects literature that includes issues or topics related to social studies (history) and the sciences following a thematic approach. Her objective is to build vocabulary related to different subject areas so students are able to make the transition from the ENL class to the other content area classes in a smoother manner. Also, scaffolding instructional methods are presented to allow the students to expand academically based on their prior knowledge and cultural academic proficiency levels. Other supports consist of bilingual dictionaries and content area textbooks or workbooks in the students' native language for beginner and intermediate level students. All student schedule programming is done in consultation with the student programmer to make sure that all students receive the mandated instructional number of minutes to the fullest extent possible. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? The ENL teacher (Ms. deblasi) surveys content area teachers during common planning time to align ENL instruction to content area topics and themes. She selects literature that includes issues or topics related to social studies (history) and the sciences following a thematic approach. Her objective is to build vocabulary related to different subject areas so students are able to make the transition from the ENL class to the other content area classes in a smoother manner. Also, scaffolding instructional methods are presented to allow the students to expand academically based on their prior knowledge and cultural academic proficiency levels. Other supports consist of bilingual dictionaries and content area textbooks or workbooks in the students' native language for beginner and intermediate level students. All student schedule programming is done in consultation with the student programmer to make sure that all students receive the mandated instructional number of minutes to the fullest extent possible. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. During Registration ( Home Language Personal Interview Survey Form) Interview is conducted. a) Letters for Waiver of Transfer (program selection) provided. Description of ELL Programs (videos and provision of the school's ELL program narrative that can be understood by parents) provided by Ms. Chelsea Acevedo (parent coordinator) Ms. deBlasi (ENL teacher) during parent-teacher conferences. HLIS forms are collected and filed during the first day of registration. All HLIS are completed at the school. ATS data is retrieved to analyze English proficiency levels based on NYSESLAT and LAB-R scores. ELLs are grouped by English language proficiency levels. At least 90% of parents prefer the free-standing ENL program because the students continue to receive content area instruction in a general education setting with other language supports and extended school day programs on Tuesdays Thursdays, and Saturdays. Program model offered at the school correlates with parents' program requests. NYSESLAT Assessment Notification to Parents (parent accountability, NYSESLAT and Regents prep after-school/Saturday programs available at the school. Provided by the AP administration: Ms Luz Liriano. Parents and Teachers Association’s Representative (due process dissemination) Ms. E. Ebarra (PTA president) LAB-R testing of new arrivals during the first ten days is administered by the ENL teacher (Ms. deBlasi) Community Resources for Immigrants are discussed to inform parents about institutions 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Instructional modifications consist of acknowledgement of student background and language to provide differentiated instruction that appeals to the students' learning styles; ENL approaches, and specific academic needs are better addressed if student is approached in their native language. The ENL teacher (Ms. Deblasi) surveys content area teachers during common planning time to align ENL instruction to content area topics and themes. She selects literature that includes issues or topics related to social studies (history) and the sciences following a thematic approach. Her objective is to build vocabulary related 2018-19 SCEP-FL 69  to different subject areas so students are able to make the transition from the ENL class to the other content area classes in a smoother manner. Also, scaffolding instructional methods are presented to allow the students to expand academically based on their prior knowledge and cultural academic proficiency levels. Other supports consist of bilingual dictionaries and content area textbooks or workbooks in the students' native language for beginner and intermediate level students. All student schedule programming is done in consultation with the student programmer to make sure that all students receive the mandated instructional number of minutes to the fullest extent possible. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Spanish 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Levels Units of Instruction Daily Number of Instructional Daily Number of Minutes Subjects Periods Based on 45 Minutes Class sessions for ELA, Math, Science, and Social Studies Beginner for a total: 540 min; Intermidiate for a total of 365 and Advance for a total of 180 minutes 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. The LAP will be supported by on-going communication with the school principal, teacher teams, counselors, parents, students, staff development ELL consultants, and the "New Visions" instructional support specialists, BOCES, BETAC, other community resources,after-school and Saturday programs, parent participation support, Small Schools Networking, and Title III Supplementary Services as the needs arise. Professional Development Plan: o off-site and on-site staff development workshops 2018-19 SCEP-FL 70  o ELL consultant visitations o staff will attend ESL-TESOL conferences and workshops o staff will attend ENL seminars and institutes during the regular school year. o create teacher study groups o conduct continuous parental meetings o allow and encourage teacher inter-visitations o establish schools networks to learn about best practices o maintain an open line with BOCES, BETAC, and VESID for instructional support o maintain an open Line with NYS Office of Bilingual Education Services o staff will attend summer ENL institutes when available o coordination of Saturday and after-school programs o articulate with middle schools to provide "Project Jump Start" opportunities for new students before the beginning of the school year (summer). o consult and research Fordham University's "Project Jump Start" initiatives to address the needs of students who have just arrived to the United States and that will enroll at the High School for Contemporary Arts in September of 2012 o hire certified and well qualified instructional staff (NYS ENL Certified Teachers and content area teachers with bilingual extension credentials) o native language arts program placement of students with native speakers of English that have enrolled in Foreign Language Classes. o Technological training will be provided to the staff for the implementation of data entry and retrieval mechanisms to assist the staff with crucial data needed to plan instructional support for the students. This year staff training has included the Lesson Writer web page to assist the staff in the preparation and adaptation of lesson plans for the diverse student population currently enrolled at High School for Contemporary Arts. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Paste response to question here: 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. During the course of the year a series of dinner activities and workshops for parents are conducted to orient parents on different issues pertaining to ELL learners. The family worker in conjunction with the guidance counselors develop multicultural gatherings where parents meet to discuss issues related to attendance and the different types of ENL programs available at the school and across the school district.In addition, the PTA, the parent coordinator, and guidance counselors interact as a team to involve parents in “Awards Night” presentations. Also, the family worker meets one-on one with parents of ENL and ELL/Special Education 2018-19 SCEP-FL 71  students to discuss concerns related to the students or any other family issues that parents might be confronting. Parents are briefed on immigration issues that might affect the students’ ability to receive financial aid for college Parents are briefed on immigration issues that might affect the students’ ability to receive financial aid for college. Parents and students are informed of the graduation requirements as mandated by the State of New York Department of Education. Parents are trained to gain access to New Visions Skedula (www program containing students’ historic academic profile) so that they can view the student’s academic standing. During these meetings, parental networking amongst parents is encouraged so that parents work as a team to provide support to the school and their children. The family worker is currently contemplating on creating a parent interdisciplinary network for the English Language Arts program and selecting a parent leader for each grade level to coordinate the networking process.. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 72 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Pedro Cubero, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 73  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: HS for Contemporary Arts School DBN: 11x544 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Pedro Cubero Title Principal Jacqueline Vieira Assistant Principal Chelsea Acevedo Parent Coordinator Candida Tejada ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Helenia Marshall Teacher/Subject Area Max Petrus Juan Mendez Ana Vasquez Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 SCEP-FL 74 2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools School Name: High School for Contemporary Arts Superintendent: Juan Mendez DBN: 11X544 The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Chelsea Acevedo Parent Coordinator Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. There are currently two systems in place to assess language preferences: 1. For incoming students new to the NYCDOE: a. parents fill out Home Language Identification Survey and a parent survey for the school. b. blue emergency card also asks parents for language preference. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 75  c. ENL coordinator interviews parents and student of foreign origin. 2. For students transferred from a NYCDOE school: a. Same as above b. we look at the RAPL (Adult Preferred Language Report) on ATS. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral English Spanish Arabic Bengali French 485 201 4 4 2 69.48% 28.8% .57% .57% .29% 482 201 4 4 2 69.15% 28.84% .57% .57% .29% 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Annual Handbook Calendar Parent Teacher Conference notifications September Monthly School staff School Staff September, November, March, May NYC DOE website Promotion in Doubt letters February ATS 2018-19 SCEP-FL 76  2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to Curriculum Night September provide interpretation service(s)? School Staff and the language line Parent-Teacher Curriculum November, March, May School Staff and the language line Parent Association meetings Monthly Parent appointments Everyday basis School Staff School Staff 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. School has purchased software from Kinvolved which automatically translates text alerts to parents in their preferred language. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. In the Staff handbook, the Translations and Interpretations brochure, Language ID guide and staff memos Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) The Welcome Poster posted outside the main office, Parents Bill of Rights, Parents Guide to Language Access and information given to parents at the Campus Welcome Center. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 77  Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Parent surveys, Parent Association meetings and SLT. We pruchased Kinvolved software which automatically translates all messages to parent home language. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 78 
