 11X545 School Name: BRONX AEROSPACE HIGH SCHOOL Principal: ERIKA HURTADO 2018-19 SCEP-FL 1  School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Section 4: SCEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Bronx Aerospace High School 11x545 0000 9-12 School Number (DBN): 800 East Gun Hill Road Bronx, NY 10467 718-696-6010 718-696-6030 Phone Number: Erika C. Hurtado Fax: Ehurtado@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Erika C. Hurtado Georgina Appiah Blanca Rivera Erika C. Hurtado Anthony Ramirez JoslynBatten RamoneGolding N/a District Information Geographical District: 11 Carron Staple Superintendent: One Fordham Plaza, Bronx NY 10458 Superintendent’s Office Address: Cstaple@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-741-5852 Phone Number: 718-741-7098 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 3  Bronx FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Jose Ruiz Executive Director: 1 Fordham Plaza Room 817, Bronx, NY 10458 JRuiz2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-828-7776 Phone Number: 718-741-7098 Fax: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the SCEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Erika C. Hurtado Georgina Appiah Blanca Rivera Janet Peguero Anthony Ramirez JoslynBatten RamoneGolding MariaanitaMandell Stephanie Lindo Wanda Alamo *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Member/ CSA Member/ Parent Member/ Parent 2018-19 SCEP-FL 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Andrea Paulino Annemarie Scopino Jaclyn Delao Evelyn Burgos Ramirez Member/Parent Member/ UFT Member/ UFT Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 SCEP-FL 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) is a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. The process of developing and implementing the SCEP is aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding SCEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and SCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 7  In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement 2018-19 SCEP-FL 8  NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the SCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the SCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for SCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 9   Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 5: Build consensus around activities, strategies and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 6: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 7: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 10 Section 4: SCEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? BAHS is a college preparatory community committed to supporting student success through inquiry, collaboration, and by instilling a sense of purpose that will help all scholars achieve their career dreams. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Bronx Aerospace High School is a high school with 340 students from 9 th through 12 th grade. The school population comprises 29% Black, 65% Hispanic, 2% White, 2% Asian students and 2% other. The student body includes 12% English language learners and 23% special education students. Boys account for 82% of the students enrolled and girls account for 18%. The average attendance rate for the school year 2017-2018 was 80%. Bronx Aerospace High School is committed to our instructional focus of “Learning through Collaboration”. Not only are students in all classrooms engaged in group-work every day, teachers also engage in working and learning together. Teachers participate in several teams designed to promote student achievement by monitoring student learning and providing supports for students who are struggling, both academically and behaviorally. Through Circular 6, time is allocated for teams to meet on a regular basis. Bronx Aerospace High School communicates high expectations to all members of the school community. Assistant principals perform the role of instructional coaches to support and strengthen teachers’ instructional practices. Using the Danielson Framework for Teachers, administrators give teachers relevant feedback, including specific and measurable recommendations for next steps to improve instruction. Teachers at Aerospace examine their scholarship reports, set goals, and develop action plans. Furthermore, they examine their own summaries of observation reports and set goals for improvement. Bronx Aerospace High School, offers a variety of initiatives geared toward increasing graduation rates, increasing rates of college matriculation, and preparing students to graduate ready to pursue a career in the field of Aerospace Science: - Advanced Placement Courses - College Now / Lehman College - Aerospace Studies - Robotics - After School Tutoring - Saturday School - Full Time College Advisor - College Readiness Courses 2018-19 SCEP-FL 11  - JetBlue Partnership - NFTE Business & Entrepreneurship - Student Clubs - College Trips - iLearn (Online Courses) To communicate high expectations for student behavior and conduct, Bronx aerospace high School implements Positive Behavior Intervention and Supports (PBIS). Bronx Aerospace High School considers parents to be active partners in students’ progress toward college and career readiness; as such we have established a partnership with the School of Education Bronx Parent Center. In addition we sponsor a variety of workshops and events such as: - Parent Curriculum Night - Team Building - Learning Walks - Award Ceremonies 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. SWDs struggle with reading comprehension and credit accumulation. ELLs struggle with language acquisition and reading comprehension. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Progress: Rigorous Instruction: Teachers develop curriculum maps aligned to the CCLS, which integrates the instructional shifts for ELA and math. Curriculum maps include the learning activities, teaching strategies, and assessments, and how they align to the CCLS. Each teacher selects a “Thought Partner” and works in pairs to review each other’s curriculum map using the 2018-19 SCEP-FL 12  Curriculum Map Rubric and give each other feedback. Teachers use the feedback to continuously engage in the revision process. Collaborative Teachers: Grade level teams provide teachers the opportunity to participate in distributed (shared) leadership and to support the implementation of the Four Pillars established by New York City Department of Education to move our schools and students forward to college and career readiness. Grade Teams aim to achieve the following: ● Establishing expectations of how students learn best and how it should manifest itself in the classrooms ● Looking at student work together for evidence of our instructional focus ● Identifying students who are struggling academically and behaviorally and developing intervention plans with the support of guidance counselors and social workers ● Conduct grade level parent conferences and outreach Areas of Focus: Supportive Environment Trust 2018-19 SCEP-FL 13  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 11X545 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 346 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 50 48 1 5 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 19 12 2 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 75.0% % Attendance Rate 75.1% % Reduced Lunch 14.5% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.9% 48.0% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 2.9% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 4.22 12% 15% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 64% 52% 64.8% 0.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No No Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A NO N/A N/A NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient N/A YES N/A NO No N/A 162 157 19 80.8% 0.0% 27.7% 40.5% 6.4% 2.3% 4 85% 11.1 N/A N/A 58% 60% 72.8% 5% N/A Yes No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 14  Economically Disadvantaged YES ALL STUDENTS YES 2018-19 SCEP-FL 15  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed x na x na Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Comprehensive Assessment: ● Quality Review Feedback 2017-2018 ● MOTP Overall Rating 2017-2018 & Regents Results Strenghts: ● Support and evaluation of teachers through feedback using the Danielson framework and analysis of learning outcomes There is a Need for: ● Developing transparent, collaborative system(s) for measuring progress towards interim and long term goals and making adjustments during the year and over time 2018-19 SCEP-FL 16  ● Graduation improvement *Priority Need: After conducting a comprehensive assessment of Bronx Aerospace High School’s data and performance of the 2017-2018 school year we identified the following high needs area: - College & Career Readiness Tasks - Algebra CC, Global and Science Regents Exams Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. In order to promote student voice and involvement in our school community, by June 2019 the BAH Youth Equity Team will have developed a proposal to address two school wide concerns, resulting in a 3% increase in credit accumulation for each cohort. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 17  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff)  Create BAHS Youth Equity Team (YEP)  Train peer jury members on norms for discussion - transition Youth Equity Team September-June Principal, Aps and Teachers, Students  to YEP Equity Team Inform students of opportunities and procedures for proposals and concerns Schedule YEP times and place convenient to students & staff   Create protocol & proposal template  YEP & Teacher Teams will develop school-wide plagiarism policy.  Design and implement school-wide citation/plagiarism lesson  Develop school-wide rubric to assess citation usage in writing  Work with teachers to ensure continuous progress monitoring of student citation use in their writing. YET, Teacher Teams September -June Principal, Aps and Teachers   Identify teachers and students who will assist in the development of workshop Identify times and places for student-led workshops to occur YET, Teacher Teams September -June Principal, Aps and Teachers All Teachers, Teacher Teams, YEP September -June Principal, Aps and Teachers  Discuss advanced Regents diploma during workshops  Work with teachers to ensure continuous progress monitoring of student citation use in their writing 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 18  - Family Night (October 2018) / College and Career Readiness workshop will be held with the parents of all students by grade. College Reps will be present and our Literacy Plan will be shared. - PA (Monthly) / Will discuss information shared during the SLT to discuss instructional goals and how to better support their child. - Parent Workshops / Twice a month: committee will develop workshops for parents to discuss how to better prepare or support their child with college and career. Workshops will be designed and modified as per the College application calendar and differentiated by grade. - Student Presentations of Learning will take place during open school night. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. - Common Planning Time (No Funding) - PD Committee (Per session) - Grade Team Leaders (Per session) -Leadership / Team Building Training for Students (Outward Bound) - Purchase of instructional technology tools / skedula, castle learning, supplies Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP X Title I TA Title III PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. February 2019: Term 1 scholarship reports will show a 2% gain in passing grades for all departments. April, 2019: - Term 2 MP2 scholarship data for cohorts will demonstrate a 3% gain of students on track for earning 10+ credits. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 19  Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. STARS scholarship report Student transcript/ report cards Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 20  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. SOP(s) Addressed x Na Na Na Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Comprehensive Assessment: ● Quality Review Feedback ● EOY Attendance Strenghts: ● Support and evaluation of teachers through feedback using the Danielson framework and analysis of learning outcomes There is a Need for: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 21  ● Teacher teams to engage in collaborative practice using the inquiry approach to improve classroom practice ● Developing transparent, collaborative system(s) for measuring progress towards interim and long term goals and making adjustments during the year and over time ● Graduation improvement ● An improvement in School Culture, Systems for Improvement and Instructional Core - Improve student attendance and student intervention systems *Priority Need: After conducting a comprehensive assessment of Bronx Aerospace High School’s data and performance of the 2016-2017 school year we identified the following high needs area: ● School Culture / Attendance Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools –Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. In order to address issues around racial equity and bias with students, by June 2019, the BAHS Staff & Youth Equity Team will have revised Advisory Workshops to embed racial equity and bias activities, resulting in two culminating student led presentations of learning around social justice or celebration of diversity. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 22  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff)  Conduct implicit bias PD and training for Equity Teams and whole staff.  Re-alignment of goals and instructional focus to support All Teachers, All Students, YEP September – June 2019 Principal, APs and Teachers equity.  By May 2019, teachers will design two performance tasks in all content areas that include an aspect of culture and or bias within the assessment, one for each semester. All Teachers, All Students, YEP  The Performance tasks will result in a minimum of of 50% of students in each grade level participating in student led conferences in March and May of 2019. September – June2019 Principal, APs and Teachers  Meet in groups, Humanities and STEM teachers to identify guidelines and create multiple drafts in order to create a successful performance task.  Create Calendar of due dates  Support teachers with the development of the performance task  Update performance task rubric and feedback forms. All Teachers, All Students, YEP September – June 2019 Principal, APs and Teachers The Staff Equity team will collaborate with Staff Equity Team to design a clear and concise workshop calendar which will include staff Equity Professional Development workshops and Equity/Implicit Bias student advisory session dates. All Teachers, All Students, YEP September – June Principal, APs and Teachers 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent Workshops & Family Night- review attendance, grades, curricula PA Meetings - discuss attendance incentives 2018-19 SCEP-FL 23  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. - Common Planning Time will be used as Circular 6 Assignment - 1 Guidance Counselor & 2 Social Workers - PD Committee (Per Session) - Grade Team Leader Positions (Per Session) - Learning Walk Cycle Structure - COSA (Per Session) - Attendance Teacher (Per Session) - Attendance Consultant - Chorus Teacher - Enrichment Courses (Per Session) - Attendance Incentives - Saturday and After School Tutoring - Incentives for students -Professional Development Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP X Title I TA Title III PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 24  February 2019: There will be a 15% gain in number of HE ratings for Domain 1. Grades 11 & 12 will showcase presentation of learning There will be a 10% reduction in the number of Principal Suspensions Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Attendance plan Suspension Report OORS Report Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 25  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. SOP(s) Addressed x Na x 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. Na 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Comprehensive Assessment: ● Quality Review Feedback / ADVANCE Data ● School Quality Guide Strenghts: ● Support and evaluation of teachers through feedback using the Danielson framework and analysis of learning outcomes There is a Need for: ● Teacher teams to engage in collaborative practice using the inquiry approach to improve classroom practice 2018-19 SCEP-FL 26  ● Developing transparent, collaborative system(s) for measuring progress towards interim and long term goals and making adjustments during the year and over time ● Developing Curricula-aligned assessment practices that inform instruction ● Aligning the use of resources to support instructional goals that meet students’ needs ● Implementing a research-based, effective instructional model that yields high quality student work ● Graduation improvement ● An improvement in School Culture, Systems for Improvement and Instructional Core *Priority Need: After conducting a comprehensive assessment of Bronx Aerospace High School’s data and performance of the 2016-2017 school year we identified the following high needs area: ● Structures for Improvement Measures of Teacher Practice Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teacher teams will have created and executed two school wide initiatives using the inquiry cycle to ensure that the College Readiness benchmarks in Math and English increase by 10%. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 27  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Regents item analysis Teachers September-June Teachers will meet as a grade team and cohort to assess impact of Learning Walk and make revisions Teachers September-June Assistant Principals will work in the capacity of coaches and mentors when leading cohorts by providing informal feedback, one-to-one coaching sessions, facilitating inter visitations, co-teaching and modeling best practices. Teachers will participate in six cycles of Learning Walks by evaluating, revising and adjusting each cycle’s structure to suit their needs as individual learners. Teachers, SWDs and ELLs September-June PD Committee will analyze and monitor teacher MOTP ratings and make informed decisions develop PD Calendar Teachers September-June Teachers will adopt a Looking at Student Work protocol to analyze argumentative writing samples of a variety of learners (gen ed, SWDs and ELLs) and articulate next steps to implement instructionally Teachers, SWDs and ELLs September-June Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Principals, APs, Teachers, Grade Team Leaders Principal, APs, Teachers, Grade Team Leaders Principal, APs, Teachers, Grade Team Leaders Principal, APs, Teachers, Grade Team Leaders Principal, APs, Teachers, Grade Team Leaders 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. - Family Night (October ) / College and Career Readiness workshop will be held with the parents of all students by grade. College Reps will be present and our Literacy Plan will be shared. - PA (Monthly) / Will discuss information shared during the SLT to discuss instructional goals and how to better support their child. - Parent Workshops / Twice a month: committee will develop workshops for parents to discuss how to better prepare or support their child with college and career. Workshops will be designed and modified as per the College application calendar and differentiated by grade. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 28  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Common Planning Time will be used as Circular 6 Assignment - PD Committee (Per Session) - Grade Team Leader Positions (Per Session) - Learning Walk Cycle Structure - Great Books PD -Educational Alchemy / Through the Looking Glass - Vaughn College Training Aeronautics Studies Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP X Title I TA Title I 1003(a) Title III PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. February 2019: - January Regents data will show that 50% of students programmed to re-take Algebra Regents sat for test. - January Regents data will show that 20% of students achieved mastery of Algebra Regents Exam Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance data Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 29  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, SOP(s) Addressed Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). Na x x x Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Comprehensive Assessment: ● Quality Review Feedback ● School Quality Guide Strenghts: ● Support and evaluation of teachers through feedback using the Danielson framework and analysis of learning outcomes There is a Need for: ● Teacher teams to engage in collaborative practice using the inquiry approach to improve classroom practice 2018-19 SCEP-FL 30  ● Developing transparent, collaborative system(s) for measuring progress towards interim and long term goals and making adjustments during the year and over time ● Developing Curricula-aligned assessment practices that inform instruction ● Aligning the use of resources to support instructional goals that meet students’ needs ● Implementing a research-based, effective instructional model that yields high quality student work ● Graduation improvement ● An improvement in School Culture, Systems for Improvement and Instructional Core *Priority Need: After conducting a comprehensive assessment of Bronx Aerospace High School’s data and performance of the 2016-2017 school year we identified the following high needs area: Supportive Environment Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART– Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. In order to deepen teacher leadership across the school, by June 2019, there will be a 20% gain in the number of teachers who are rated “Highly Effective” in 4E: Growing and Developing Professionally, by re-evaluating teacher leadership expectations and systems in place used for decision making. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 31  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff)  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teacher teams will be re-arranged to support school wide goals. BAHS Draft Day will take place mid September. Teachers will draft and choose which teacher team they would like to join. Teacher Leaders will oversee and own school wide goal and create initiatives alongside their team - rather than oversee grade team. Grade Team Leader Roles will be re-assigned to Guidance Counselor and Lead Teacher. Support Staff, Assistant Principals, Teachers, PA, Students Support Staff, Assistant Principals, Teachers, PA, Students Support Staff, Aps, Teachers, PA September - June Principal, APs, Teachers, Grade Team Leaders September - June Principal, APs, Teachers, Grade Team Leaders September - June Principal, APs, Teachers, Grade Team Leaders Teacher Leaders will be part of PD Committee Principal, APs, Teachers September - June Principal, APs, Teachers One team will oversee creation and implementation of Youth Equity Team. One Team will oversee the creation and implementation of the Staff Equity Team. Principal will chair all Teacher Leader meetings and Professional Development. Teacher, Parent and Student Surveys will be administered and evaluated for growth beginning November 2017. Support Staff, Assistant Principals, Teachers, PA, Students Support Staff, Assistant Principals, Teachers, PA, Students Support Staff, Assistant Principals, Teachers, PA, Students Support Staff, Assistant Principals, September - June Principal, APs, Teachers, Grade Team Leaders, COSA September - June Principal, APs, Teachers, Grade Team Leaders, COSA, Social Workers, GC September - June Principal, APs, Teachers, Grade Team Leaders, COSA, Social Workers, GC September - June Principal, APs, Teachers, Grade Team Leaders, COSA, Social Workers, GC, 2018-19 SCEP-FL 32  Special Advisory programs will be implemented March - June to address needs of ELLs and SWDs. Advisors will meet with cohort students twice a week for 2 hours to discuss credit accumulation, tutoring and language acquisition. In addition this will be the space and time in which students can receive extended time to complete their work and/or assessments. Teachers, PA, Students Support Staff, Assistant Principals, Teachers, PA, Students Student Government, PA March - June Principal, APs, Teachers, Grade Team Leaders, COSA, Social Workers, GC, Student Government, PA 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. - Family Night / College and Career Readiness workshop will be held with the parents of all students by grade. College Reps will be present and our Literacy Plan will be shared. - PA (Monthly) / Will discuss information shared information during the SLT to discuss instructional goals and how to better support their child. - Parent Workshops / Twice a month: committee will develop workshops for parents to discuss how to better prepare or support their child with college and career. Workshops will be designed and modified as per the College application calendar and differentiated by grade. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Common Planning Time will be used as Circular 6 Assignment Assistant Principal Grade Team Leaders (Per Session) Dean of Students PBIS Team (Per Session) COSA (Per Session) SKEDULA/ PupilPath 2018-19 SCEP-FL 33  ELL / SWD Advisory program Per session Per session to pay for extended time for ELLs and SWDs Eastwood Manor - Award Gala Ceremony Graduation Ceremony Decor - Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP X Title I TA Title III PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019 there will be a 10% increase in HE, 4E. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance / Danielson Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 34  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. SOP(s) Addressed x Na Na Na Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Comprehensive Assessment: ● Quality Review Feedback ● School Quality Guide Strenghts: ● Support and evaluation of teachers through feedback using the Danielson framework and analysis of learning outcomes There is a Need for: ● Teacher teams to engage in collaborative practice using the inquiry approach to improve classroom practice 2018-19 SCEP-FL 35  ● Developing transparent, collaborative system(s) for measuring progress towards interim and long term goals and making adjustments during the year and over time ● Developing Curricula-aligned assessment practices that inform instruction ● Aligning the use of resources to support instructional goals that meet students’ needs ● Implementing a research-based, effective instructional model that yields high quality student work ● Graduation improvement ● An improvement in School Culture, Systems for Improvement and Instructional Core *Priority Need: After conducting a comprehensive assessment of Bronx Aerospace High School’s data and performance of the 2016-2017 school year we identified the following high needs area: time line According to the NYC DOE Office of Post-Secondary Readiness, “at least 1.7 million students do not file a Free Application for Federal Student Aid (FAFSA )because they believe themselves to be ineligible. It has been estimated that $50 million in Pell Grant Award(s are untapped by New York City students that would have been eligible had they filled out a FAFSA.” Additionally, due to recent federal changes to the FAFSA completion timeline, it is imperative that parents and students are aware of the changes. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the BAHS Youth Equity Team will have created and executed two school-wide initiatives that involve families and community partners, which will increase the number of students in the honor roll by 15%. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 36  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Create BAHS Advisory calendar for 2018-2019 & Curriculum. Special Advisory programs will be implemented March - June to address needs of ELLs and SWDs. Advisors will meet with cohort students twice a week for 2 hours to discuss credit accumulation, tutoring and language acquisition. In addition this will be the space and time in which students can receive extended time to complete their work and/or assessments. Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) September-June Teachers, Admin, Students, Parents Principal, APs, Teachers, Grade Team Leaders, Student Council, Parent Association Revise BAHS Honor Roll Criteria - incorporate into Traffic Light System (Green/Yellow/Red = Gold) September-June Teachers, Admin, Students, Parents Principal, APs, Teachers, Grade Team Leaders, Student Council, Parent Association Campus wide Honor Roll will be developed and we will hold our first Awards Night Gala May 2018. Commencement Ceremony will be held at Evander Campus to facilitate traveling and reduce cost for struggling families. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Honor Roll celebrations Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 37  Per session, membership fees Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP X Title I TA Title III PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. College counselors will monitor credit accumulation and course mastery. February 2019: 10% increase in honor roll 2% increase in attendance Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. CTE PSO Assessment Report Cards Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 38  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) 8 th Grade Reading Levels, ELA Regents Exam, ELA Credit Accumulation, NYSESLAT Data, and current MP ELA grade. All ninth grade students; All upper classmen who will be sitting for Regents. 8 th Grade Math Levels, Algebra Regents Exam, Math Credit Accumulation and current MP Math grade. Each 9th grader receives a second Math and Science (elective) class geared towards the development of foundational Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Tutoring - Small Group - During School Saturday School - One- to-One - After School iLearn - Whole Class Saturdays Twice a year English Regents preparation sessions are offered to all students on Saturdays. Students are also targeted for ELA classes during Saturday Academy. In addition, students use iLearn with the assistance of an ELA and ESL content teacher to meet outcomes and be awarded credit for the course. Tutoring - Small Group - During School Saturday School - One- to-One - After School iLearn - Whole Class Saturdays Students with identified needs (i.e. those needing to pass a Regents Exam) are programmed (during the school day) for a third sequence of 2018-19 SCEP-FL 39  Science problem solving skills. All ninth grade students and upper classmen who will be sitting for Regents. Living Environment Regents Exam, Science Credit Accumulation, and current MP Science grade. Each 9th grader receives a second Math and Science (elective) class geared towards the development of foundational problem solving skills. Social Studies 8 th Grade Reading Levels, Global and US History Regents Exam, Social Studies Credit Accumulation, and current MP Social Studies grade. All 11th and 12th grade students missing Social Studies Integrated Algebra to help them focus on key learning objectives. Twice a year math Regents preparation sessions are offered to all students on Saturdays. Tutoring - Small Group - During School Saturday School - One- to-One - After School iLearn - Whole Class Saturdays Students needing to pass the Living Environment Regents exam are programmed into Biology during the school day. Twice a year Living Environment Regents preparation sessions are offered to all students’ during Saturday Academy and after school. In addition, students use iLearn with the assistance of a Science and ESL content teacher to meet outcomes and be awarded credit for the course. Tutoring - Small Group - During School Saturday School - One- to-One - After School iLearn - Whole Class Saturdays Students in the 11th and 12th grade with identified needs (i.e. those not passing the Regents) are 2018-19 SCEP-FL 40  Regents; All students who will be sitting for a Social Studies Regents exam. At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Students with Mandated Counseling on their IEP, Behavior Intervention Plans, addictions or in need of emotional support. programmed into the related core class –during the school day (even those students who do not need the credits). Twice a year social studies Regents preparation sessions are offered to all students during Saturday Academy and afterschool. In addition, students use iLearn with the assistance of a Social Studies and ESL content teacher to meet outcomes and be awarded credit for the course. Guidance Counseling Services are provided through: Guidance Counselors push-in to 12th grade Student Learning Communities daily. Workshops related to college planning. Walk-in counseling: counseling services are provided to individual students when needed. Individualized supports - Students who are not on track, have few credits and who are over-age are supported with customized schedules that include online learning as well as extended learning. If alternate placements are deemed mutually beneficial for all stake-holders, alternative sites are considered. - Small Group - During School - One- to-One - After School - Whole Class Saturdays 2018-19 SCEP-FL 41  Support for Struggling Seniors – Several times per week, individual and group meetings occur with 12th graders at risk of not graduating. Individual Career Plan - Transcript reviews are conducted for every student. This is done through Student Learning Communities on an individualized basis. The following At-risk Services are provided by our Social Worker: Mandated Counseling for Students with IEP’s – Done one on one and in small groups as written in the IEP. Short Term Counseling- Conducted on a walk-in case-by-case basis. Articulation/9th Grade Transfer Counseling – Provide placement services to 9th graders and their parents who are considering a school transfer. Student Learning Communities – Students are supported through examining relevant topics of interest and of need (i.e. Health, bullying, etc.). Transcript Review and Counseling – Work with students 2018-19 SCEP-FL 42  on an individualized basis to help them understand transcripts and to create improvement plans. Attendance – Provide counseling to students who are chronically absent from school. Referrals – Made as needed to mental health clinics and pregnancy prevention clinics. Mediations and addressing reports of bullying. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 43  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 35 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Funding will be used to purchase school uniforms and academic materials needed. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). Na 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 44  Na 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. Na 2018-19 SCEP-FL 45  Section 8: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Recruitment: NYC DOE, New Teacher Finder, Hiring Fairs. - Bronx Aerospace high school's Hiring Committee is made up of teachers and students. This year our goal is to include parents in the process. Candidates must create and teach a demo lesson to groups of students. Retention and Assignments: Teachers are given preference sheets and the opportunity to recruit students to their courses. Assignments are given based on student need. Support: An assistant principal is assigned to each cohort to support and facilitate their learning and to give non-evaluative feedback on their instructional practices. After each cycle of observations (Learning Walks), teachers from each cohort are given their End-of-Cycle reports. Reports identify areas of strengths, areas needing improvement, and next steps. Taking ownership of their learning, cohort teacher-teams work together to establish goals for improving their effectiveness in selected components of the Danielson Framework. Safety, Discipline, and PBIS Team The Safety and Discipline team works in collaboration with the Positive Behavior Intervention and Supports (PBIS) team to maintain a safe and orderly environment that is conducive to high levels of teaching and learning. The team consists of majority teachers, with one assistant principal and one dean. The team implements strategies and policies to improve school tone and climate such as the “Aero Dollars” program and Student Monitoring Program. In addition, an Individualized PD Plan is created for all teachers at Bronx Aerospace High School. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Bronx Aerospace High School is committed to our instructional focus of “Learning through Collaboration”. Not only are students in all classrooms engaged in group-work every day, teachers also engage in working and learning 2018-19 SCEP-FL 46  together. Teachers participate in several teams designed to promote student achievement by monitoring student learning and providing supports for students who are struggling, both academically and behaviorally. Through Circular 6, time is allocated for teams to meet on a regular basis. Curriculum Maps Peer Feedback Groups At the beginning of the school year, each teacher develops a curriculum map aligned to the CCLS, which integrates the instructional shifts for ELA and math. Curriculum maps include the learning activities, teaching strategies, and assessments, and how they align to the CCLS. Each teacher selects a “Thought Partner” and works in pairs to review each other’s curriculum map using the Curriculum Map Rubric and give each other feedback. Feedback includes how well the map is aligned to the CCLS as well as the NYS Content Standards. The teachers then revise the curriculum maps based on the feedback. Grade-level Teacher Teams Grade level teams provide teachers the opportunity to participate in distributed (shared) leadership and to support the implementation of the Four Pillars established by New York City Department of Education to move our schools and students forward to college and career readiness. Grade level teams meet at least twice per week to monitor student performance, support quality instructional practices, and engage parents in the educational process. In previous years, there were two grade level teams, one for grades 9 and 10 and one for grades 11 and 12 with 2 grade level team leaders. This year, the grade level teams have expanded to one for each grade with 4 grade level team leaders. Through Teacher Leadership Development, our grade level teams accomplish the following:  Establishing expectations of how students learn best and how it should manifest itself in the classrooms.  Looking at student work together for evidence of our instructional focus  Identifying students who are struggling academically and behaviorally and developing intervention plans with the support of guidance counselors and social workers  Conduct grade level parent conferences  Conduct parent outreach via Phone Messenger Measures of Student Learning Committee (MOSL) The Data Inquiry Team At the beginning of the school year, teachers worked in teams by content areas to analyze data from the previous year’s NYS Regents examinations. The team conducts an item analysis to determine areas of common struggle. This year, we identified the “Constitution” in US History and “Literal Elements” in English Language Arts as areas of struggle for students. Teachers spend more time teaching and assessing those topics to ensure students achieve mastery. The grade level teams continued this work by examining student work for evidence of our instructional focus: Learning through Collaboration. Cohort Teams Teachers participate in cohort teams to add another layer of professional collaboration. An assistant principal is assigned to each cohort to support and facilitate their learning and to give non-evaluative feedback on their instructional practices. After each cycle of observations (Learning Walks), teachers from each cohort are given their End-of-Cycle reports. Reports identify areas of strengths, areas needing improvement, and next steps. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 47  Taking ownership of their learning, cohort teacher-teams work together to establish goals for improving their effectiveness in selected components of the Danielson Framework. Safety, Discipline, and PBIS Team The Safety and Discipline team works in collaboration with the Positive Behavior Intervention and Supports (PBIS) team to maintain a safe and orderly environment that is conducive to high levels of teaching and learning. The team consists of majority teachers, with one assistant principal and one dean. The team implements strategies and policies to improve school tone and climate such as the “Aero Dollars” program and Student Monitoring Program. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. Teachers will receive the coaching services of NTN and Great Books to improve student achievement in mathematics and literacy. In addition, students will receive after school tutoring by certified teachers both after school and on Saturdays. TA resources will also be used to develop Grade Team Leaders and Mentors, in order to evaluate data and develop intervention supports. 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). Teachers will receive the coaching services of NTN and Great Books to improve student achievement in mathematics and literacy. In addition, students will receive after school tutoring by certified teachers both after school and on Saturdays. TA resources will also be used to develop Grade Team Leaders and Mentors, in order to evaluate data and develop intervention supports. Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). n/a 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers meet with their Grade Team Leaders during Common Planning Time to discuss student progress. Our teachers created our Literacy Plan for the 2016-2017 school year which contains goal setting by departments and grade teams with an action plan that uses measurable goals to implement and monitor an assessment plan. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible 2018-19 SCEP-FL 48  for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (SCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Title I Part A (Basic) Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 287,965 N N n/a n/a 12,366 2,865,490 X x x x x x x Column B Section Reference(s) 4B,5A,5B,5C,5D5E N N n/a n/a 4B,5A,5B,5C,5D5E 5A,5B,5C,5D5E 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 49   Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/SCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 50  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Bronx Aerospace High School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Bronx Aerospace High School will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 51  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 52  ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 53 School-Parent Compact (SPC)  School-Parent Compact (SPC) Template Bronx Aerospace High School , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Elementary and Secondary Education Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 54  ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 55  ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 56  Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 57  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): K 6 1 7 2 8 3 9 4 10 5 11 12 2018-19 SCEP-FL 58  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Begin description here: Based upon the June 2018 Regents data, 7 percent of ENL students scored above 65% on the NYS ELA Regents and 10% scored above 65% on the Global History Regents which led the school to focus on higher order reading comprehension skills, building vocabulary skills and citing evidence from multiple sources for the Title III Supplemental Program. After School Program The goal of the after school program is to build upon the students reading comprehension skills and writing skills. Areas that will be of focus are: to write an argumentative essay The 10th grade and 11th grade ENL students will be the grade levels served through the After School Program and the program will be offered to all ENL students in the 10th and 11th grade level. The schedule will be every Wednesday and Thursday from 2:35-3:50 from October 2018 thru January 2019; 28 sessions. The language of instruction will be English and Spanish. Two certified ENL teachers will rotate on a weekly basis, 1 ELA certified teacher and 1 Global History teacher, and a certified Spanish teacher will provide native language support for the after school program. Saturday Academy Based upon the NYSESLAT data from 2017, the listening and reading modalities were areas that did not show much growth. Therefore, we will be offering a Saturday Academy that will focus on listening and reading comprehension skills and will run from November thru June for 18 sessions. The time will be from 9-12.There will be six sessions before the January 2019 regents and 12 sessions before the June 2019 regents. All ENL students in in grades 9-12 will be invited to attend the Saturday Program. One certified ENL and one Social Studies teacher will co-teach. There are approximately 50 ENL students at BAHS. However, we anticipate about 20 students to attend. If the class size goes over contractual limits, another ENL teacher and content area teacher will co-teach. The Saturday sessions will reinforce listening and reading comprehension strategies presented in class during the school week. Technology will be integrated into the lessons as well as NYSESLAT test prep material. For both programs, Regents and NYSELAT test prep materials will be purchased. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 59  Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Part C: Professional Development Reading Comprehension Skills Workshop All Staff will receive the training on September 5th, 2018. The facilitators will be the two ENL teachers who will share best practices and a toolkit that teachers can utilize in the classroom to support ENL students. Classroom Resource Workshop All staff will receive the training on October 15, 2018. The facilitators will be the two ENL teachers who will share technological resources that will address the four modalities. RBERN/Bronx Borough Field Support The two ENL teachers will attend workshops that will be offered by Field Support office and RBERN. However, the schedule has not been determined yet for the 2018-2019. The ENL teachers will turn- key the training attended. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Graduation Requirement Workshop The guidance counselors and ENL teachers will provide a workshop on November 13, 2018 from 9-10 to the parents to review graduation requirements. Parents will be notified of the activities through a newsletter. ENL Resource Workshop on December 10, 2018 from 9-10. The ENL Teacher, Parent Coordinator and Guidance Counselor will share resources. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 60 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. NA Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) NA  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA 2018-19 SCEP-FL 61  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 11 School Name Bronx Aerospace High School Borough Bronx School Number 545 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Erika C. Hurtado Coach n/a ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Joy Ramkissoon Teacher/Subject Area Kathleen Enright/English Teacher/Subject Area Anne Marie Scopino/Special Ed. Related-Service Provider N/A Superintendent Carron Staple Assistant Principal Maria Anita Mandell Coach n/a School Counselor Jennifer Martinez Parent Blanca Rivera Parent Coordinator Janet Peguero Field Support Center Staff Member Malika Elwin Other (Name and Title) Sabrina Cook (PLF) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 2 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 2018-19 SCEP-FL 62  D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 337 Total number of ELLs 53 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 15.73% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): N/A If yes, indicate language(s): N/A Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Lang. N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? We will use the results for NYSESLAT , CC ELA exam and NYC Performance Exam for ELA to guide our instructional planning for our ELLs. This will help us determine what additional support is needed for our ELL population. The results will help us predict how well the ELLs will perform in the NYSESLAT which is administered in April and May. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 2018-19 SCEP-FL 63  The ELL team will meet at least once a month to review ELL data and strategies to support ELL.population. We will also plan and administer the NYC Performance exam for ELA in the Fall and Spring semester. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? NYSESLAT and Regents exam results will be used to evaluate the success of our program for ELL. The content area and ESL teachers will provide students with various assessment tasks which include all 4 modalities (reading, writing, listening, and speaking). ELLs will experience Common Core (CC) aligned activities that include reading, analyzing non-fictional texts, and writing opinions/arguments. They will take the baseline and End of the Year (EOY) assessment-for the NYC Performance Exam for ELA. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Please refer to #2 response. The ESL teacher will provide weekly and/or Saturday tutoring sessions for ELL population who has not passed the NYSESLAT and ELA. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] N/A We are a high school. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Analysis of the proficiency levels of our ELLs show that students are making progress toward Commanding or Proficiency level. The majority of our entering students are in the 9th grade. Most of our students are at the Expanding Level. Many students remained at the Expanding level (advanced) for two or more years. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? The ELL data will be shared during the monthly ELL meeting and Professional Development which is held on Monday. General Education and ELL teachers will co-plan during professional period during period 7. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Grades 9 and 10 ELL students are in one class and Grades 11 and 12 ELL students are in another class taught by a teacher who is certified in English and TE. Instruction for ELL is delivered in the ELA content area as stand alone and a co-teaching model. The 2 ENL teachers serve a co-teacher in grade 9, 10, 11, and 12 grade for ELA. Students travel to different classes ungraded. For example, some stand-alone classes have students who are in 2 separate grades. However, the integrated ELA classes have all students of the same grade. b. TBE program. If applicable. We do no offer TBE program. c. DL program. If applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 64  We do not offer DL program. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? ENL instruction is provided by ESL and ELA teachers. Entering students receive 3 units of study per week for a total of 540 minutes of ESL instruction. They all have 1 intergrated ENL/ELA class with an ELA teacher and an English teacher, and 2 stand-alone ENL classes. Emerging students receive 2 units of study per week for a total of 360 minutes. All receive 1 stand-alone class and .5 Integrated in Global Studies and 1 inter grated ENL/ELA class. Transitioning students receive at least 1 unit of study per week. .5 in the content area and 1 intergrated ENL/ELA class. Expanding students receive 1 unit of study per week for a total of 180 minutes. All students receive 1 unit in integrated ELA/ENL. Commanding students or former ENLs continue to receive services for an additional 2 years. They are currently receiving at least .5 unit of study per week. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Freestanding ENL classes use a Common Core aligned curriculum to deliver a rigorous ENL class targeting improving text based evidenced writing and reading skills. The mode of language used in ENL classes is English. Students participate in shared inquiry to help them develop their reading, speaking, listening and writing skills. The teachers scaffolds the lesson , use purposeful grouping, graphic organizers, visual aids and other strategies to make the content more comprehensible to students. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Teachers use rubrics and assessments for essay writing. The Spanish NYSITELL is administered to students to evaluate their native language skills. Every student also takes the Spanish Language Regents exam, too. Students also take the AP Spanish Language exam. They average a score of 3+. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status For all our subgroups, we will survey the student's past performance records to determine his/her capabilities. We will also use Socratic Seminar, Collaborative group work activity and direct instruction Processing Strategies will be used such as graphic organizing, scaffolding and KWL. Resources will be offered in the student's first language if available. Students can use bilingual dictionary and glossary during classwork and assessment. They will be assigned a peer with the same first language as a "buddy" We will use various assessment techniques including rubrics, performance-based assessment and open-ended assessment. During independent reading students are given a choice to select their text. Students will also be given a choice to select projects that reflect a variety of learning styles and interest. ELLs will be be engaged in learning tasks that increase their exposure to academic vocabulary using scaffolding techniques . Tutoring is offered after school from Monday to Friday and during Saturdays. Former ELLs have either freestanding or integrated ENL instruction for 2 additional years and have access 2018-19 SCEP-FL 65  to tutoring and extended time. Former or Commanding ELLs continue to receive services for up to 2 years. They receive integrated instruction in their ELA classes. They continue to receive testing accommodation, which is time and a half on all tests, including state tests. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Teachers of ELLs with a disability can use many of the same strategies such as small group instruction and Socratic Seminars to ensure that all students understand the texts. Total physical response, visuals, and technology ensure that students can follow directions. The same level of instructional materials for our ELLs as with our non-ELLs are used . All content area classes are taught in English using scaffolding strategies to make content comprehensible. In addition, students can be provided with a text in their native language along with the English version. Videos can also be used as resource where visual and auditory learners can be assisted. In addition, ELLs with disabilities are not exempted from the NYSESLAT. However, they may use the accommodations that are detailed in their IEPs as permitted in the Administrator's Testing Manual. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? At BAHS most of our core classes are taught using a co-teaching model. There are 4 ELA classes with 3 teachers ( ELA, ENL, and special ed.) who are providing students with needed assistance. Teachers use shared inquiry, differentiated instruction, annotation, scaffolding strategies, the SMART Board, and supplemental content area materials. Students who have not met the standards will be given the extended time and support through repetition, reteaching, reinforcement. ELL-SWDs will receive all services mandated by their IEPs including testing accommodations. These accommodations are implemented for classroom as well as city and state assessments. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. In order for our ELL population to become English proficient and meet the graduation requirements, we offer an after-school tutoring program from Monday to Thursday. The tutoring sessions are provided by a bilingual teacher. We also offer Saturday academy from 9 am to 1 pm that runs throughout the year. All our ELL students are invited and encouraged to attend both programs. . During the school day, teachers provide academic intervention by differentiating instruction. The language of instruction is in English with native language support as needed. ELL students take the NYC Performance baseline and end-of- the year performance exam for ELA. The data is collected, recorded and analyzed. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We have adopted the Socratic Seminar teaching strategy for all of our students. We will continue to use this strategy because our students are more engaged in the lessons. Students are able to ask each other questions, become involved in interesting conversation, question one another about thoughts and perspectives , and question the text. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? We are not discontinuing any teaching practices or programs at this point. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Our students are able to enroll in all after-school programs provided within the school and the campus. Our students are enrolled in Saturday school, After-school, in addition to extra-curricular sports activities such as basketball, baseball, football, volleyball, and track. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 66  12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Our ELLS have access to the same materials as all non-ELL students. We have Smartboards in every classroom, laptop carts, textbooks books in English and Spanish, bilingual dictionaries and glossaries, Brain Pop in English and Spanish , bilingual online resources. Our students including our ELL population used the computer lab in the library to conduct research and complete projects on a whole class and/or individual basis. Our ELLs also utilize Getting Ready for the NYSESLAT. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Home language support is provided in our integrated ELA classes and Free Standing ENL Program through the use of bilingual materials and resources, bilingual staff members and students who speak Spanish and other languages. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Students are offered the same content and have the same access to the same materials as all non-ELL students. The instructional materials are aligned with grade and age levels. All are offered the opportunity to take pre-calculus, AP and College Now classes. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Our ELLS have access to the same materials as all non-ELL students. We have smartboards in every classroom, laptop carts, textbooks books in English and Spanish, bilingual dictionaries and glossaries, Brain Pop in English and Spanish , bilingual online resources. Our students including our ELL population used the computer lab in the library to conduct research and complete projects on a whole class and/or individual basis. Our ELLs also utilize Getting Ready for the NYSESLAT. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). We offer an orientation and school tour to all incoming students and their parents, ELLs included, in August. The administrators, Guidance Counselor, Social worker and teachers present at the orientation explain their roles in school. The teachers also provide the overview of what they are going to be teaching. The AP of ELLs and/or parent liaison provide orientation to the newly enrolled ELLs and their parents. We provide a montly workshop to parents including ELL parents. Some of the workshops provided were, "How to help my child academically?" and "Stress and anxiety management"The AP of ELL explains the various ELL programs to the newly enrolled ELLs and their parents. Our teachers provide a small group or one-on-one mentoring sessions to struggling students including ELLs. New ELLs who enroll are also supported by their social workers and guidance counselor. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? We do not offer language electives at the moment due to lack of time in their program. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? 2018-19 SCEP-FL 67 BAHS does not currently have a Dual Language Program. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Our objectives for our professional development are to improve literacy across the curriculum and increase teacher effectiveness through the use of Danielson Framework . We want our students including ELLs to develop evidence based essay-writing, reading and critical-thinking skills. We will continue our efforts on early interventions for students who are failing classes; improving teacher questioning techniques and shared inquiry skills, implementing differentiated instruction and developing curriculum aligned to Common core Standards. We provide an on-site professional development for all teachers to support ELLs as they engage in the common core learning standards. On Mondays, we have whole faculty professional development. We also have a grade level and department meeting at least once a week. Our teachers including ESL teachers receive one-on-one coaching from their cohort Supervisor. Some of the topics discussed during PD or department meeting are the following: How to design a coherent lesson plan How to use DOK to increase rigor in the classroom Literacy plan for all students including ELLs Regents analysis Skedula training Teaching strategies to support ELLs We also have a great book coach who comes regularly throughout the year and meet with our teachers to provide them one-on-one coaching on shared inquiry. During one-on-one coaching with the AP, some of the topics that are discussed to help our ELL population are the following: Vocabulary development in all classes Argumentative Essay writing Read alouds and shared reading Purposeful group and accountable talk Turn and talk Collaborative group protocol Scaffolding Socratic seminar Lesson planning Coaching from assistant principals and principal -Content area team meetings to share best practices -General Education teacher, Special Education teacher and ELL teacher team planning during professional periods -Inter-visitations -PD workshops on several topics such as Regents analysis, Literacy plan, Skedula Training and lesson planning - Mentoring from a Highly Effective teachers -Demonstration lessons -Shared Inquiry one-on-one coaching by the Great Books coach 2018-19 SCEP-FL 68  2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Our students transition from High School to College. We have 2 college advisors to assist all of our ENL students as they prepare to go to college, the military, and the workforce. Advisors assist students in completing the college application, writing their personal statements, visiting college and university campuses, and applying for financial aid. We also offer AP , career and college readiness class. BAHS provides professional development to all teachers and administrators that specifically addresses the needs of English language learners. At the beginning of the school year all teachers received a list of all ENL students and their levels. A minimum of fifteen percent (15%) of the required professional development hours for all teachers prescribed by CR Part 80 is dedicated to language acquisition, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English language learners. There are 4 ENL/ELA co-teaching classes. The ELA content teacher who is also certified in TESOL meets with Special Education teacher on a daily basis as they plan lessons and interact with each other. In addition, the AP of ENL encourages teachers to attend monthly workshops provided by the NYC Department of Education Division of English Language Learners & Student Support. The AP receives the email notification and forwards it to teachers so that they can attend the workshops. Our English as a New Language (ENL) teachers attend a minimum of fifty percent (50%) of their required professional development hours during the school-year. As it is a must for language acquisition in alignment with core content area instruction, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English language learners. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? All parents workshops and Principal breakfast with parents are provided with a bilingual translator. Our parent coordinator and parent volunteer call the parents individually to attend the workshops and meetings. We also reach out to the parents via school messenger and letters in their preferred language. Attendance is recorded at each meeting. We also meet with the parents (including ELL parents) of struggling 11th grade and 12th grade students to discuss progress, promotion criteria and graduation requirements. The ENL AP and the ENL teacher meet with the parents or guardians of English language learners at least once a year; in addition teachers can also meet with parents during parent-teacher conferences, initial parent orientations, quarterly progress meetings or other scheduled meetings provided for parents or guardians to discuss the goals of the program, their child’s language development progress, their child’s English language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas. In addition, the meeting is conducted with a qualified interpreter/translator in the language or mode of communication the parent or guardian best understands. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. We provide at least one parent workshop and Principal Breakfast once a month to all parents including ELL parents during weekdays which is held from 10 am to 11 or 5:30 pm to 6:30 pm. All workshops and meetings are provided with the bilingual translator. We also meet with parents of struggling students, ELLs included. Some of the workshop topics are included below. College Application Process Graduation requirements/transcript/promotion in doubt How to survive in High School ? 2018-19 SCEP-FL 69  Parent English Language Learner Orientation How to deal with children with emotional disturbances, self- harming and ADHD Suicidal Ideation ? How to communicate with my child effectively? Financial Aid Workshop Internet Workshop Stress Management workshop How to help students who are struggling in the classroom Positive Discipline Promoting Healthy Habits How to talk to your child about sex? How do social media affect your child? Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 70 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Erika Hurtado, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 71  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Bronx Aerospace High School School DBN: 545 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Erika Hurtado Title Principal Maria Anita Mandell Assistant Principal Natasha Matos Parent Coordinator Joy Ramkissoon ENL/Bilingual Teacher Blanca Rivera Parent Kathleen Enright/English Teacher/Subject Area Joyce Wojnarowski/Special Ed. Teacher/Subject Area N/A N/A Coach Coach Jennifer Martinez School Counselor Carron Staple Malika B. Elwin Sabrina Cook N/A N/A Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Field Support Center Staff Member Other PLF Other N/A Other N/A Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 6/30/17 6/30/17 6/30/17 6/30/17 6/30/17 6/30/17 6/30/17 N/A N/A 6/30/17 6/30/17 6/30/17 6/30/17 6/30/17 6/30/17 2018-19 SCEP-FL 72  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 11X545 School Name: Bronx Aerospace High School Superintendent: Carron Staple The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Janeth Peguero Parent Coordinator Yes, she will Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 requires that all schools determine the primary language of parents within 30 days of student enrollment. Once the language is determined, parents are provided with all information from school in their preferred language. Based on current data from ATS report from RCPL, HLA and RPOB, most of our parents are Spanish speakers and prefer communication in Spanish. Our school provides translation and interpretation services to all parents in English and Spanish. For parents who prefer language other than English and Spanish, we reach out to them by phone in their preferred language through our bilingual staff . If there is a language that our staff members do not speak, we call OTPI which provides the staff to over 200 languages so they can speak to parents regardless of 2018-19 SCEP-FL 73  what their preferred languages. Some parents may also choose to rely on other adult translators/ companions or friends for assistance. Those parents may choose to travel to the school with their personal translator. We assess parents' language preferences during parent workshops, Open house , Parent and Student Orientations and parent-teacher conferences. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Arabic Bengali French Filipino Spanish Telugu Hindi English Haitian Creole TWI Urdu Ukrainian 10 9 2 1 149 1 1 297 1 2 3 1 2.10 1.89 0.42 0.21 31.24 0.21 0.21 62.26 0.21 0.42 0.63 0.21 10 9 0 1 154 1 0 295 1 2 3 1 2.10 1.89 0.00 0.21 32.29 0.21 0 61.84 0.21 0.42 0.63 0.21 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 74  Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. The documents that we typically disseminates every year that require translation are as follows : NA BAHS Monthly Newsletters which includes important events and dates such as PTA meetings, college events, Back to School Night, Saturday and after school programs, School Leadership Team Meetings and Parental workshops First week of every month NA We currently have bilingual staff members on site who speak Spanish. The Spanish teacher and parent coordinator assist with translating documents. Documents which need translated are given to the teacher and/or parental coordinator prior to the date to be sent to the parents to ensure timely provisions. In addition, we ask the NYC DOE translation unit service to assist us in translating documents to other languages (French, Bengali, Arabic. etc.) In the event that a language is not covered, we contract a DOE vendor to translate documents. Skedula Access September Promotion in Doubt Letter January and June See above See above 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Every Tuesday afternoon Formal and informal meeting with Parents For all face-to-face meetings, the Parent Coordinator and Spanish speaking bilingual teachers assist with translating documents to the Spanish language and with providing translation between staff members and the parents/guardians as needed. Also, if 2018-19 SCEP-FL 75  Parent Workshops Monthly School Leadership Team Meeting Second Tuesday of every Month Title 1 Meeting Second Tuesday of every month needed, there are staff members who can translate in Albanian, Tagalog and Arabic. If needed, the OTPI is contacted for assistance or/and we arrange for a translator to provide interpreter services either by phone or in person at the school. Some parents may also choose to rely on other adult interpreters/ companions or friends for assistance. Those parents may choose to travel to the school with their personal interpreter. See above See above See above Parent-Teacher Conference and Back to School Night October, November, March and May See above 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In the event of a school emergency, when possible, we utilize in house staff to interpret for the parents. Currently, we have interpreters available in Spanish, Albanian and Tagalog. However, for parents who have a language not covered by school staff, we contact OTPI. In addition, we also are able to hire a DOE vendor to send an on site interpreter, when needed. The Parent Coordinator reaches out to the parents in the event of an emergency and is aware of the preferred language from the Home Language Survey, ATS and Skedula. Through Skedula, all teachers are aware of the home language of each students as well as how to utilize the Translation and Interpretation unit. In addition, the school has signage available for parents and staff members to provide awareness of translation and interpretation services available. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 76  Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. During Chancellor's PD in November, we will review the goals of Chancellor's Regulation A-663. A copy of the Parent's Guide to language Access and Bill of Parent Rights and Responsibilities will be distributed during the PD. The ENL Coordinator will also provide a workshop for staff members to ensure staff members are aware of OTPI. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Welcome Poster is posted by the main entrance of the school. Parents’ Bill of Rights and Parent's Guide to language Access will be distributed to students to be backpacked and mailed to all parents in September. Whenever a new student is admitted, the documents are also given to the the student and parents. Parents' Guide to Language Access is also available to all parents at the Welcome Center. The school will utilize the translation services of the DOE for documents, flyers and posters if needed. Translated documents of items are downloaded from the DOE webpage and distributed to parents. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? We conduct survey for every parent workshop we provide to assess the needs of our parents. We also gather feedback through face to face meetings during SLT, Parent-Teacher conference, guidance meetings, attendance meetings and grade team meeting with the Parents. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 77  2018-19 SCEP-FL 78 
