 10X549 School Name: DISCOVERY HIGH SCHOOL Principal: ROLANDO RIVERA 2018-19 SCEP-FL 1  School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Section 4: SCEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Discovery High School 321000011549 9-12 School Number (DBN): 10X549 2780 Reservoir Ave Bronx NY 10468 718-733-3872 718-733-3621 Phone Number: Teresita Antigua Fax: tantigua@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 10 Superintendent’s Office Address: Email Address: Rolando Rivera Marilyn Martin Juan Boyer Rolando Rivera none Jennifer Barth AgrendalyToribio N/A District Information Carron Staple Superintendent: 1 Fordham Plaza Bronx NY 10458 cstaple@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-741-5834 Phone Number: 646-341-3923 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 3  FSC: Bronx Executive Director’s Office Address: Jose Ruiz Executive Director: 1230 Zerega Avenue, Bronx NY 10462/1 Fordham Plaza , Bronx, NY 10458 Jruiz2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: Phone Number: Fax: 718-828-7776/718-741-8895 718-828-6280 2018-19 SCEP-FL 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the SCEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Rolando Rivera Marilyn Martin Juan Boyer Jordan Mitchell AgrendalyToribio Sonia Mejia XiomaraPerez Boyer *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable member/parent member/parent 2018-19 SCEP-FL 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Doris Mitchell TeresitaAntigua Nicholas Federn member/parent member/staff member/staff Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 SCEP-FL 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) is a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. The process of developing and implementing the SCEP is aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding SCEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and SCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 7  In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement 2018-19 SCEP-FL 8  NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the SCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the SCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for SCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 9   Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 5: Build consensus around activities, strategies and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 6: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 7: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 10  1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: SCEP Overview Discovery's mission is to help students engender a deep and sophisticated reservoir of content knowledge and acquire complex cognitive processes which they can transfer to new and different real-world environments in college and the work world of tomorrow. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Discovery High School is a 9 - 12 school with 442 students in a campus setting. The student population comprises 17% Black, 79% Hispanic, 1% White and 2% Asian. The student body includes 20% English language Learners and 24% special education students. Boys account for 56% of students enrolled and girls account for 42%. Discovery currently collaborates with or is establishing a collaboration with the following organizations to support our students:  Lehman College - College Now: Students who excel at Discovery HS and qualify for the College Now program are able to choose college level courses for college credit while still attending high school.  ACCESS-VR: Provides vocational and financial support for students with IEPs.  Institute for Career Development: Will provide on-site after school vocational training via a work readiness program  PSAL: Public School Athletic League for students wish to participate in campus wide sports  Opening Act: For students who are interesting in acting 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Special student populations at Discovery High School are students with IEPs and ELLs, both of which comprise a significant percentage of our lower third population. In conjunction with Section 5A - Rigorous Instruction, 5C - Collaborative Teachers and 5D - Effective School Leadership, Teacher Team Leaders will work with teachers to analyze multiple and diverse sources of data to include periodic assessments and “Folders of Progression” in order to determine where special student populations are relative to where they need to be, identify specific areas in need of improvement, and create targeted instruction to address those specific areas of need. The instructional focus for our IEP and ELL sub-populations will be to develop a more efficacious, literacy-rich curriculum where students will develop more sophisticated skills around writing a thesis statement and providing multiple sources of evidence to construct logical and relevant reasoning. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 11  Aligned with the Framework for Great Schools, Discovery High School made the most progress in Section 5C where the Principal created “To-Watch” committees for all grades levels. “To-Watch” committees meet every two weeks to address the social/emotional and academic needs of a carefully selected group of lower third students, to include students with IEPs and ELLs. While “To-Watch” committees were successful in moving students to or closer to “on-track” status, the focus of the 2018-2019 school year will be to further improve the efficacy of the “To-Watch” committees to include more student “adoptions” and the development of additional intervention strategies aimed specifically at student motivation and engagement. Additional progress was made in the 2017-2018 school year where the Principal created, implemented and tracked Student Progress Referrals (SPRs). SPRs are designed to immediately address the social/emotional needs of all DHS students when necessary. DHS will continue the use of SPRs in the 2018-2019 school year and will work to further improve the quad-angulation between students, teachers, counselors, staff and parents. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 12  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 10X549 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 456 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 74 49 4 8 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 53 49 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 89.0% % Attendance Rate 88.6% % Reduced Lunch 18.6% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.4% 73.7% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 2.4% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 11.26 7% 33% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 78% 67% 73.8% 35.5% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No No Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups ED Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A NO N/A NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient N/A YES N/A YES No N/A 11 9 87.7% 0.9% 28.3% 19.1% 3.5% 1.3% 4 20% 4.6 N/A N/A 83% 78% 74.1% 15% N/A No Yes N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A YSH N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 13  Economically Disadvantaged YES ALL STUDENTS YES 2018-19 SCEP-FL 14  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed x x x Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Needs/Areas of Focus: 3.2, 3.3, 3.5 DHS strengths are evidenced in Periodic Assessments given every six weeks. Periodic Assessments are thoughtfully and effectively analyzed to determine student’s strengths and needs relative to content knowledge and skills for all subject areas. Data gathered from assessments is used to drive short and long term instruction that is tightly aligned to both the Common Core and NYS Learning Standards and the Danielson Rubric with a focus on the criteria 3B - Using Questioning and Discussion Techniques and 3C - Engaging Students in Learning. During the 2017/2018 school year, data from assessments, classroom observations, individual feedback from teachers during Instructional Intensives, a cyclical analysis of student work in professional development and feedback from the QR suggests a need to improve the construction of rigorous tasks and activities that set expectations and provide opportunities for students to extend and refine content knowledge and skill applications to tasks and activities that are cognitively challenging. Inherent in the design of rigorous tasks and activities is the need to improve the construction and implementation of written and oral questions that will be cognitively and meta-cognitively challenging. Based on data gathered from the 2018-19 SCEP-FL 15  aforementioned sources, teachers need to employ a variety of high impact strategies that will lead students to effectively use evidence and reasoning when responding to rigorous questions while simultaneously addressing the needs of our ELL and IEP sub-populations. The proper and effective design of rigorous instructional activities should also lead to an improvement in student participation and engagement in general and in rigorous discussions. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Rigorous Instruction (to Increase Cognitive Capacity & Engender a More Comprehensive Comprehension of Content) In order to increase student engagement in rigorous discussions, targeted professional development will be offered, resulting in at least 75% of teachers’ Advance observation reports indicating an improvement of at least one graduation on both 3B and 3C of the Danielson Rubric by June 2019. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 16 Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Teacher Team Leaders and Teachers Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Teachers will use Common Core State Standards, the DHS Teachers lesson plan template and Discovery’s product based rubrics for Thesis, Reasoning and Evidence to develop unit plans and rigorous daily lessons that enable students to not only acquire selected content and skills but to extend and refine their understanding of selected content and skills.  Embedded in the development of unit plans and daily lesson plans is the construction of rigorous oral and written questions that are cognitively challenging and incorporate student responses to advance their thinking (Danielson 3B.4 & 3C.5.  Teachers will pre-select 15 students total; 5 students with IEPs, 5 ELLs and 5 mid-range students.  Teachers will create folders of progression for the pre-selected 15 students where sample work will represent student performance on pre-established rubric criteria that will be assessed and tracked all year. Teachers Teachers and Select Students Teachers Quarterly Unit planning: 9/1/18-12/1/18 1/1/19-4/1/19 4/1/19 -6/12/19 9/15/18 -9/30/18 9/15/18 -9/30/18 2018-19 SCEP-FL 17 Teachers and Select Students  Baseline: Using Discovery’s product based rubrics for Thesis, Reasoning and Evidence and Danielson's Rubric 3B & 3C, teachers will establish a performance baseline for each of the rubric criteria for all 15 students.  Teachers will consistently create specific work products with embedded forms of pre-established criteria that will be compared to baseline and subsequent student work products for each of the pre-established criteria to be tracked throughout the year.  Teachers will identify and select specific work products for all 15 students that will be placed in the progression folders. The selected work products will represent specific content and or skills criteria students are expected to acquire as established by the Thesis, Reasoning and Evidence rubrics.  Work products will be designed so students can make their thinking visible (Danielson 3C.3)  Teachers will assess student work according to the rubric criteria and provide specific and meaningful feedback to students relative to the rubric criteria being assessed.  Teachers will assess and track student work performance in teacher team meetings during professional development and in one-on-one meetings with coaches.  Teachers will assess student work according to the rubric criteria and provide specific and meaningful feedback to students relative to the rubric criteria being assessed.  Teachers will assess and track student work performance in teacher team meetings during professional development and in one-on-one meetings with coaches. Teacher Team Leaders and Teachers Twice weekly 9/15/18 – 5/31/19  Teachers will use Discovery created feedback protocols to provide feedback to other teachers regarding student work assessments and lesson plan construction to include tasks and activities that are designed to address the learning Twice weekly from 9/15/18 - 2018-19 SCEP-FL 18 needs of students as determined by student work collected in the folders of progression relative to the aforementioned rubric criteria and Danielson's Rubric criteria and elements of 3B & 3C as it pertains to increasing student engagement in rigorous discussions.  Based on whole-group and sub-group performance and progress, instructional next steps will be established and used to create appropriately rigorous student-to-student learning experiences that engender and, then extend and refine content understanding and cognitive skills acquisition (Danielson 3C.5) 5/31/19 Teachers and Select Students Teachers and Teacher Team Leaders 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Monthly Parent Association meetings will be conducted with a portion of each meeting dedicated to academic support for parents where subject specific teachers employing the use of Discovery’s product based rubrics for Thesis, Reasoning and Evidence will inform parents about the Common Core standards relevant to that teacher's subject area. Teachers will discuss expectations for specific content and skill acquisition, class-work, project and homework requirements and strategies parents can use to support student learning and work completion at home. Additional teacher support is available through Jupiter Grades e-mail and parent/teacher meeting requests. Parent Association meetings are overseen by the Principal, Assistant Principal of Operations, conducted by the Parent Coordinator and attended by selected teachers on the following dates: 9/25/18, 10/23/18, 11/20/18, 12/18/18, 1/22/19, 2/12/19, 3/5/19, 4/9/19, 5/7/19, 6/11/19. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The above goal will utilize research based materials, Teacher-Team Leaders to include coaches and administrators to provide professional development to all teachers three times each week during prep periods. Funding will be used to cover salaries of staff members and per session postings and funding will be made available if needed. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding 2018-19 SCEP-FL 19  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In order to increase student engagement in rigorous discussions, targeted professional development will be offered, resulting in at least 40% of teachers’ Advance observation reports indicating an improvement of at least one graduation on both 3B and 3C of the Danielson Rubric by February, 2019. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. - Danielson Rubric criteria and elements of 3B & 3C - Discovery’s product based rubrics for Thesis, Reasoning and Evidence · Student Work Products (essays, culminating question answers) in Folders of Progression. · Periodic Assessment Analyses Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 20  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. x x X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Needs/Areas of Focus: 5.2, 5.4, 5.5 Discovery High School provides an environment where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers by:  Helping students engender a meaningful and impactful relationship with adults in the school that is reciprocally respectful;  Creating the conditions that enable students to feel a sense of personal belonging in a warm and encouraging environment;  Developing learning experiences that can spur students to care about their daily school work and see the relevance of it to their present and future lives;  Providing continual opportunities for students to experience success in accomplishing complex school assignments. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 21  The priority need is to uncover and address the core emotional issues that may be impeding some students from being successful academically. For school years 2016-2017 and 2017-2018, there has been an increase in the credit accumulation and graduation rates of off track students in a sub population (To Watch) that is identified and provided with additional social emotional supports. This data indicates that if students have positive, nurturing, and meaningful interactions with adults at Discovery, then these opportunities can foster and maintain these healthy social bonds for our students. If Discovery's faculty applies impactful interventions when our students need social-emotional support, then the students will have opportunities to successfully develop and maintain their emotional well- being. If students' overall social and and psychological well-being improves, then they will be in a better position to improve their academic performance and progress. The policies, practices, and structures that are in place to support the whole child are:  Regular meetings with Guidance Counselor to assess academic progress and take the social and emotional temperature of every student.  Discovery's deans employ active counseling and restorative justice counseling techniques when necessary to address the social and emotional needs and concerns of students.  Daily monitoring of attendance and cutting and timely follow-up when issues are noted.  Creation of sub-populations (To Watch )of at risk students , to monitor and support them.  Established committees that meet regularly regarding to To Watch populations.  Electronic system used by school staff to generate Student Progress Referrals (SPR), when they have a concern about a student. The referral is received by school staff for follow up.  Opportunities for parents and students to receive and discuss information on their academic performance and in school or out of school variables that could be limiting their potential. . They are also encouraged to share feed back and comments. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools –Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, as a direct result of the "to-watch" committees' focus on improving students' on going social emotional and academic needs, there will be a 5% increase in students earning 10+ credits in 11th grade as compared to their scholarship from 2017-2018, improving from 64.7% to 68% by June 2019. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 22  2018-19 SCEP-FL 23  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff)  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Over the summer, a pre-identified group of students is identified based on a review of the Grade-Level Tracker for Seniors.  A sub-tracker for these specific students is created to better targeted their particular needs. It follows the same format at the Grade-Level Tracker, but is specifically for these pre-identified students only.  A senior committee will be established and meet weekly to discuss the performance and progress of the seniors-to-watch  High-leverage constituents--teachers, guidance counselors, attendance coordinator, parent coordinator, assistant principals, and the principal—will be identified to be on this committee; committee members who have the greatest potential and ability to address general and specific social-emotional issues as it pertains to student academic achievement.  Meetings will be conducted using specific protocols, with a conceptual inquiry-based framework (employing the recursive cycle for improvement framework) to identify the core issues that are impeding a small but insignificant subpopulation from succeeding as their classmates are.  Committee Members are trained how to analyze multiple and diverse forms of data, effectively engage in problem-solving and decision-making processes, and how to engage in an inquiry-based process.  During weekly meetings, Committee Members are provided time and opportunity to analyze multiple and diverse sources of data, coupled with and tempered by anecdotal information—such as STW tracker data, Snap-Shot by Credit, Jupiter Grades, report cards, histograms on attendance and cutting, Snapshot by Group Anecdotal, etc.—to assess where students are in relation to where they Students (To Watch) 9/6/18 – 11/13/18 Teachers, Administrators, School Staff. 11/14/18- 1/25/18 1/29/19- 3/27/19 3/28/19- 6/10/19 2018-19 SCEP-FL 24  need to be in terms of credit accumulation and regents and college preparation.  Using the results of their analysis from the aforementioned data analysis, Committee Members will create, implement, and assess targeted strategies to address the social-emotional that are preventing academic success on both the individual student-level and for groups of students within the STW, or the whole group of STW students. Examples include (but are not limited to): *Strategic Programming: Students are programmed for all the classes they need to graduate. Alternative pathways to meet graduation requirements are used to program students (4+1option/Various Appeals for Diverse Learners). *Guidance Intervention- Counselor meets with each student in this subgroup at least once every two weeks using “Guidance Intervention Process” for SE-Effective Conversations & Documentation Form *Quad-Angulation Process : Committee members pool information from various constituents in the school to communicate about what the issues with the student currently are, and, then, use this information to develop a composite understanding of what the issues are. The counselor then uses this information to engage in a potentially more productive conversation that enables the counselor to find out why the student is having these issues. The counselor then brings this information back to the committee so that the committee can collaboratively pool their knowledge of the students to determine the root causes and the branch causes of the problems and, then, use this information to come up with a plan to figure out how best to address the problem, now that we have a clearer, more comprehensive, and coherent understanding of why the problem is occurring.  Adoption Program- Formalized process where DHS staff adopt STW students and develop a personal one-on-one relationship with the student that they adopt in order to help the student deal with his/her social emotional issues and become more successful in their coursework at DHS. The process follows DHS model of what/why/how. Students (To Watch) 9/6/18 – 11/13/18 Teachers, Administrators, School Staff. Parents 11/14/18- 1/25/18 1/29/19- 3/27/19 3/28/19- 6/10/19 Students (To Watch) 9/6/18 – 11/13/18 Teachers, Administrators, School Staff. 11/14/18- 1/25/18 2018-19 SCEP-FL 25  What are the problems the student is having? Jupiter Grades Attendance/Grades/Check in with Teachers including Saturday School Teachers. Why is the student having these problems? Discuss home/social/school life, build trust, and follow up on conversations from previous discussions. How can we fix these problems? Come up with an action plan to solve the problem. Wake up calls/ Breakfast or Lunch/Check on them in class they cut/Walk around the building to find them/Complete assignments with adopter. 1/29/19- 3/27/19 3/28/19- 6/10/19  Home Visits- Home Visits are done by school staff that have relationships with the students as opposed to the traditional Attendance Coordinator/Family Worker model. Students (To Watch) and Parents 9/6/18 – 11/13/18 Teachers, Administrators, School Staff.  Referrals to Montefiore Clinic (school based) – Referrals generated from discussions in adoption process. 11/14/18- 1/25/18 1/29/19- 3/27/19 3/28/19- 6/10/19 2018-19 SCEP-FL 26  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Discovery parents participate in the Parent Panel Process which is a formalized process where parent/student/school staff have a face to face meeting so that the student and parent have an understanding of what’s currently preventing the student from progressing, discuss and understand why these issues are occurring, and create a 3 tiered next step plan to resolve these issues.  o The process follows DHS model of what/why/how. 1. What are the problems the student is having? Purpose of meeting/ What are the problems/Desired Outcome/Data Review/Outcome if issues aren’t resolved. 2. Why is the student having these problems? Reciprocal Dialogue/Parent’s Perspective/Student Perspective/Determine effectiveness of what has been tried to date. 3. How can we fix these problems? Panel develops solutions and determine when and how will they know if they worked Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The above goal will utilize salaries for school personnel, school technology resources, per session funding and flexible scheduling. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. As a direct result of the "to-watch" committees' focus on improving students' on going social emotional and academic needs, there will be a 2.% increase in students earning 10+ credits in 11th grade as compared to their scholarship from 2017-2018, improving from 64.7% to 66% by February 2019. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Student academic standing trackers and sub trackers.   Weekly Attendance Reports (in histogram form) Jupiter Grades: Semester Attendance at-a-glance   ATS: School Attendance Percentages 2018-19 SCEP-FL 27  Google Docs logs Snapshot by credit  Snapshot by group  Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 28  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by SOP(s) Addressed x x x using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Needs/Areas of Focus: 4.3, 4.4, 4.5 Discovery High School's strength comes in the form of daily formative and/or summative assessments which are implemented to assess incremental progress toward the longer term learning goals assessed through periodic assessments conducted every six weeks. Teachers work collaboratively by department to thoughtfully and effectively analyze data and identify patterns and trends that drive instruction. Analysis of the 2017-2018 Quality Review, the 2017/2018 Superintendents Review as well as summative and formative data gathered through Periodic Assessments given every six weeks suggest the need for teachers to efficaciously and efficiently use organically-constructed data tools to identify, collect, categorize, and analyze quantitative and qualitative data results for IEP and ELL sub-populations. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 29  DHS has implemented efficacious systems to track student progress for all students toward graduation and specifically identify what credits and/or regents are needed for graduation. Guidance counselors construct customized Road to Graduation Trackers, where students can see where they are relative to where they need to be in order to graduate on time. Current trends in data derived for Road to Graduation Tracker analysis for the 2017/2018 school year indicate that the ELL sub-population and students with IEPs have the lowest percentage of on-track students. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Collaborative Teachers: By June 2019, our staff will engage in inquiry work focused on creating a literacy-rich supportive culture, resulting in at least 70% of ELL/IEP students improving by one full gradation on each of the three major components of Discovery’s In-House 4-tiered Rubric (Thesis Statement, Reasoning, and Evidence) as compared to their baseline measure in September 2018. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 30  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Discovery High School teachers from the English, History and Science departments have collaborated within their department and across subject areas to construct 4-tiered Thesis, Reasoning and Evidence Rubrics that identify criteria to write a clear and concise thesis statement or claim, cite evidence from multiple specific, relevant, & sufficient examples from the text(s) (or prior content knowledge) that collectively support all parts of the thesis statement and provide logical reasoning that explains how each piece of evidence supports its related idea in the thesis. Teachers, ELL Students and Students with IEPs 9/15/18 - 9/30/18  Baseline: English, History and Science department teachers will work collaboratively to establish a baseline measure for all ELLs and students with IEPs for each of the three aforementioned criteria (write a thesis statement/make a claim, cite evidence and provide reasoning) indicating where each student is relative to where they need to be. From this baseline, teachers will create benchmarks and end-goals to inform the process of helping students improve in the aforementioned rubric criteria. Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Teacher-Team Leaders  Targeted PD: Teachers will be provided with targeted, Teachers interactive PD training sessions on what data analysis entails in general, how to collect and organize data sources, how to most effectively analyze multiple and diverse forms of data, and how to more effectively use these results to inform and adjust pedagogical practices in relation to student-outcome data.  During PD and one-on-one meetings, Teacher-Team Leaders and teachers will use established feedback protocols to 9/15/18- 10/30/18 Teacher Team Leaders 2018-19 SCEP-FL 31 provide and receive targeted feedback on assessment design and to efficaciously and efficiently use organically-constructed Thesis Statement, Reasoning and Evidence Rubric to identify, collect, categorize, and analyze quantitative and qualitative data results for IEP and ELL sub-populations. Teachers Twice-weekly from 9/15/18 - 5/31/19 Teacher Team Leaders  Explicit Instruction in One-on-One Meetings: Teacher-Team Leaders will meet with teachers individually during the interactive Periodic Assessment Cycles to provide augmented training, support, and guidance in analyzing data. These meetings will help teachers apply what they have learned from PD to effectively and efficiently determine what happened, (data results), why it happened (possible causes for these results), and how it could be addressed (next steps for students with IEPs and ELLs during the next cycle of instruction). Teacher Team Leaders and Teachers Teachers and Students 10/17/18 -10/19/18 11/19/18 - 11/21/18 1/17/19-1/18/19 3/15/19 -3/16/19 5/2/19-5/3/19 Teacher Team Leaders Teacher Team Leaders 10/17/18 -10/19/18 Targeted Instruction: Based on data analysis teachers will collaborate to identify high leverage strategies and activities that will address the specific needs of each ELL and/or student with an IEP to include the following:  Teachers will share the Thesis Statement, Evidence and Reasoning Rubrics with students and establish common 2018-19 SCEP-FL 32  methods and strategies that will lead students to comprehend and effectively use the rubrics to determine where they are relative to where they need to be. Students will learn to be meta-cognitive about their own thinking processes relative to the rubrics. Teachers and Students 11/19/18 - 11/21/18 Teachers  Teachers will establish individual student work portfolios that will house selected pieces of work where students can use the aforementioned rubrics to compare and contrast current work to past work in order to track progress.  Teachers will select appropriately leveled texts that are just outside each student’s Zone of Proximal Development.  Teachers will provide exemplars that students will use to self and peer assess their work relative to the rubrics.  Teachers will create appropriately leveled activities and scaffolds and that are designed to address individual and explicit student needs based on data analysis.  Teachers will provide each student with meaningful feedback as well as clear and targeted next steps students can take to improve their work relative to the rubrics. Teachers will follow up with students to see that they are implementing feedback as evidenced in new student work. 1/17/19-1/18/19 3/15/19 -3/16/19 Teachers 5/2/19-5/3/19 Teachers and Students Teacher Team Leaders Teacher Team Leaders 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Monthly Parent Association meetings will be conducted with a portion of selected meetings dedicated to how Discovery High School analyzes student data in order to track student academic progress relative to the Common Core Standards. Teachers will discuss expectations for specific content and skill acquisition relative to the Thesis, Reasoning and Evidence Rubrics, Periodic Assessments and how class-work, project and homework requirements align to 2018-19 SCEP-FL 33  successful Periodic Assessment results. Parents will be provided strategies to support student learning at home to include study strategies and test taking skills. Additional teacher support is available through Jupiter Grades e-mail and parent/teacher meeting requests. Parent Association meetings relative to the goal for Collaborative Teachers will align to Periodic Assessment Data Reports. PA meetings will be overseen by the Principal and Assistant Principal of Operations, conducted by the Parent Coordinator and facilitated by teachers on the following dates: 9/25/18, 10/23/18, 11/20/18, 12/18/18, 1/22/19, 2/12/19, 3/5/19, 4/9/19, 5/7/19, 6/11/19. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The above goal will utilize salaries for school personnel, school technology resources, per session funding and flexible scheduling. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, our staff will engage in inquiry work focused on creating a literacy-rich supportive culture, resulting in at least 35% of ELL/IEP students improving by one full gradation on each of the three major components of Discovery’s In-House 4-tiered Rubric (Thesis Statement, Reasoning, and Evidence) as compared to their baseline measure in September 2018. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Discovery's In-House 4-tiered Thesis Statement, Reasoning and Evidence Rubrics Student Work Products (essays, culminating question answers) in Folders of Progression. The "Data Analysis Rubric," Periodic Assessments and Periodic Assessment Data Analysis Reports. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 34  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). x x x x SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Needs/Areas of Focus: 2.2, 2.3, 2.4, 2.5 Discovery High School's strength comes in the form of daily formative and/or summative assessments which are implemented to assess incremental progress toward the longer term learning goals assessed through periodic assessments conducted every six weeks. Teachers work collaboratively by department to thoughtfully and effectively analyze data and identify patterns and trends that drive instruction. Analysis of the 2017-2018 Quality Review, the 2017/2018 Superintendents Review as well as summative and formative data gathered through Periodic Assessments given every six weeks suggest the need for teachers to efficaciously and efficiently use organically-constructed assessment & data tools to address the need for our students to improve their abilities to intellectually interact with diverse types of appropriately-leveled content to engender deeper and more sophisticated levels of content understanding. Additionally, students need to improve their ability to transfer their complex cognitive abilities within and between subject areas. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 35  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART– Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, school leadership will have planned and implemented a robust professional development plan including a strong coaching model, resulting in at least 65% of the teachers will be at a 3 or higher on a 4 tiered in-house organically-constructed Meta-Cognitive Teaching Rubric (which helps teachers help students think about thinking and performance) as compared to a baseline assessment in September 2018. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 36  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Context 1: Teachers will create cognitively complex & meta-Teachers cognitive experiences and scaffolds to build ALL students’ capacity to produce richer responses.  Teachers will create meta-cognitive oral and written questions/tasks/activities/ scaffolds that enable ALL students to self-monitor their current level of understanding and adjust accordingly their cognitive performance both while engaging in these processes and upon reflection of past performances that will result in future refinement (improvement).  Teachers will create rigorous learning experiences that enable students to cognitively grapple with appropriately-leveled texts to produce more sophisticated oral and written responses.  Context 2: Teachers will use consistent criteria to assess and provide targeted feedback that improves students’ ability to become meta-aware and able to appropriately adjust their own performance.  Teachers will adroitly assess students’ ability to self-determine why and how they are doing what they are doing.  Teachers will provide actionable, targeted feedback to enable students to become meta-aware of their current level of understanding to appropriately self-adjust their current performance by using information from this feedback and, then, accurately explain why and how they did so. 9/7/18- 1/26/19 1/31/19- 6/11/19 Teacher Team Leaders 2018-19 SCEP-FL 37  Teachers:  Create activities that ask students to be conscious of present and past perspective taking.  Provide targeted feedback information that enables students to understand why and how they need to improve.  Explicitly model his/her thinking to show why and how he/she has thought about something in a particular way.  Ensure that students are deeply steeped in the language of the class criteria so that they know the destination as well as the path (the processes in the procedural checklist) to that destination.  Provide ample time for mastery of a particular cognitive process and to develop a conceptual understanding of key ideas that undergird the course.  Pose meta-cognitive oral questions to improve the quality of students’ reasoning and ability to think about how they can reason most effectively.  When eliciting responses teachers focus predominately on the quality of reasoning in students’ explanations, not just on the content of the response. Students:   Students will have plenty of opportunities to use consistent criteria and exemplars to assess their own products and improve specific components of these products. Students use the information provided in their teacher-given feedback to make effective and efficient mid-course adjustments. Teachers 9/7/18- 1/26/19 Teachers Team Leaders 1/31/19- 6/11/19 Students 9/7/18- 1/26/19 Teacher Team Leaders and Teachers 1/31/19- 6/11/19 2018-19 SCEP-FL 38        Students regularly assess their own and their peer’s cognitive processes; they often consider their processes in relation to their written products. Students have plenty of time to independently practice and think and reflect upon this practice. Students will explain why and how they are engaging in what they are doing; students will be able to monitor and adjust their own execution of processes. Students will have regular opportunities (during and at the end of lessons) to reflect upon past performances to refine them in the future. Students will help each other acquire or perfect a specific cognitive process by providing each other feedback, using the formalized structure for providing feedback. Students will transfer cognitive processes not only from one activity to another within a course but between different subject areas (ELA to History to Science; Math to Science: Graphing, calculations, data analysis). 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Monthly Parent Association meetings will be conducted with a portion of selected meetings dedicated to how Discovery High School analyzes student data in order to track student academic progress relative to the Common Core Standards. Teachers will discuss expectations for specific content and skill acquisition relative to the Effective School Leadership goal, the Meta-Cognitive Teaching Rubric, Periodic Assessments and how class-work, project and homework requirements align to successful formative and summative assessment outcomes to include Periodic Assessment results . Parents will be provided strategies to support student learning at home to include an understanding of the meta-cognitive processes their children are expected to engage in. Additional teacher support is available through Jupiter Grades e-mail and parent/teacher meeting requests. Parent Association meetings relative to the goal for Effective School Leadership will align to Periodic Assessment Data Reports. PA meetings will be overseen by the Principal and Assistant Principal of Operations, conducted by the Parent Coordinator and facilitated by teachers on the following dates: 9/25/18, 10/23/18, 11/20/18, 12/18/18, 1/22/19, 2/12/19, 3/5/19, 4/9/19, 5/7/19, 6/11/19 Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The above goal will utilize research based materials, Teacher-Team Leaders to include coaches and administrators to provide professional development to all teachers three times each week during prep periods. Funding will be used to cover salaries of staff members and per session postings and funding will be made available if needed. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 39  X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, school leadership will have planned and implemented a robust professional development plan including a strong coaching model, resulting in at least 40% of the teachers will be at a 3 or higher on a 4 tiered in-house organically-constructed Meta-Cognitive Teaching Rubric (which helps teachers help students think about thinking and performance) as compared to a baseline assessment in September 2018. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. - The organically constructed 4-tiered in-house Meta-Cognitive Teaching Rubric - Student Work Products (essays, culminating question answers) in Folders of Progression - The "Data Analysis Rubric," Periodic Assessments and Periodic Assessment Data Analysis Reports Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 40  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. x x x x SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Discovery High School has a full time Welcome Center, overseen by the Parent Coordinator. Parents are welcomed to come in and have all inquiries addressed. While there, the parents are also provided with resources and information crucial to their child's academic success and social emotional well being. The areas that need improvement are reciprocal communication among parents, students, and school staff. Some student issues are addressed in isolation. Parent attendance at meetings and Parent Teacher Conference is low, as well as the use of Jupiter Grades (online gradebook). The priority need will be addressed by improving the lines of communication between and among various faculty and staff and the families/parents/guardians of our students through a systematic process of “quad-angulation.” Quad-angulation is a systematic process that will more successfully streamline the internal lines of communication between and among the different constituents about student performance and progress and, then, use the content of these communications to create, maintain, and monitor the reciprocal lines of communication between faculty and the families of our students to improve students' performance and progress. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 41  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the school's parent engagement team will increase parent outreach as well as add two additional parent events, resulting in a 5% increase in positive responses on the NYC School Survey from school year 2017-2018 results. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 42 Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Parents 9/6/18- 1/25/19 Parent Coordinator, School Staff, Administrators 1/30/19- 6/10/19 Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Timely communication is key, not only in alerting parents to issues with their child, but allows for the issue to be addressed as soon as possible. The “Parent Inquiry Intake Form” is an electronic checklist that allows the Parent Coordinator to not only document the parent’s inquiry, but to be able to direct the parent and or issue to the appropriate school personnel that will be able to resolve the issue. The form is also used to document any parent inquiry that is received electronically or via phone. The form also asks for parent contact information. The new information received is cross referenced with what is on file and if needed updated accordingly. After the issue is addressed by school personnel the PC follows up with a quality assurance call to assess if the parent is satisfied with the school’s efforts or if additional assistance is needed.  Discovery will provide an Informational Family Night where parents will be invited to tour the school, meet the teachers and staff, and receive information regarding rules, policies, procedures, and promotional criteria.  Parents have access to their child’s attendance and grades via Jupiter Grades online gradebook. They can access the site 24 hours a day 7 days a week. Jupiter Grades also allows them to communicate with teachers via email. This function allows for frequent reciprocal communication among teachers, students and their families. Students and Parents 9/6/18- 1/25/19 1/30/19- 6/10/19 Parent Coordinator, School Staff, Administators 2018-19 SCEP-FL 43  Translations for all communications will be made available in parent’s native language. Use of phone translation services will be employed for languages not spoken by DHS personnel.  Multiple school-personnel will contact parents regarding the same issue to provide multiple perspectives and created a concerted front from the school regarding the issue in question (Ex: if child is cutting classes, calls will be made by teacher, attendance coordinator, and guidance counselor).  Parents receive information about their child and school matters via School Messenger’s automated phone calls, emails and text.  Discovery will create a special link/tab on its website to provide information for parents regarding parent-related information (calendars, promotional criteria, organization sheet, staff contact) and activities such as upcoming events, meetings, celebrations.  The administration and teachers, as well as representatives of the student body, will engage in meetings with parents to discuss methods/strategies/etc. for improving their child’s academic and social-emotional achievement. SLT meetings   PA meetings  Panel Meetings- Meetings held with parents and school personnel of high risk students to discuss where the child is in relation to where they need to be. An action plan is created and agreed upon by all parties for student to implement and be successful. Student and Student/Parent Guidance Conferences   Restorative Justice and Dean Conferences with students/parents/school personnel.  Parent Teacher Conferences (citywide and school scheduled-as needed)  Meetings to discuss Promotion in Doubt notifications Students and Parents Parent Coordinator, School Staff, APO 9/6/18- 1/25/19 1/30/19- 6/10/19  Every summer the Parent Coordinator will initiate contact with all new parent/guardians to introduce herself and personally invite them to New Student Orientation.  The school will follow a streamlining system—to ensure that Discovery has the most accurate parent contact information. All personnel will provide the most recent parent contact information to the Attendance Coordinator who will place this information on ATS and Emergency Card. Students who do not have recent parent contact information will be brought to the office and required to provide this information. Students and Parents 9/6/18- 1/25/18 Parent Coordinator, School Staff, Administrator 1/30/19- 6/10/19 2018-19 SCEP-FL 44  Parent Coordinator will collect at least one Email address per family to allow for School Messenger and electronic communications (positive encouragement, announcements, needs improvement feedback, and/or school concerns). In order to ensure that teachers have the most up to date parent contact list, the Attendance Coordinator will email a list with the most recent contacts to all teachers.   The Parent Coordinator and Parent Association President will work in tandem to provide once a month training workshops that equip parents with information and skills to better assist their children in succeeding in school. Parent Coordinator will conduct on-going surveys to determine the topics of greatest interest to parents. Examples of high interest workshops: o Reading a HS Transcript/Report Card o Using Jupiter Grades o Regents Exams, PSAT/SAT, AP Exams, NYSESLAT, Periodic Assessments. o Meeting School Personnel o Skills based trainings. o College and Career Readiness 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. n/a Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The above goal will utilize salaries of school personnel, google docs, SchoolMessenger , Jupiter Grades, per session funding and translation/interpretation services. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 45  By February 2019, the school's parent engagement team will increase parent outreach as well as host one additional parent event, resulting in a 3% increase in positive responses on the NYC School Survey from school year 2017-2018 results. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Instrument: In-house Parent Survey Feedback received from follow up for Parent Intakes. Increase in participation of school events and or meetings. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 46  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Every 6 weeks students are recommended for AIS services by their subject teacher based on an analysis of their performance on their Periodic Assessment on the subject. Every 6 weeks students are recommended for AIS services by their subject teacher based on an analysis of their performance on their Periodic Assessment on the subject. Every 6 weeks students are recommended for AIS services by their subject teacher based on an analysis of their performance on their Periodic Assessment on the subject. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Tutoring, small group, one to one. During lunch, after school, and or Saturdays. Tutoring, small group, one to one. During lunch, after school, and or Saturdays. Tutoring, small group, one to one During lunch, after school, and or Saturdays Lowest third students/IEP students-Note taking, questioning scaffolds, choral reading, and RTI. ELLs- SSR, small group instruction and additional instruction in the new language when necessary. Lowest third students/IEP students-Note taking, questioning scaffolds, choral reading, and RTI. ELLs- SSR, small group instruction. Lowest third students/IEP students-Note taking, questioning scaffolds, choral reading, and RTI. ELLs- SSR, small group instruction. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 47 Tutoring, small group, one to one During lunch, after school, and or Saturdays Lowest third students/IEP students-Note taking, questioning scaffolds, choral reading, and RTI. ELLs- SSR, small group instruction. Weekly meetings with counselor. Individual and or small group. Elective periods or during lunch. Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Every 6 weeks students are recommended for AIS services by their subject teacher based on an analysis of their performance on their Periodic Assessment on the subject. Committees will be established (at each grade level) and meet bi-weekly to identify and discuss the performance and progress of To-Watch students. To Watch student criteria is an at risk student that is not succeeding in school due to social-emotional issues 2018-19 SCEP-FL 48  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 8 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Students are supported with guidance intervention, AIS services, Saturday Academy, and instructional resources (supplies, calculators). Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). n/a 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 49  n/a 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. n/a 2018-19 SCEP-FL 50  Section 8: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. 1) Discovery High School will use the best available resources for identifying highly qualified teachers: New Teacher Finder, NY Times, references and recommendations, Open Hire, etc. 2) Construction of Interview Questions to elicit the characteristics of a highly qualified teacher to include in depth knowledge of their content area and an understanding of how to disaggregate content and skills into small learning steps. 3) Employ a 3 step Interview Process: 1) Preliminary Phone Interview 2) Interview with AP of Instruction to select potential candidates and 3) Interview with the Principal. 4) Demo-Lesson Analysis of Teacher Portfolio to determine teacher’s strengths and areas for improvement 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). 2018-19 SCEP-FL 51  The Principal of Discovery High School took the lead in disaggregating the CCSS for English and developed a long term series of professional development sessions modified for and attended by non-math subject teachers and paraprofessionals. Professional development employs multiple and diverse strategies as follows: 1) Teachers and paraprofessionals familiarize themselves with the CCSS 2) Teachers and paraprofessionals identify the skills inherent in the CCSS 3) Teachers and paraprofessionals work collaboratively to develop step-by step procedures and processes to teach students how to master the CCSS skills 4) Teachers and paraprofessionals apply the step by step procedures to selected text and further refine the processes 5) Student work is examined to determine if the procedures/processes are effective (are students able to meet the CCSS using designed procedures) and if not determine how procedures and processes may be modified. 6) Teachers employ strategies for Student Centered Learning 7) This is a recursive process. For Math: Teacher team leaders employ a similar process as above with the math department. 1) Math teachers and paraprofessionals collaborate in disaggregating the CCSS for Integrated Algebra and Geometry: 2) Skills inherent in the CCSS are identified 3) Math units of study are planned and sequenced according to the CCSS 4) The math team identifies teaching strategies based upon the standards addressed to include strategies for Student Centered Learning 5) Student work is assessed for mastery against the CCSS 6) Teachers and paraprofessionals refine strategies and methods to improve the efficacy of instructional delivery Meetings focus evidence of CCSS skills mastery as evidenced in student work. Feedback is provided and specific strategies are recommended that will support individual teachers in mastery of Danielson criteria. Teachers are encouraged to avail themselves of the expertise of their coach and/or instructional leaders when additional support is needed. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 52  3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Assessment measures are an integral part of content and skill mastery. The application of formative and summative assessments is woven into the CCSS professional development three times each week in an effort to determine if and to what degree students have acquired desired content and skills. On a day to day basis, teachers choose formative or summative assessment methods they have acquired in Professional Development based upon the content and/or skills being assessed. Assessment choices are reflected upon and receive feedback from Instructional Leaders during the twice weekly Instructional Intensive meetings. Every 6 weeks, Discovery High School implements Periodic Assessments. These are cumulative assessments designed to resemble regents tests and are based upon the content and skills covered to date. Teachers select regents multiple choice, short answer and extended response questions based upon their individually or collaboratively planned units and lessons. Discovery uses the Apperson Scantron program to generate reports on multiple choice responses which are carefully analyzed along with data from other sections of the test. Teachers identify strengths and weakness, infer reasons for both and determine what the instructional next-steps will be in order to move students closer to the learning objectives. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (SCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 53 Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Title I Part A (Basic) Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 398,642 16979 78160 0 123666 0 3,109,219 Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) Section 5 & 7 Section 5 & 7 Section 5 & 7 Section 5 & 7 Section 5 & 7 x x x x x 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 54  2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/SCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 55  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Discovery High School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Discovery High School will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 56  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 2018-19 SCEP-FL 57  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Discovery High School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum 2018-19 SCEP-FL 58  Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 59  ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; Parent/Guardian Responsibilities: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 60  ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; III. Student Responsibilities Student Responsibilities: ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 61  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): K 6 1 7 2 8 3 9 4 10 5 11 12 50 2018-19 SCEP-FL 62  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: The rationale for the Saturday Academy Program is to provide ELL's with the skills needed for language development, academic progress, success on NYSESLAT and Regents examinations and on meeting AMAOs. While students receive these skills as a part of their day school classes, the ENL teachers as well as the Instructional Coach and principal have identified kids in need of support beyond these classes. These students are invited to Saturday Academy. Discovery High School's Saturday Academy is for (50) ELL students. The grade level distribution is as follows: 9th grade (13), 10th grade (14), 11th grade (14), 12th grade(9). From these numbers 10 students will be SWD. There will be two groups of 25 students in each group. ENL and Social Studies are the subjects offered and the language of instruction will be English. The ENL class will be taught by a certified ENL Teacher and the Social Studies class will be taught by the certified Bilingual Social Studies Teacher. ENL students receive an invitation to attend. Classes meet all Saturdays ( 21-23 sessions). Each of the teachers will hold 2 sessions (9am-11am and 11am-1pm). The Academy builds on Day School instruction. The Program will run from January 2018 - until June 2019. Data used to support the program includes test results, periodic assessments analysis, Jupiter grades, teacher anecdotal information. As a part of the six time per year PAA process, teachers identify students that did not achieve mastery of specific content and skill standards based on quantitative multiple-choice test scores and qualitative essay scores. The standards not mastered by students are used as the driving factor beyond Saturday instruction. Home Language Support is provided through translations, parent outreach and literacy events. One student group will go to ENL in the am and Social Studies in the pm. The other group will have a reverse schedule, Social Studies in the am and ENL in the pm. During the day school, all ENL instruction is provided in English by the ENL teacher. Focus areas include but are not limited to differentiation and scaffolding. Weekly Professional Development sessions provide the opportunity for the ENL teacher to work alongside content area teachers, on how to incorporate ENL targeted intervention strategies, into all disciplines. With the training received in Professional Development the Bilingual teacher is also able to implement lessons that will target academic deficiencies for ELL's. The Saturday Academy will use supplemental Leveled text and classroom libraries among it's resources including picture dictionaries and home language to English dictionaries. In addition, students will read informational texts matched specifically to their lexile level and the 2018-19 SCEP-FL 63  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information standard's on which they have not reached mastery. These materials are distinct from the daily materials and curriculum used in the ESL day school classes.Each of the two teachers will hold two sessions (8:30am-11:30am) (12pm-3pm). Program records will be kept in Main office room 254. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Discovery High School has created a Professional Development Model where staff (Principal, Assistant Principal, Teachers) meets 3 times a week to develop instructional topics (core curriculum, unit plans, differentiation of instruction, formative assessments, classroom practices, lesson planning, etc.). Application of these topics are then further developed within each subgroup (by grade level, special education, ELLs). The Professional Development Model also uses an action research model to determine what current issues the students are having, ways to address these issues, and methods of monitoring and revising instructional practices to ensure that students are successfully mastering content and acquiring skills. Title III After school Professional Development sessions (17) will be held once a week beginning the week of January 5th 2017. The PD is facilitated by the Instructional Coach, Nicholas Federn. The ENL Teacher and Bilingual teacher will be paid using Title III funds. During these PD sessions, teachers and the IC will first examine written assignments from the identified sub group of ELL students in order to determine specific areas of skill deficiency and brainstorm possible reasons why these deficiencies exist. The group will then examine literature describing possible strategies to use with ELL students that have the identified areas of struggle. PD will then be provided around these strategies. As the strategies are implemented in the Saturday Academy program, student work as well as the PA data will be consistently examined for growth in the identified areas of skill deficiency. The principal, Rolando Rivera, will meet one on one with the IC for PD to provide feedback on the PD itself as well as to analyze student work and determine whether the strategies coming out of the PD are best suited to the ELL student needs. As a result of the program, ELLs' scores on assessments with regards to identified skill standards should increase over time leading to a higher lexile level as well as increased speaking and writing skills. Records will be maintained in binders in room 288. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 64  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Parental support is part of student achievement but we understand it can be difficult for TitleIII/ELL parents who do not speak or understand the English language. They can become frustrated and opt to distance themselves from the school. Discovery High School is always trying to increase parental involvement in the school, so for our TitleIII/ELL parents we have instituted the following: 1) ELL Parent Participation in Parent Association (once a month), School Leadership Team (once a month), Attendance Committee(once a month). 2) Parent Workshops ( with translation ) on computer literacy, navigating JupiterGrades (online gradebook), promotional and graduation requirements for students, the college process, curriculum informational sessions, meetings with teachers (as needed). Workshops are held weekday evenings from 5:30pm-7:30pm and or Saturdays 10am-12pm. January , 2019- "Using Jupiter Grades as a tool to assist your child". AP of Operations and teachers. February , 2019- "Spring Semester Curriculum Night". "AP of Instruction and teachers. March, 2019- " Preparing for the college application process."- Guidance Counselor and College Advisor. April , 2019- "Financial Literacy- Bank TBD" May ,2019-" Testing Time is Here"-Testing Coordinator and teachers. June , 2019- "What to Expect Next Year"-AP of Instuction and Teachers. 3) Collaboration with school based clinic (Montefiore) to provide health related information and resources to parents. Activities are planned and executed with assistance from , the Parent Coordinator Karina Sanchez, the Parent Association and school personnel. Parents are notified via SchoolMessenger using, flyers in mailings, backpacked home with students, email, and live phone calls by school personnel. Communications are translated and intrepretation is available. Records are kept by Parent Coordinator in room. 254. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 65  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Per Session Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) 12680  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 2000 Supplies and instructional materials 2018-19 SCEP-FL 66  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 10 School Name Discovery High School Borough Bronx School Number 549 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Rolando Rivera Coach type here ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Katemah Lewis Teacher/Subject Area Nicholas Federn/Social Studies Teacher/Subject Area type here Related-Service Provider Diana Chase Superintendent Carron Staple Assistant Principal Teresita Antigua Coach type here School Counselor Christine ORourke Parent Felicia Marte Parent Coordinator Karina Sanchez Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 2 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 2018-19 SCEP-FL 67  D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 442 Total number of ELLs 70 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 15.84% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 2 3 4 K Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? In September, ELL students take teacher made assessments that provide baseline data for reading, writing, speaking and listening skills. Daily formative and regular summative assessments are used to track student progress relative to learning objectives. Periodic Assessments are given every 6 weeks. Teachers analyze data to gain a deep understanding of student content and skill levels and create instructional next steps based on what the data tells them. Data provides insights on reading levels, reading comprehension, writing skills, grammar, syntax, sentence and paragraph construction as well as listening and speaking skills. Instructional next steps are based on data analysis of where students are relative to where they 2018-19 SCEP-FL 68  need to be. Instructional next steps will address all student ability levels and will inform text selection, appropriate scaffolds, student groupings and selected strategies. In the 2017 baseline, 71% of ELL's were unable to score proficient (7 out of 10 questions correct) on MC questions that required making an inference from a text. This was supported by formative assessment data that showed students had trouble making connections between texts because they struggled to make explicit meaning of the texts. I 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Professional Development workshops are conducted with ESL teachers every six weeks where the data from the above mentoned assessments are analyzed. Based on the analysis of the results, teachers develop action plans in six week cycles to target specific student language acquisition issues. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Teacher made formative and summative assessments are analyzed for short term progress. Student performance on Periodic Assessments given every 6 weeks provide indicators as to how effective ELL planning and instruction is. Regular classroom assessment in conjunction with NYSESLAT and regents exam scores reveal that our program for ELLs needs to continue our focus on the instructional delivery of lessons that address high leverage areas in need of improvement such as reading comprehension to include vocabulary development and writing to include grammar and sentence/paragraph construction. The area of need was identifed as deriving explicit meaning from a text in order to infer implicit ideas and make implicit connections between texts. sentence/paragraph construction. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? At the three week point after the Periodic Assessment, a second exam is given to ensure that the instructional interventions developed are working as planned. Adjustments are made at this point if necessary to the instructional trajectory. Teachers also use daily formative assessment practices to ensure the efficacy of interventions for ELL students. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Paste response to question here: N/A 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The patterns show that the areas of focus should be reading and writing where our students are scoring the lowest scale scores. The NYSITELL and NYSESLAT data reveals that across all grade levels, vocabulary, reading comprehension and writing are the areas with the greatest need for improvement. All three areas of need addressed above are lowest in 9 th and 10 th grade and improve as in the junior and senior years. Relative improvements occur as students move through a recursive program of vocabulary development, reading comprehension to include micro and macro understandings of text and the ability to accurately site evidence from the text to support answers to cognitively challenging questions within each students zone of proximal development. NYSITELL and NYSESLAT test assessments reveals grammar and correspondingly, proper construction of sentences and paragraphs as additional areas in need of improvement. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? At the beginning and mid point of the school year, the faculty engages in a one day data analysis inquiry meeting. Teachers analyze school wide results on outcome assessments in relation to results for ELL students. Part IV: ELL Programming 2018-19 SCEP-FL 69  Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. ELLs are grouped according to ability levels based on NYSESLAT results in homogenous classes. Entering ELL students receive required mandated units of study according to their proficiency level. Within each class students are put into sub groups for targeted small group instruction. ELL students in an integrated History section receive ENL instruction from a push-in ENL co- teacher for 48 minutes a day. b. TBE program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: n/a c. DL program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: n/a 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Commanding and Expanding students are programmed to receive 240 minutes of ENL instruction plus 240 minutes of mainstream English, Emerging and transitioning students receive 240 minutes of ENL each week. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. ELLs receive intense instruction in ENL classes around vocabulary, reading, writing and listening. Teachers of all content areas deliver content using common strategies and methodologies for teaching vocabulary, reading and writing that have been developed and practiced in professional development. All instruction is in English with home language supports as needed. This means that students receive modified text and assignments, students work individually or are paired or grouped heterogeneously or homogeneously within the class depending upon the assignment. : 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? : Current consideration is being given to the selection of a diagnostic test to assess student proficiency in their home language. Assessment data will be used to develop instruction designed to target areas of need in both language acquisition and literacy development as it relates to their English acquisition. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Students are programmed homogenously according NYSESLAT test results. For all subgroups, teachers use flexible ability groupings, modified assignments, modified texts, appropriate speech, sufficient wait time multiple entry points, modeling and various scaffolding techniques to meet the individual needs of subgroup populations. Pacing is adjusted according to ability levels. For SIFE and Newcomers they are supplied with translated materials and in class translation, if needed. Developing 2018-19 SCEP-FL 70  students are provided with English and their native language dictionaries to help them build their Tier I and Tier II vocabulary. Former ELLs and Long Term ELLs may be placed in mainstream English classes with modifications. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Teachers identify long-term learnning objectives that are broken into appropriate learning segments which are within the ZPD for ELLs who have disabilities. Learning objectives are written in clear language, pacing is adjusted accordingly, the number of items a learner completes is modified, teachers select and modify text according to reading abiliites with vocabulary supports to improve English acquisition. Repetition is frequent, methodologies are consistant and regular, assessment is used to determine where students are relative to the learning objectives. Assessment data dives instructional next step and meaningful feedback is provided. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? All teachers are provided access to student IEPs through SESIS. Teachers are encouraged to aprise themselves of the specific learning needs of each student with disabilities and modify instruction accordingly. Further support is offered by the special education coordinator and guidance counselors. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. ELLs receive modified text and assignments in ELA, Math, History and Science. Students work individually or are paired or grouped heterogeneously or homogeneously within the class depending upon the assignment. Newcomer and developing ELLs can be paired or grouped with expanding or commanding home language speakers. Periodic Assessments may be offered in home language if needed. Intervention services are offered in Spanish. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? New programs in place for ELLs include small group instruction available during Saturday School. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? No programs will be discontinued. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs are encouraged to participate in all school and after school programs. Adults and/or students who can translate language provide access to students as needed. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. ELL students are provided teacher selected text that is modified based upon student need, text books in all subject areas are available in English and Spanish, dictionaries in home languages are provided to all classes, selected students have access to Rosetta Stone. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Home language support is available to ELL students in their home langauge through the AP Spanish classes. Students are provided instruction to develop vocabulary and literacy in the form of reading comprehension, grammar and essay construction. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 71  Students are programmed according to ability level based on NYSESLAT. The English/ELL coach guides and monitors the ELL teacher in providing grade and age level appropriate resources and supports to students. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Discovery HS shares the building with other schools. Campus wide programs and activities allow for all ELL students to participate. Each school also shares their resources with other schools such as textbooks, Rosetta Stone and alternate language dictionaries. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). 1) Discovery High School hosts a new student orientation every August to welcome new students. 2) The Parent Coordinator (bilingual) calls the homes of all new students in July to introduce herself and ask if they have any questions or concerns.3) If students enroll after the start of the school year parents are invited to a meeting where they can meet their child's teachers and school staff. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Spanish and Advanced Placement Spanish 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Paste response to question here: N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? The ELL teachers participates in whole school professional development whose current focus is on the development of rigor in the classroom and effective assessments. Additionally the teacher of ELLs is informally observed twice each week and meets for two instructional intensives each week with the English coach so that ENL instruction is aligned to the English curriculum but modified for ELLs. Instructional Intensives with the English coach twice each week address curriculum development, unit plans and daily lesson plans that align are modified to meet the needs of all ELL subgroups and are aligned to Common Core Standards. Non-pedagogic personnel receive an ELL overview that describes who are ELLs? What types of ELLs are there? What mandated services do they receive? and testing protocols regarding the administration of the NYSESLAT exam. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. The ELL teacher participates in professional development sessions three times each week and meets with the English coach twice each week. English language development in alignment with core content area is addressed in three professional 2018-19 SCEP-FL 72  development seesions each week and professional development that addresses the specific needs of ELLs is addressed with the English coach twice each week. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Parents are invited to participate in School Leadership Team, Open School events, Parental Workshops/Trainings, Teacher Meetings , Annual ELL Mandated Meeting and Parent Teacher Association Meetings . Monthly meetings and additional workshops are held throughout the school Their child's progress and language development are discussed. Translation services are made available by employing in house resources. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Parental support is part of student achievement but we understand that it can be difficult for our ELL parents, who like their children, not speaking or understanding the English language, can become frustrated and opt to distance themselves from the school. Discovery High School is always trying to increase parent involvement in the school, so for our Ell parents we have instituted the following: 1) Bilingual Parent Coordinator that greets all parents upon arrival to the school and is able to direct them as need be. 2) Bilingual Secretary answers phone calls made to the school. 3) ELL parent participation in school wide decision making groups : Parent Association, School Leadership Team, Attendance Committee. 4) Jupiter Grades online grade/attendance reporting grade book offers Spanish language translation. 5) All written communications are translated. 6) Parent Workshops on computer literacy. 7) Collaboration with school based Montefiore Clinic to provide health related information and resources to parents. 8) During the Fall and Spring Parent Teacher Conferences, the ESL teacher meets with ELL parents and conducts an interview for Quality Assurance purposes and to identify the needs of parents. Needs of parents are also assessed via the learning environment surveys and discussed during meetings where parents are invited to discuss the success of our ELL students and ensure they are being given the support they need. One need we have identified is that parents would like to be able to speak English, in order to help their child and communicate better in English settings. In response to this, we are working on trying to begin Adult ESL classes (with a teacher and the assistance of software programs/Rosetta Stone) in the evenings and/or Saturdays to teach parents basic English skills. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: n/a 2018-19 SCEP-FL 73  2018-19 SCEP-FL 74 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Rolando Rivera, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 75  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Discovery High School School DBN: 10X549 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Rolando Rivera Title Principal Teresita Antigua Assistant Principal Karina Sanchez Parent Coordinator Katemah Lewis ENL/Bilingual Teacher Felicia Marte Parent Nicholas Federn/History Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Christine O'Rourke School Counselor Carron Staple Diana Chase Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Related Services Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 6/29/17 6/29/17 6/29/17 6/29/17 6/29/17 6/29/17 6/29/17 6/29/17 6/29/17 2018-19 SCEP-FL 76  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 10X549 School Name: Discovery High School Superintendent: Carron Staple The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Karina Sanchez Parent Coordinator Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. The language of the parent is determined by various sources: language noted on ATS (RAPL,RCPL) at the initial meeting at the school or via a phone conference, responses on the emergency card and through the responses of the HLIS and Parent Survey. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 77  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Afrikaans Albanian Arabic Bengali English Haitian Creole Spanish Korean Urdu Vietnamese 1 3 9 4 340 1 355 2 2 4 .14 .42 1.25 .55 47.16 .14 49.24 .28 .28 .55 1 3 9 4 334 1 360 2 3 4 .14 .42 1.25 .55 46.32 .14 49.93 .28 .42 .55 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. n/a Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families School Calendar Sept /Feb Parent Jupiter Grades tutorial and password information Sept/October/Feb Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Discovery High School uses the translated copies the DOE provides. If the translation is not available we will have it translated by translation interpretation unit or an approved vendor. If we do not have the resource to translate a document into the parents preferred language we will use language line to inform parents of upcoming events. Discovery High School uses the translated versions available through the Jupiter grades website. f the 2018-19 SCEP-FL 78  Montefiore Clinic Application Sept Promotiion in Doubt Letters Feb/June DOE generated communications Distributed when received and or instructed to do so. Meeting/Event Notices As needed Principal Letters As needed translation is not available we will have it translated by an approved vendor. Discovery High School uses the translated versions provided by Montefiore clinic. If translation is not available we will have it translated by an approved vendor. Discovery High School uses the translated copies the DOE provides. If the translation is not available we will have it translated by translation interpretation unit or by an approved vendor. Discovery High School uses the translated copies the DOE provides. If the translation is not available we will have it translated by an approved vendor. Discovery High School uses bilingual school based personnel and on the phone translation services to translate. If the translation is not available we will have it translated by an approved vendor. If we do not have the resource to translate a document into the parents preferred language we will use language line to inform parents of upcoming events. Discovery High School uses bilingual school based personnel to translate. If the translation is not available we will have it translated by translation interpretation unit or an approved vendor. n/a n/a n/a 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to 1) Parent Teacher Conferences November provide interpretation service(s)? Discovery High School uses bilingual school based personnel and telephone interpretation services if 2018-19 SCEP-FL 79 no school staff speaks the parents' preferred language. Discovery High School uses bilingual school based personnel and telephone interpretation services if no school staff speaks the parents' preferred language. 2)Parent Association Meetings September March October November December January February March April May June 3 )Meetings with school personnel (Guidance/Attendance) As needed. Discovery High School uses bilingual school based personnel and telephone interpretation services if no school staff speaks the parents' preferred language. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Discovery High School uses School Messenger to communicate with parents via phone call, email and text. Personnel will be trained on the use of Language Line's 3 way calling and will be used to assist parents for languages other than English and Spanish. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 80  After sharing information from trainings with Administration, the Language Access Coordinator will facilitate a meeting where she will to turn key the information to school staff. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) The Bill of Parent Rights and Responsibilities which identifies parent's rights with regards to translation and interpretation services is included in the student welcome back package and distributed at parent meetings throughout the school year. The Welcome Center (Main Office) will have displayed all Language Access resources (fposters, flyers, brochures. Information is shared at all parent meetings. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Currently we gather feedback from the NYC School Survey, emails from parents, Jupiter Grades communications, parent conference results, meeting minutes, and a school generated online parent survey (survey monkey). Language Line will be used for survey administration of languages besides Spanish. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 81 
