 07X600 School Name: ALFRED E. SMITH CAREER AND TECHNICAL EDUCATION HIGH SCHOOL Principal: EVAN SCHWARTZ 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 1  School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Section 4: SCEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Section 7: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 8: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 9: Title I Program Information Section 10: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Alfred E. Smith CTE High School 320700011600 9-12 School Number (DBN): 07X600 333 East 151 st Street Bronx, New York 10451 (718)993-5000 (718)292-1944 Phone Number: Evan Schwartz, Principal Fax: Eschwar2@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Email Address: Evan Schwartz Jessica Bennett Stephanie Rodriguez Pablo Muriel Stephanie Rodriguez Jazmine Moya na District Information Geographical District: 7 Richard Cintron Superintendent: 335 Adams Street Room 504 Brooklyn, NY 11201 Superintendent’s Office Address: Rcintro@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: (718)923-5124 Phone Number: 718-923-5145 Fax: FSC: Affinity Group Field Support Center (FSC) Executive Director: A. Anormaliza 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 3  Executive Director’s Office Address: 131 Livingston St., Brooklyn, NY 11201 Executive Director’s Email Address: AAnorma@schools.nyc.gov Phone Number: (718) 935-5618 Fax: (917)287-9241 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the SCEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Evan Schwartz Jessica Bennett Yoraima Rodriguez Rosa Gonzalez Leah Pride Illany Collado JazmineMoya Stephanie Rodriguez *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Teacher Member/ Member/ Parent 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Yoraima Rodriguez Leah pride Arriel Nickens Isabel Aristy Yadira Brignoni judithLauderdale Julia Raykin Member/ Parent Member/Parent Member/ Teacher Member/Teacher Member/ parent Member/ parent Member/ Teacher Member/ Member/ 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) is a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. The process of developing and implementing the SCEP is aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding SCEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and SCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 7  comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 8  Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the SCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the SCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for SCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: New this year, instead of self-rating, in Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 9  major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 5: Build consensus around activities, strategies and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 6: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 7: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 10  Section 4: SCEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? The mission of Alfred E. Smith CTE High School is to provide students with the skills necessary to pursue higher education through the introduction of carers in Automotive Technology and Graphic Arts . Students will acquire the skills and certifications needed to compete in an innovative and technical industry,. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Alfred E. Smith CTE High School is located in the hub of the South Bronx. Alfred E. Smith CTE High School is distinctive in that our school is one of the few high schools in the tri-state area where students can earn both an academic Regents diploma as well as a New York State CTE endorsement in their trade area. As students enter the 9 th grade, they receive academic support in all core subjects and begin the first year of their career and technical program. Every student at Alfred E. Smith CTE High School is assigned an adviser that supports them during their transition into high school along with our College and Career Counselor. The school leader has used strategic programming to ensure that all teachers and support staff have common planning time that enables them to discuss student progress, engage in unit study and curriculum mapping and conduct case-conferencing. A guidance counselor works with each grade team to ensure that there is an intense focus on not just the academics but the social-emotional well-being of every student. The College and Career counselor works diligently to provide opportunities for students in all grades to attend workshops and presentations from various organizations such as the armed forces, career and technical schools, and post-secondary institutions. .All academic classes will meet for 80 minutes twice a week and once on Fridays for 40 minutes. This will enable teachers to scaffold and provide varied instruction in their classroom. Extended learning time also provides opportunities to modify and differentiate learning to address students' diverse abilities. In addition, the school has continued their partnership with the community-based organization, Creative Connections. This program as well as funding that the school has secured through the School Improvement Grant has enabled us to provide after-school enrichment in the core subject areas as well as extracurricular club activities such as Dance, Wellness, Electric Car/Robotics, Film, Music Production, Open Weight, SAT Prep, Singing, /RC Racing and Career and College Readiness programs. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Currently, we have 457 students on register and our demographics include 75% Hispanic, 24% Black, Asian 1% and White 1%. Alfred E. Smith CTE High School has a population of 24% of English Language Learners and 27% of Students with Special Needs. 83 percent of our students are economically disadvantaged. Our school has been attracting high performing students for our graphic arts program. Those students along with all of our students have access to 4 AP classes and a full college Now program. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Our school has identified concise goals for the 2018-2019 school year- 90% in attendance, 83% credit accumulation and 78% graduation rate. These goals are articulated to the school community through town hall meetings, letters, flyers, posters, and the school’s website with parents, students, and major stakeholders. The principal works to hold stakeholders responsible for ensuring that they are establishing frameworks and protocols to meet these expectations. This address the specific framework of student achievement 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 11  In the area of collaboration in the Framework for Great Schools:  Teacher teams across grade levels collaborate when planning across curriculum to in an effort to meet the diverse academic styles of students. Teams meet three times a week using protocols to evaluate unit plans and assess student work.  We have a structured system for meeting in grade teams and content areas. Within the grade team meetings,  teams will analyze student work and lesson plans/unit plans using the inquiry rubrics from Equip for lessons and units of study. In an effort to ensure greater collaboration among teachers and transparency, the building leader has required all teachers to upload their unit plans onto the ATLAS online portal. This has helped teachers effectively plan units that detail the elements of what students are expected to learn, the methods that will be used during instruction, and how mastery will be determined.  The use of Board DOCS will allow teachers to monitor teacher teams and create agendas to promote student growth and build collaboration between team meetings  Attendance was addressed by continuing to monitor attendance with weekly attendance meetings conducted with the Assistant Principal, guidance counselors, and family worker. Additionally daily calls were made to absent and late students.  The advisory structure has led to a culture of trust within the school. Relationships amongst the major stakeholders of the school community is based on respect and concern for the social and emotional well-being of the students.  Professional development is targeted based on the school's vision and observation trend and most importantly, by the input from teachers in forums and surveys. Data was continually collected by looking at student report card grades, assessments in portfolios, and teacher meetings. This data helped to direct the focus of our PD. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 12  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 07X600 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 463 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual YES Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 60 55 8 5 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 17 13 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 93.0% % Attendance Rate 87.7% % Reduced Lunch 23.8% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.2% 74.3% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 1.5% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 6.25 3% 6% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 80% 41% 75.9% 0.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A NO N/A N/A NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A N/A YES Yes N/A 153 104 18 84.3% 4.8% 28.7% 22.9% 0.9% 0.4% 8 12% 9.1 N/A N/A 68% 72% 75.0% 3% N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A YES 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 13  2018-19 SCEP-SIG 14  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed X X X X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The School Leadership team demonstrated initiatives that have been established to address The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools (Rigorous Instruction, Supportive Environment, Collaborative Teachers, Effective School Leadership, Strong Family-Community Ties and Trust). In collaboration with the key stakeholders and feedback from School Receivership meeting and the School Leadership Team, the school leader identified following goals for the 2018-2019 school year and the areas of strengths that has been created to meet these goals: · 78% graduation rate in June 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 15  · 80% graduation rate in August · Increase in attendance from 85% to 90% · 84% of students earning 10 or more credits by June 2019 Additionally, the School Leadership Team made the following recommendations for improvement : 1. Create smaller classes to provide support for struggling students. 2. Contact the New York City Department of Education to provide for the placement of Absent Teacher Reserves for additional academic support until they are able to find placement in their license area. 3. Continue to implement Common Core curriculum across disciplines provide ongoing professional development through coaches from Teacher’s College, New Visions (Affinity Group), and DOE Renewal School Training. 4. Implement student portfolios in all classrooms that demonstrate evidence of text-based learning and assessment. 5. Continue to promote the social and emotional well-being of students through our guidance support team and advisory. This also includes outside referrals for families, all-girls meetings, “Curriculum Night”, peer mediation and informational meetings for parents, and outside speakers focusing on bullying. Continue to grow College and Career Program by expanding our work-based learning program and internships, College Now opportunities, and Advanced Placement courses which will include Statistics , AP Literature, AP Composition, Ap Environmental Science, and our new AP course AP Studio Art. Areas of Strengths: 1. The school leader has strategically structured the school day to ensure that teachers have common planning/meeting time to discuss student progress across grade levels, evaluate student work, and develop curriculum. 2. In September 2018, the school will maintain block scheduling to provide extended learning time for students. Research studies have shown that students outcomes will improve when they are given more time on task. 3. Teams of teachers in grade teams and content areas utilize a unit planning protocol to provide actionable feedback to teachers to ensure that all units of study and lesson plans are aligned to the common core standards. Assistant 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 16  Principals provides frequent feedback to teachers on their units and work with them to plan rigorous lessons designed to improve student outcomes. 4. All incoming 9th grade students are placed in a ELA Skills course to provide extra support in literacy skills. Research studies have shown that students are more successful on state assessments when they utilize concise literacy strategies as they complete text-based writing assignments and learning tasks. 5. The guidance and support staff have collaborated with the administrative cabinet to identify at-risk students and ensure that are receiving academic support in meeting the mandated requirements for graduation. Guidance counselors will provide workshops to students to address the social and emotional needs of our students. During these sessions, counselors review transcripts and discuss graduation requirements, official status, and credit accumulation. 6. In partnership with Creative Connections and additional funding provided by the School Improvement Grant, we will continue to provide Regents prep courses and courses for credit to aid our students in meeting state requirements for graduations. Guidance counselors will work with students and families to ensure that students who have not received a level of proficiency of 65 or higher on the core state assessments are registered for these courses. These courses are offered Mondays-Thursdays. An onsite coordinator was placed in the school beginning in September 2013, to oversee the program and she continues serve as a liaison between the organization and the school community. 7. All cohort students who fail to meet graduation requirements are placed in an intensive summer school program which will provide additional preparation for state assessments and opportunities for credit accumulation in the core subject areas. 8. Teacher Teams participate in ongoing professional development on unit planning and essential questions. These sessions have helped teachers to reflect on their pedagogy and long-term learning. 9. Teachers are encouraged by school leaders to select common-core aligned non-fiction texts to support their curriculum and promote increased use of informational texts across content areas. 10. Uniform protocols and rubrics are used in weekly Teacher Team meetings and Content-Area meetings that will be recorded using Board Docs so that the team is able to provide actionable and supportive feedback to the presenting teacher on their proposed unit plans and practices can be shared in the Board Docs across all grade teams and content teams. 11. Strategic programming by the school leader has also led to greater collaboration across disciplines and grade levels. Teachers frequently utilize the Tuning Protocol to evaluate student work to determine its alignment to the instructional shifts in the subject area and the CCLS and to inform subsequent instructional steps. 12. A New Visions supports the social studies department to implement curriculum for Grade 9 Global History and Geography along with US History. We will work closely with New Visions as we implement the new state Social Studies curriculum. This program is a common core -aligned sequence for grades 9 and grade 10 of the Global History and Geography curriculum. Teachers are given access to unit plans, lesson plans, and instructional resources including media clips, besides over-the-shoulder coaching during classroom implementation. Beginning in the spring of 2016, the grade 10 Global History and Geography teacher has introduced Google Classroom to his students to improve communication and provide actionable feedback in a timely manner. The teacher is able to monitor class discussions, and share instructional materials, videos, links, and images as the students prepare for the state assessment in Global History and Geography. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 17  13. In partnership with the 21 st Century Community Learning Centers, we have been offering the TEC Financial Management course in advisories and various math classes. In addition, the program has also extended to extracurricular activities such as the Dance, Vocal, Yugioh, Film and Music Clubs that meets two times per week. Our on site coordinator actively recruits students for these programs and monitors their progress. Datea sources to be used include Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, and NYC School Survey Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. S Our goal for the 2018-2019 school year is to increase Rigorous instruction by increasing Advanced placement class participation and increase the scores on Ap examinations. M As measured by the participation levels, AP class grades, and AP examination scores . A This will be achieved through promoting the importance of AP classes during college visits and discussions. PD provided by AP for All and College Board has been and will continue to be utilized during the year. R Students taking AP courses will increase the rigor that students need to take to be successful in their post secondary schools and/or careers T The number of students taking at least one AP course will increase by 15 percent this school year. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 18  2018-19 SCEP-SIG 19 Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Teachers and Paraprofessionals September 2018-June 2019 Assistant Principals, Instructional Coaches from Teacher’s College and New Visions for Public Schools. Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  1. By June 2019, all teachers and paraprofessionals will receive weekly professional development during grade team and content area meetings on the Danielson Model of Teacher Effectiveness, Unit Planning, and developing rigorous Common Core units that challenge and engage students. School leaders have also encouraged the staff to attend conferences both in and out of the city to enhance their professional growth. There will be a strong emphasis on creating lessons that reflect multiple entry points for students. A key initiative to implement google classroom throughout all classes will help to monitor student progress not only in one class but throughout the four year curriculum To meet of Special Needs students and ELL's teams review SESIS and NYSELAT data to inform lesson planning and scaffolded learning to address skill deficits for these students 1. The school leader has developed a system to ensure that all teachers and instructional support staff meet on a weekly basis. Research has shown that teacher collaboration is an effective tool to enhance student achievement. We have seen clear evidence that frequent interactions among the staff has changed the culture of the school and established a “learning community” that adamantly supports student progress. September 2018-June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, Teachers, Paraprofessionals, Support Staff, and Instructional Coaches. 1. Grade teams and content area teams meet twice a week to discuss student progress, monitor and revise goals, plan, and participate in professional development workshops. Target Student Population- Grades 9-12 September 2018-June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, Programming Chairperson, Grade Team Teacher Leaders, Guidance Counselors, and Support Staff Assistant Principals, Teachers, Guidance Counselors, Support Staff Although the AIS extended program is open to all students routines are put in place to monitor and ensure the participation of our special needs and ELL students. The use of attendance sheets and SKEdula roosters will be used to monitor participation Target Group- Content Area Teachers, CTE Teachers, Grade Teams and Guidance Support Staff 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 20  Prep courses and tutoring for students in need of Regents or CTE assessments (plus option) will be provided during the school day and after school throughout the school year. Conduct on going workshops for parents on various topics such as curriculum night, Financial Aid Nights, College Applications,, FAFSA, and parent conferences Parents Parents September 2018-June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The following events are planned to specifically address parental support and engagement: 1-Orientation for incoming freshmen students in July and August 2-Curriculum night in September 3-Open school evening and afternoon 4- College Workshops At all events, there will be ample time allotted to meet with parents and to provide information that will support them with their children. The language needs and understandings will be addressed through key Bilingual Staff strategically placed to meet with parents and students. Parent surveys will be given at every meeting to encourage parents ideas to be used in our planning. Prior to each event, we will remind parents of the upcoming events with our phone blasts and letters home After each event, we will survey parents to assess the effectiveness, allowing us to make adjustments where needed. Key personnel include: Bilingual Guidance counselors, Bilingual Related service providers, Bilingual Teachers in Math and ELA as well as Social Studies and Special Education. Working with all staff will be our ENL teachers and bilingulal family workers. We will include our bilingual deans (2). 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 21  Parents are notified of events in their home language through Phone messages, mailings, and student backpack letters Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Per Session and Per Diem funding for teachers and supervisors will be utilized to allow for both to attend outside workshops in targeted areas. Online instructional programs such as Atlas and New Visions curricula will be used to ensure teachers are aligning unit plans to the state standards. Coaches from Teachers College will continue to work with and support all academic disciplines infusing writing strategies Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded X P/F Set-aside SIG Grant X 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, an analysis of AP courses class grades to determine the success the students are having in their courses. Regular meetings with AP teachers, the guidance counselors, and administration will be scheduled to monitor student progress and address any concerns regarding student achievement. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Baseline, predictive assessments, and Mock Regents examination data will be reviewed to measure student progress. The use of google classroom as a tool to measure and store assessments will be used throughout all classes Also we utilize the New Vision Data portal Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 22  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. X X X X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? ● High expectations—that is, 90-83-80 in the areas of attendance, credit accumulation and graduation rate are communicated to students and families on a regular basis. The school's goal is to increase the number of students with 90% attendance by 5%. To ensure that the school is maintaining good attendance, we have attendance support staff that makes daily phone calls home, provide access to the online system Skedula for parents and students, send letters home, conduct home visits, and have regular guidance intervention meetings. The parent coordinator as well as the guidance counselors is used to help build our partnerships with our student families by hosting regular meeting and workshops. In addition, each teacher is assigned a daily attendance roster. At the end of each day, a new attendance sheet is placed in the teacher’s folder. The attendance sheets are scanned on a daily basis and attendance percentages are posted outside of the attendance office. A PRUR report is produced daily to determine missing attendance data. ● Grade teams, guidance counselors and student advisers consistently monitor the 90-83-80 school goals during advisory classes daily. Data sources from student scholarship, attendance, and monitoring credit accumulation are accessed through Skedula and the New Visions Student Sorter . 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 23  ● Awards ceremonies and celebrations are held at the end of each marking period for honor roll, Principal's honor roll, attendance, and most improved students. Students have received recognition awards from the CTE Industry partners and are acknowledged in town hall meetings. ● High expectations in our academics is communicated through our commitment to hosting College and Career fairs, outside trips to Colleges and Secondary training schools, creation of Advanced Placement, honors, and College Now courses. These commitments are celebrated through award ceremonies, induction into the National Honor society and SkillsUSA. ● As a CTE school, the College and Career readiness component is especially important to our culture. We have a created a culture of all students striving for college and career readiness by emphasizing the importance of meeting the state scores necessary to be considered College ready. Students are tested and re-tested until they meet this goal. Incoming 9 th graders are given a college and career survey which helps to guide students guide students on an appropriate college and career pathway. ● We have created a dedicated College and Career office with a full time counselor to focus not just on college placement but on career placements In addition, the college and career counselor also works closely with the armed forces, trade unions, and Secondary Technical schools to expand our students options for post-secondary plans . Our priority is to continue the implementation of Google classroom and digital portfolios in all classes. This is based on our data analysis that the trend reveals students continue to need support on writing on State Assessments and school based tasks Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools –Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be a 4 % increase in whole school attendance rate as measured by the school’s Annual Attendance Report. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 24  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Assistant Principal/Organization, Administration, Attendance Support Staff, Guidance Counselors, Teachers Grades 9-12 September 2018-June 2019  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). .The Assistant Principal/Organization and the Attendance Committee will organize award ceremonies at the end of each marking period. The names of students who have perfect attendance with no cuts are displayed on the attendance bulletin board in the main hallway. In addition, students are given a "dress down" day the second Friday of every month and given special wristbands to indicate that they had perfect attendance for the previous month. An absent list is generated everyday by 12 pm. The family worker and attendance office call homes of absent students on a daily basis. Parents of students with excess absences will be asked to come to school for a meeting with the AP and guidance counselor. The Single Shepard Counselor will be working specifically with students with attendance issues. The counselor will meet with the student, call home, and conduct home visits if necessary na na na 3b – Parent and Family Engagement na na na na na na na na na How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. The following events are planned to specifically address parental support and engagement: 1-Orientation for incoming freshmen students in July and August 2-Curriculum night in September 3-Open school evening and afternoon 4- College Workshops 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 25  At all events, there will be ample time allotted to meet with parents and to provide information that will support them with their children. The language needs and understandings will be addressed through key Bilingual Staff strategically placed to meet with parents and students Prior to each event, we will remind parents of the upcoming events with our phone blasts and letters home After each event, we will survey parents to assess the effectiveness, allowing us to make adjustments where needed. Key personnel include: Bilingual Guidance counselors, Bilingual Related service providers, Bilingual Teachers in Math and ELA as well as Social Studies and Special Education. Working with all staff will be our ENL teachers and bilingulal family workers. We will include our bilingual deans (2). Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Funding will be used to provide AIS services such as hiring a full time family workers dedicated to attendance. Funding will be used to provide incentives and celebrations for students and parents with great attendance. Per session for family workers, supervisors, and teachers will be used for after school and evening outreach to parents. Our current IEP teacher will address Academic Intervention Services to all students, to be implemented in small groups of students using a pull-out and/or push-in methodology. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded X P/F Set-aside SIG Grant X 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, we will review all attendance data and evaluate our progress in comparison to 2017-2018 to determine our ability to reach a 90% attendance rate by the 2018-2019 school year. A mid-year benchmark of 86 percent will be needed to reach our goal of 90 % by June. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Daily attendance reports, daily cut sheets, monthly par reports, and agendas from attendance meetings will be used to measure student progress. These reports are genertaed from ATS, CASS, and New vision data portal Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 26  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. SOP(s) Addressed x x x 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. x 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. ● By focusing on the CCLS and Danielson’s Domains 1 and 3, teachers have developed and implemented units of study and lessons where students work in groups and are engaged in meaningful discussions. These practices enable students to be accountable for their own learning. Moreover, students have opportunities to work in groups on various tasks differentiated for their learning needs. ● Teachers use data in team meetings to frame multiple entry points such as turn and talk, various groupings of students, questioning for engagement, station teaching to support student progress and give them additional opportunities to comprehend the learning material being taught. ● Socratic seminars are used in ELA and social studies classes to enhance the level of inquiry in academic classes. Students are asked a series of open-ended questions within the context of the class discussion based on text-based information. Social Studies teachers implement debate to reinforce topics throughout the curriculum. In Math classes students are encourages to evaluate solutions and defend their assessments of these processes, both verbally and in writing. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 27  ● Argumentative writing tasks are will be utilized in all disciplines to allows students to think critically and articulate themselves better during class discussions. ● Teachers use data from IEPs, SKEDULA, ELL data, as well as formative and summative assessments to develop learning goals for students and drive instruction. ● Teachers are provided technology to enhance instruction. All classrooms are equipped with Smart Boards and laptop/iPad carts are available to provide multiple entry points for students. ● Special Education teachers meet consistently with General Education teachers in an effort to modify curriculum and to ensure adaptations are being made to scaffold instruction with graphic organizers, etc., enabling ICT teachers to set learning goals for students with disabilities. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. S By June 2019,through meetings three times a week, all 4 grade teams will conduct unit and lesson plan inquiry to ensure that units are aligned with the Common Core Learning Standards M Measured by the use of Atlas which captures all unit plans, minutes that address plans on how to impact student learning through discussions in team meetings A This will be achieved the use of team meetings and the observation process R Unit planning directly impacts teaching and learning in the classroom T This will occur throughout the school year and bu attending bi-weekly meetings of all teacher grade teams 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 28  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) na September 2018-June 2019 Teachers, Assistant Principals, School Leader, Instructional Coaches na Teachers Assistant Principals  Evidence-based instructional  programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). na 100% of our teachers are engaged have received training in ATLAS, on online curriculum mapping system. Teachers upload their unit plans on ATLAS at the beginning of each month or at the end of their units. Assistant Principals provides actionable feedback to teachers and offers support in planning and preparation. Professional development occurs through out of school PD provided by New visions and the DOE. PD is also provided by exemplar units shared in team meetings. The school leader and administrative cabinet will be conducting observation cycles with all teachers. Teachers will receive a minimum of one observation each marking period. Observation trends will be monitored to provide support to pedagogues during professional development sessions. Teachers, Assistant Principals, School Leader, Instructional Coaches September 2018-June 2019 Teachers, Assistant Principals, School Leader, Instructional Coaches na na na na 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The following events are planned to specifically address parental support and engagement: 1-Orientation for incoming freshmen students in July and August 2-Curriculum night in September 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 29  3-Open school evening and afternoon 4- College Workshops At all events, there will be ample time allotted to meet with parents and to provide information that will support them with their children. The language needs and understandings will be addressed through key Bilingual Staff strategically placed to meet with parents and students Prior to each event, we will remind parents of the upcoming events with our phone blasts and letters home After each event, we will survey parents to assess the effectiveness, allowing us to make adjustments where needed. Key personnel include: Bilingual Guidance counselors, Bilingual Related service providers, Bilingual Teachers in Math and ELA as well as Social Studies and Special Education. Working with all staff will be our ENL teachers and bilingulal family workers. We will include our bilingual deans (2). Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We will be utilizing SIG grant funds, Title I Funding, and Tax levy funding to provide Learning Partner visits in order to provide common themed schools in Affinity Group, AIS services such as coaches to provide professional development,instructional support and lesson plan inquiry. Skedula and Atlas are programs we purchases to provide access to student data to be used by all teachers. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded X X P/F Set-aside SIG Grant X 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By September 2018, all unit plans will be posted in the ATLAS portal for the first semester of the 2018-2019 school year. This will allow us to see the number of unit plans in posted in the ATLAS portal and allow for teachers and administrators to help edit and review to allow for high quality unit plans aligned with the common core. Atlas will help us measure the number of tecahers with unit plans and the quality of those plans that can be shared with the school community Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance reports documenting teacher evaluation in regard to domains 1 and 3 will be used to measure effectiveness. Atlas will provide access to all teacher units of study. Teacher videos to demonstrate the use of Danielson will be used in school provided PD. Additionally, we have brought on a PCT to work with the teachers on the use of Google classroom. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 30  Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 31  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). x x x x SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. ● The school has implemented the use of ATLAS, an online curriculum mapping system. . This system provides support, resources, and a vast variety of CCLS and content standards designed to ensure that all course materials is aligned to the New York State CCLS and instructional shifts. School leaders have also had Instructional Coaches from Teacher’s College work directly with our ELA and Social Studies teachers during special professional development sessions. These facilitators have worked diligently with individual teachers and small groups of teachers to ensure that they understand the essential strategies needed to improve student outcomes through standards-based learning and formative and summative assessments. ● Teacher Teams are participating in ongoing PD on unit planning and essential questions. These sessions have helped teachers to reflect on their pedagogy and long-term learning.  Teachers were encouraged by school leaders to select CCLS aligned non-fiction texts to support their curriculum and promote increased use of informational texts across content areas. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 32  ● Protocols and rubrics are used in weekly Teacher Team meetings and Content-Area meetings to record notes and ideas so that the team is able to provide actionable and supportive feedback to the presenting teacher on their proposed unit plans. ● Strategic programming by the school leader has also led to greater collaboration across disciplines and grade levels. Teachers frequently utilize the Tuning Protocol to evaluate student work to determine its alignment to the instructional shifts in the subject area and the CCLS and to inform subsequent instructional steps. Specifically the ELA team is working toward vertical alignment with annotation, vocabulary, and writing prompts. ● A New Visions Instructional Coach supports the social studies department to implement curriculum for Grade 9 Global History and Geography. This program is a CCLS-aligned sequence for grade 9 and will eventually include year 2 of the Global History and Geography curriculum. Teachers are given access to unit plans, lesson plans, and instructional resources including media clips, besides over-the-shoulder coaching during classroom implementation. ● Teachers use data to inform groupings in classes to include IEP’s, student scholarship, NYSESLAT data, New Visions Student Sorter in an effort to differentiate instruction. ● Teachers are diving deeper into the CCLS and content standards as well as skills students need to master in order to plan more thoughtfully to ensure students attain this mastery. Grade level teams provide opportunities to share best practices designed to improve student outcomes. The sharing of best practices for project based learning school wide has increased as teacher teams set goals. ● Administrators will review the classroom observation trends observed from the first cycle of observations to determine areas of support needed by the end of the first marking period. All CTE courses will continue to focus on writing aligned with CCLS and to work collaboratively with all academic disciplines examining student work. The use of Google DOCS will allow teachers to monitor teacher teams and create agendas to promote student growth and build collaboration between team meetings Data sources used will be Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, and NYC School Survey Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART– Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Through monitoring student progress based on January Regents data and assigning academic intervention plans accordingly, the College and Career Readiness Index (CRI) will increase to 40% by June 2019 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 33  2018-19 SCEP-SIG 34  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). All teachers will have curriculum that is aligned to the Common Core and engages students in text-based evidence activities that are designed to improve student outcomes on state assessments. AIS will be provided for all students both during the school day, as well as extended day programs of tutoring and after school services. Students will continue to be supported until reading the college and career in the respective benchmarks in ELA and Math. Re-testing will occur until students have reached their college and career readiness standard. Through college access for all we will promote AP classes and rigorous content. PD is provided though a PCT through C4All na 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Grades 9-12 September 2018-June 2019 Assistant Principal/Teachers and Support Staff Grades 9-12 September 2018-June 2019 Assistant Principal/Teachers and staff Grades 9-12 September 2018-June 2019 Teachers na na na How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The following events are planned to specifically address parental support and engagement: 1-Orientation for incoming freshmen students in July and August 2-Curriculum night in September 3-Open school evening and afternoon 4- College Workshops At these parents events students are engaged to offer time for parents to give feedback to parent leaders and school administration. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 35  At all events, there will be ample time allotted to meet with parents and to provide information that will support them with their children. The language needs and understandings will be addressed through key bi-lingual Staff strategically placed to meet with parents and students Prior to each event, we will remind parents of the upcoming events with our phone blasts and letters home After each event, we will survey parents to assess the effectiveness, allowing us to make adjustments where needed. Key personnel include: Bilingual Guidance counselors, bi-lingual Related service providers, bi-lingual Teachers in Math and ELA as well as Social Studies and Special Education. Working with all staff will be our ENL teachers and bi-lingual family workers. We will include our bilingual deans (2). Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Funding will be used to provide AIS services after school for tutoring and "for credit" classes. DOE funding is provided for an IEP Teacher to provide push in AIS services for all students. Skedula, Board Docs, and Atlas are programs we purchases to provide access to student data to be used by all teachers. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded X P/F Set-aside SIG Grant X 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, all students will take a mock Regents examination in all ELA and Math to determine their readiness for the state assessment in the subject area. Item analysis will be conducted on all assessments to identify the areas of strengths and weakness for students and to drive instruction. Specific All students will take mock regents Measurable Assessment scores are placed in skedula to monitor all students progress Actionable All students will participate in a mock regents exam Realistic All students that are regularly attending will take exam during regular class to ensure maximum participation Timetable Completed by February 2019 Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 36  Item analysis from mock regents and baselines assessment will be used to measure progress. Student portfolios consisting of a minimum of two text based evidenced documents per marking period will also be used to measure performance and college and career readiness. These assessments are formative assessments such as examinations, projects, science labs, and school based projects. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 37  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment  Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. x x x x SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1-Strengths: A working AIS program has been well established due to SIG funding over the past four years. We provide AIS support for all students, specifically, students with special needs, Bilingual Students and seniors not yet making career and college readiness benchmarks 2 -Our priority is for all students with IEPs and English Language Learners to not only reach Regent Diploma requirements, but to meet college and career readiness benchmarks asoutline by the CRI We will use the following data sources ntegrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, and NYC School Survey. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 38  identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. S By June 2019, the school will have continued to build collaborative partnerships with families and community organizations M As measured by the number of participants at parent teacher meetings and workshops increasing by 20 percent A This will be achieved by increasing outreach to all students and parents R Increased parent engagement will help to achieve better student outcomes by providing information and PD to parents to assist their children T At least one parent activity a month will be planned. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 39  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). The school leader ensures that all correspondence to parents and guardians are translated in their native language. Guidance Counselors and support staff frequently meet with parents to keep them informed of the progress of their child and provide support as necessary. Parents and Guardians September 2018-June 2019 The newly hired Parent Coordinator makes initial contact with all parents that enter the school building to ensure that their needs are addressed. Parents and Guardians Parent workshops are organized by the School Leader, Parent Coordinator and 21st Century Partners to promote the social and emotional well-being of students. Parent and Guardians September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) School Leader, Administrators, Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselors, Support Staff Parent Coordinator, School Leader, and Administrators School Leader, Administrators, Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselors, Support Staff Workshops such as financial aid, college workshops and curriculum workshops Specific workshops for our Spanish speaking parents are provided at all PD's Parents September 2018-June 2019 Parent coordinator and 21st century coordinator 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. The following events are planned to specifically address parental support and engagement: 1-Orientation for incoming freshmen students in July and August 2-Curriculum night in September 3-Open school evening and afternoon 4- College Workshops %. PA meetings that encourage parent networking 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 40  At all events, there will be ample time allotted to meet with parents and to provide information that will support them with their children. The language needs and understandings will be addressed through key Bilingual Staff strategically placed to meet with parents and students At these parents events students are engaged to offer time for parents to give feedback to parent leaders and school administration. Prior to each event, we will remind parents of the upcoming events with our phone blasts and letters home After each event, we will survey parents to assess the effectiveness, allowing us to make adjustments where needed. Key personnel include: Bilingual Guidance counselors, Bilingual Related service providers, Bilingual Teachers in Math and ELA as well as Social Studies and Special Education. Working with all staff will be our ENL teachers and bilingual family workers. We will include our bilingual deans (2). Parents are encouraged to use of community partners for assistance. Some examples are Jacobi Medical Center,Covenant House, The Samaritans (suicide prevention), Safe Horizon, and NYC Youth line. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Funding will be used to provide resources for parents meetings and family nights. Per session will be used for teachers, family workers, and supervisors to increase family and community engagement. 21C Grant Money will be used to provide workshops specifically to address college and career readiness. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded X X P/F Set-aside SIG Grant X 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, we will review our goal of having at least one workshop per month on college readiness, social and emotional needs, and other topics related to the needs of our families. We expect to have held a minimum of 5 parent workshops by February 1, 2019. This will allow us to reach our goal to reach out to the community and parents regarding the importance of college readiness. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Using the online platform of Board Docs, Minutes and agendas from school leadership team meetings and parent workshops can be accessed and reviewed. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 41  Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 42  Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Program Description Directions: Expanded Learning Time activities are directly aligned to the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, Rigorous Instruction, Supportive Environment, and Strong Family and Community Ties. ELT provides enriching educational experiences that happen outside of the traditional school day and blend skill acquisition, relationship-building and fun to foster academic and social-emotional growth. Summer learning, afterschool programming, and extended-day ELT models, when well-implemented, play a critical role in supporting students in all grades and ensuring that they graduate from high school, college and career ready. SED requires that Priority schools offer a minimum of 200 additional student contact hours as Expanded Learning Time in addition to the current mandated length of 900 hours of instruction per year (25 hours per week) in grades K-6 and 990 hours of instruction per year (27.5 hours per week) in grades 7-12. Effective ELT models will blend school staff with community partners, and will provide a balanced curriculum that can include ELA, Math, STEM, arts, physical activity, and leadership development. Complete the sections on this page to demonstrate how the school will meet these requirements. Part 1 – ELT Program Goal(s) Describe the summative goal(s) of the ELT program for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. Specific Beginning in 2013, Alfred E. Smith CTE High School, was awarded a 21st Century Community Learning Centers (21st CCLC) grant and a state improvement grant. These grants made it possible for schools to provide a wide range of services to our school community. Our Goals include having 100% of students in grades 9 through 11 to have access to the extended learning time to expand the school day in order to ensure an increase in credit accumulation and to keep students on track toward meeting graduation requirements for a CTE diploma, which requires an additional 9 credits above a Regents diploma. Measurable After school attendance logs and students programs will allow us use to measure the number of students participating and benefiting from ELT Achievable Students are programmed for ELT and are participating Realistic All students in the school have been programmed from ELT since they were in the 9th grade. Students see the ELT time as part of their normal school day Time Bound All students begin ELT at the start of the school year 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 43  Part 2 – ELT Program Type Is the ELT program voluntary or compulsory? Voluntary X Compulsory If the ELT program is voluntary, indicate how you will actively encourage the participation of all students, with the goal of serving at least 50% of students. Although we have a compulsory extended day we also have a voluntary ELT program. Students are encouraged to enroll in after school clubs in association with our 21 st Century Grant Coordinator and Partners, and we additionally offer tutoring and credit bearing courses to help us meet our goals for credit accumulation and graduation. Part 3 – ELT Program Description Target Population: The ELT program will be offered to all students in the school, with the goal of serving a minimum of fifty percent of students. Describe how the school will meet the following SED requirements for an ELT program in a Priority School:  Integrate academics, enrichment, and skill development through hands-on experiences that make learning relevant and engaging.  Offer a range of activities that capture student interest and strengthen student engagement in learning so as to promote higher attendance, reduce risk for retention or drop out, and increase the likelihood of graduation.  Actively address the unique learning needs and interests of all types of students, especially those who may benefit from approaches and experiences not offered in the traditional classroom setting.  Contain components designed to improve student academic, social, and emotional outcomes, including opportunities for enrichment programs such as in music and art.  Ensure instruction in any core academic subject offered in the program will be delivered under the supervision of a teacher who is NYS certified in that particular content area.  Engage in outreach activities made to families. We are positioned to have increased enrollment due to the inclusion of our Career and Technical Education (CTE) programs offering hands on performance tasks, high interest and career/college readiness allowing students to enter the work force through offered internships and job placement opportunities. Since 2013, the Program Manager has been positioned at the school Mondays through Friday. Because the funding comes from the U.S. Department of Education and issued by New York State, there are observations conducted two to three times a year to ensure that all programs detailed in the grant are provided to the students and families. Students receive additional academic support, college and career readiness training and multiple opportunities to study dance, music, fitness, entrepreneurship and technology. Part 4 – ELT Program Implementation and Oversight Part 4a. Who will implement the ELT program? Who will oversee the program? 1. Indicate the key personnel that will be responsible for implementing and overseeing the ELT program, including school-based staff and any high-quality community partners that will be involved. If applicable, describe the scope of involvement of all community partners and how the joint ELT program is structured. 2. 3. Explain how you will evaluate the program to assess impact on student achievement. Our 21 st Century Grant Coordinator keeps record of all attendance and monitors students participation in the after school program supported by Vision Ed and Creative Connections. The Assistant Principal of Organization oversees attendance to include students who may be late or early and may not be benefiting from the extended day programs. The Program Manager works with school personnel to monitor the student participation and effectiveness of each program through observations, scholarship reports and feedback from the school community. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 44  Part 4b. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. By the second week of September, we are fully incorporating the programs and we finish in mid June, in order to support Regents prep coursework at the end of the school year. Academic enrichment and Regents prep classes are being developed in all core subject areas. Part 5 – ELT Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the ELT program. Teachers involved in the ELT Program include our physical education teachers, core subject teachers and CTE teachers in auto and graphic design. Teachers are either compensated for extended time or incorporated into their regular work day. Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support the ELT Program. Note: If the program is funded by 21st Century Community Center Learning Funds, it must be offered in conjunction with a high quality, high capacity community partner. X 21st Century Title I 1003(a) X X Tax Levy X Title III Title I SWP PTA Funded Title I TA X P/F Set-aside SIG Grant School X Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 6 – ELT Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. At the end of the first semester we will review overall attendance and scholarship data before making adjustments/additions or changes. The school leader and the key stakeholders will also review data from state assessments in January 2019 to evaluate the effectiveness of enrichment courses. This will allow us to monitor our goal of all students participating in ELT Part 6b. Indicate the instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. A combination of SKEDULA progress reports, STARS scholarship reports, After School Attendance Reports and ATS attendance reports and Teacher Team anecdotal reports. Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 45  Section 7: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Skill levels falling below grade level with instructional strategies in place/without improved results Skill levels falling below grade level with instructional strategies in place/without improved results Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Increased scaffold within lessons, performance assessing with graphic organizers/rubrics and use of ACHIEVE 3000 differentiated readings/writings to support improved outcomes Increased scaffold within lessons, performance assessing with graphic organizers/rubrics Student’s inability to maintain pace and complete work with labs on time/falling behind with no attempts to get back on track Organized sessions that focus on concise steps to complete work with the help of graphic organizers/rubrics Skill levels falling below grade level with instructional strategies in place/without improved results Increased scaffold within lessons, performance assessing with graphic organizers/rubrics Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Smaller group setting for 30 minute intervals and/or extended learning time with one-on-one sessions conducted in concert with our DOE funded IEPteacher During the school day during advisory or lunch and learn one on one sessions: after school for periods 9 & 10 for small group intensives Smaller group setting for 30 minute intervals and/or extended learning time with one-on-one sessionsconducted in concert with our DOE fundedIEPteacher Smaller group setting for 30 minute intervals and/or extended learning time with one-on-one sessionsconducted in concert with our DOE fundedIEPteacher Smaller group setting for 30 minute intervals and/or extended learning time with one-on-one sessionsconducted in concert with our DOE fundedIEPteacher During the school day during advisory or lunch and learn one on one sessions: after school for periods 9 & 10 for small group intensives During the school day during advisory or lunch and learn one on one sessions: after school for periods 9 & 10 for small group intensives During the school day during advisory or lunch and learn one on one sessions: after school for periods 9 & 10 for small group intensives 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 46 At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Students in crisis meet with either one or all of the following: guidance counselor, school social worker or school psychologist for a period of instruction on an as needed basis, particularly if in crisis. Teacher teams alert guidance of the student(s) at risk and steps are then followed to address and support the student(s Students in crisis meet with their guidance counselor, school social worker or school psychologist for a period of instruction on an as needed basis, particularly if in crisis. Session focus on student need with organized goal or set of goals to progress. Students at risk initially meet individually with school staff. Small groups can be created to address similar challenges as research indicates students learn from one another and form relationships that promote Meetings with school staff can be daily, bi-weekly, or weekly for one period of instruction during the school day. Additional services can be provided off campus with school community based partners for student and family. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 47  Section 8: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 38 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Students in temporary housing receive referrals to outside agencies as needed. Students are provided with the required uniforms for shops, Physical Education, and school uniform in addition, students are provided with book bags that contain needed school supplies such as notebooks, pencils, pens, etc. Metro cards are provided for parents in order to attend school meetings and conferences. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). n/a 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 48  n/a 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. n/a 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 49  Section 9: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Alfred E Smith CTE High School's goal is to have all Highly Qualified Teachers in all content areas as well as in the Career and Technical Education Components. In order to meet this goal, we recruit at fairs for any positions that are open as provided by our Affinity Group Support, New Visions for public schools. We also reach out to local universities, such as Columbia University, through our ELA and Social Studies Coaches, as well as City College, Hofstra University and Barnard University. To maintain retention, we provide mentoring throughout the first year of teaching, provide on site and off site professional development in content areas and in pedagogy, encourage classroom visits on site as well as with other high schools and last but not least, we provide targeted feedback and offer support during cycles of observation using the Danielson Framework. Teachers' assignments are planned according to licensing. We carefully align instructional needs of our students across grade levels with corresponding teachers and provide morning meetings for collaboration both in grade teams and vertical content teams. Support is ongoing and consistent. Teachers are frequently surveyed to determine areas in need of support, topics for professional development as well as being encouraged to facilitate professional development around topics they would like to highlight and share with their peers. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Teachers meet two times per week for 45 minutes in grade teams and one time per week for 45 minutes in content areas. Additionally, full faculty professional development is held two times per month for one hour. During NYC all staff professional development days, topics are explored to address Common Core learning standards and all teachers receive professional development in ATLAS software to communicate their units of study and to share best practices. Professional development will be offered by content. New Visions provide PD for common core aligned curriculum for Social Studies, Math, and Science. The Affinity group will provide FBA/BIP training and Special Education and ICT teaching PD opportunities. Part 3: TA Schools Only 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 50  3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. NA 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). NA Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). Not Applicable 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. A PD committee comprised of teachers and school administration will focus on the use of assessments and types by content. Teachers utilize a common assessment based on text based evidence documents. Each teacher maintains a portfolio with at least 2 TBE documents per marking period. These outcomes are examined in team teacher meetings using collaborative assessment protocols. ELA Utilize the NYCDOE performance based assessments at grade level. All content areas use regent aligned assessments and results. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (SCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 51  Title I Part A (Basic) Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal 429,149 0 13,518.00 0 3,928,420.00 Tax Levy (FSF) Local x x x Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Sections 5A,5B, 6, 7 Section 7 Sections 5A,5B, 5C, 6, 7 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/SCEP. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 52   Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 53  Section 10: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent Involvement Policy Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Alfred E. Smith CTE HS, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. Alfred E Smith CTE HS will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 54  ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 55  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact School-Parent Compact (SPC) Alfred E. Smith HS , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 56  School Responsibilities I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 57  ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; Parent/Guardian Responsibilities: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 58  ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 59  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 60  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Student data reveal our students struggle with English Language Arts and Social Studies curricula. Prior to the start of the regular school day, students that are at the Commanding Proficiency Level meet for 45 minutes on Monday through Thursdays with both ENL teachers in separate classrooms.. For the current school year, students are receiving additional support in these areas with after school tutoring every Tuesday and Thursday from 2:50 to 3:30 for all content areas, beginning September 11, 2018 and ending June 2019, with a focus on vocabulary and essay development - writing aligned with Common Core Learning Standards, incorporating supporting evidence from supplementary text with graphic organizers and rubrics to include strategies for scaffolds and differentiation. Our ELA Performance Assessments and NYSESLAT results data reveal significant gains in writing when comparing results from 2016 to 2018 in writing. For example the average gain in writing was 4 points improvement in the writing component and in ELA Performance Assessments, the data was compared from the baseline assessments and end of year with data revealing improvements in length of essay, conventions of language, incorporation of textual evidence and fewer spelling errors. Students are served in free standing ENL classes with additional support in Mathematics and Social Studies on Tuesdays and Thursdays fro m 2:50 to 4 pm with the Instruction provided by a combination of ENL certified teachers, Ms. Medina and Ms.Cirasella and NLA teacher, Ms. Rendon (dually certified in NLA and Social Studies). Bilingual mathematics, Mr. Banuelos (dually certified) and social studies teacher Mr. Muriel (Bilingual extension) meet to co-plan with ENL and NLA teachers on Tuesdays and Thursdays between 8:10 to 8:49 that proffers Materials provided to students in English with support in native language as needed. During the 2017-2018 school year, one new Bilingual Special Education Teacher was hired and he is also participating in tutoring, planning and working one on one with students as needed. The incorporation of supporting materials such as classroom libraries and technology support through iPads and chromebooks in each classroom are provided with additional materials utilizing Kate Kinsella's high utility vocabulary workbooks. Tutoring in Living Environment will continue to take place beginning September, 2018 on Tuesdays and Wednesdays from 2:50 to 4:30 to prepare English Language Learners for the Regents Exam and improve outcomes in class. This class will continue throughout the school year through June 2019. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 61  Part C: Professional Development Begin description here: Each session is a full day of professional development and classroom support, using data to analyze student movement and seeking trends that inform pedagogical improvements and alignment with common core standards. ELL data is examined and discussed during Morning meetings three times weekly during team meetings (45 minutes each meeting) to include all teachers, both in content areas (Wednesdays) and grade teams (Monday/Friday). During full faculty conferences monthly (one hour in duration), ELL strategies that are considered best practices are discussed with ongoing professional development provided. Throughout the school year. With regard to differentiation, ATLAS training and unit planning are consistently provided to teachers by Assistant Principals in PD meetings for content areas on Wednesdays. For the current school year we are additionally supported by our support partner, New Visions, with targeted support for Social Studies and Science teachers, for full day sessions four times per year by their talent coaches at the New Visions site. ELA curriculum was rolling out curriculum that will be ready for the 2018-2019 school year. Their professional development will take place quarterly throughout the school year, the first held on August 21-24th 2018, with upcoming dates to be announced. There is no cost for the PD for the upcoming school year. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Parent Association Meetings and orientation meetings provide opportunities for parents/guardians to receive materials in regard to LEP programs and instruction across all content areas. There are scheduled meetings prior to standarized exams in January and June for Parents, with translation provided in native language. Parent workshops: 10/9/2018-Financial Aid applications, 11/20/2018-Financial Aid application process and applying to college, 12/10/2018-Cultural diversity,2/26/2019 credit and banking workshop, 3/26/2019-Gang awareness, 4/9/2019 Art Awareness & 5/14/2019-Annual celebration of culture. Each workshop will be 2 hours in duration facilitated by Judith Rudge, Creative Connections Success Coach at no extra cost to Title III.. Notification to parents/guardians will be provided through phone messages in both languages, letters to home, and home visits when needed. A variety of speakers will be incorporated through the efforts of our APO, Ms. Arroyo and Guidance Staff. ENL teachers, Ms. Medina and Ms. Cirasella, along with Bilingual teachers, Mr. Banuelos and Bilingual Special Education teachers, Mr. Vizcaino and Ms. Velazquez and Spanish Teacher, Ms. Rendon will support staff and provide additional support to our families for translation services. Our first parent meeting will be held September 26, 2018, with "curriculum night" as the focus with all teachers present and offering course syllabus and expectations for our students. The second session will be held on Open School night, November 28, 2018 and Afternoon,November 29, 2018 with both sessions lasting 3 hours. All staff is expected to be present to provide answers to parents' questions. During all sessions, to include all our families language needs, our school aides that include Diana Rivera, Rosa Vega, Rosa Gonzalez and paraprofessionals Elena Cardenas and S. Barbosa provide any translation at no extra cost to TITLE III, that may be needed for teachers and staff that are not bilingual. Our bilingual teachers 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 62 Part D: Parental Engagement Activities and ESN teachers are always ready to provide assistance as needed and it should be noted that at this time, continuation letters are accepted from parents who may not have returned them. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) 12366  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. ENL teachers provides supplemental instruction and tutoring before the start of the students school day. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 63  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 7 School Name Alfred E. Smith CTE High School Borough Bronx School Number 600 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Evan Schwartz Coach Laura Rigolosi ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Phedra Medina Teacher/Subject Area Gabriella Cirasella/ENL Teacher/Subject Area Y. Velazquez, Bilingual SE Related-Service Provider Ivette Lopez/S&L Related Servi Superintendent Juan Mendez Assistant Principal Barbara Roman Coach n/a School Counselor Nuris Pimentel Parent Lizette Diaz Parent Coordinator Annette Villafana Field Support Center Staff Member Ana Vasquez Other (Name and Title) Salvatore Banuelos, Teacher C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 1 1 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 1 2 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 5 0 D. Student Demographics 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 64  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 453 Total number of ELLs 108 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 23.84% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 2 3 4 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 0 0 0 0 9 22 22 22 66 10 10 10 10 30 11 12 0 0 Tot # 32 32 32 0 0 0 96 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? As a high school, when receiving students, we use the ELA proficiency and performance levels given in grade 8 along with the Reading scores from the NYSESLAT. This data allows us to program students for September. Once classes begin, we assess using a baseline assessment and determine reading levels using lexile results. This past school year, 36 students were programmed together in an additional ESL setting in order to utilize ACHIEVE 3000 and ELA supports for a double period of instruction. 22 students in grade 9 are receiving TBE classes in math, social studies and science. Throughout the school year we continue to meet in collaboration as grade teams and provide changes to any individual student as needed. The data is shared with the ESL teacher and ACHIEVE 3000 is utilized at a minimum of 2 days per week in classes in order to improve reading comprehension and build vocabulary. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 65 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Structures in place to support this effort include rubrics, cross-curricular aligned unit plans, strategies for teaching within the 80 minute block, and student portfolios. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? As an administrative team, we intend to examine the data provided from the AMAO tool as well as attendance, scholarship, behavioral referrals (where applicable) and assessment results with the directive from our principal to provide common assessments across content areas. NYSESLAT scores indicate we need to make program adjustments to continue ensuring our students are receiving instruction aligned to common core standards and that our assessing bridges between and among the standards utilizing instructional supports and differentiation. Students need more exposure to and practice with the instructional shifts in literacy for citing evidence from informational text. In an effort to address the challenges students are facing, a new class was created for our incoming ninth grade students for English Writing Skills. Utilizing a curriculum blended from National Academy Foundation for ethics (high interest information text passages) and ENGAGE NY units of study, students will receive an additional period of instruction dedicated to reading/writing and building vocabulary. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Structures in place to address interventions include next-step plans, scaffolded worksheets, modeling, and manipulatives. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] As a high school, we do implement academic intervention services that include the following: Before school: for 45 minutes students are programmed for integrated ELA/ENL classes to ensure we are meeting mandates. After school, every Tuesday and Thursday, the ENL teacher provides tutoring in ELA and Social Studies for students across all categories. In addition, for students with disabilities and ELL designations, tutoring is provided by our bilingual special education teacher in math and science classes grades 9 and 10. For grade 11 ENL students, Mr. Muriel works after school for one hour on Mondays and Wednesdays for USHistory and Mr. Banuelos stays for Algebra II/Trig. When meeting in grade teams, teachers identify which students require the tutoring and this data is monitored throughout the year in order to ensure we are on top of student's challenges. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Students entering our school from Grade 9 are screened for the CTE program they will be attending. To date, we have no NYSITELL data to compare, as our students have had the NYSITELL exam prior to attending. We do not get new students in grades 10 through 12 because of our special programs with CTE classes, making students fall behind the requirements if they should report in higher grades. As a result, we have given no NYSITELL exams to date at our school. We rely upon NYSESLAT results from the previous year when programming students and when examining data. 2015 results in the NYSESLAT revealed students remain stronger in the speaking section than any other. Proficiency levels are improving in Listening and Reading while proficiency levels in the Writing has continued to reveal students' skill levels are challenged. 10% of the Intermediate and Advanced Proficiency levels of students had results of Proficient. Preliminary examination of the current year's NYSESLAT demonstrates specific skill level deficits that will need to be addressed in unit and lesson planning for the upcoming school year, specifically with finding textual evidence from the readings provided. Updating the NYSESLAT results from 2016; data reveal across grade levels only 4 students reaching proficiency levels. 65% of our students scored the same in the modalities as they had the year before. 22% showed slight increases in areas of reading and writing. Within the speaking and listening modalities, students remained at the same level as the previous year while 13% showed small gains of improvement. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Structures in place use data trends revealed from reading and writing components of the assessments. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 66  Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. ENL classes are implemented homogeneously for one period per day for free standing ESL class, one period per day with ESL support in ELA classes, one period per day in mathematics, TBE model, with students traveling together as a group to meet the requirements for Entering and Emerging students in grades 9 & 10 where the majority of our ELL students are enrolled. In Science class for grades 9 & 10 Entering and Emerging students, push in supports are provided with the ESL teacher. In grade 11 there are only 5 students receiving an integrated ESL supported in ELA class, with push in support with bilingual teacher for Social Studies. In grade 12 there are currently no ELLs. ENL classes are implemented homogeneously for one period per day of free standing ESL and one period per day of ELA with students within one grade level at the Transitioning level. For Transitioning and Emerging Levels, we have created an additional class of English Writing Skills to ensure support is provided for language acquisition. ESL support in an integrated model for ELA class for one period per day for students Expanding level by grade level. b. TBE program. If applicable. TBE program is currently serving grades 9 & 10 where students are together as a group for ELA, Mathematics, Science and Social Studies with a 50%/50% model. Students in grades 9 & 10 have additional bilingual support in their CTE courses, both auto tech and graphic design. c. DL program. If applicable. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Each class period of instruction is equal to 45 minutes + 80 minutes times 2 days per week which provides a total of 675 minutes of instruction for Entering and Emerging proficiency levels (This exceeds the mandated 540 for entering and emerging levels). Transitioning level students receive one free standing ENL class with additional support via ENL teacher pushing into Social Studies. Commanding students have an integrated model in grades 11 and 12 with push in supports in the social studies and math classes. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. The school administrative team has been professionally developed in ATLAS unit planning along with dedicated team collaborative meetings. Additionally, ELA and Social Studies have coaches from Teachers College who are consistently reviewing alignment with common core and assessments. As we move into year 4, teachers will be required to keep portfolios of student work demonstrating rubrics and writing tasks that will be examined during team meetings. The purpose is to address skill deficits in speaking, reading, listening and writing. The focus is citing textual evidence in essay format following the literary shifts. In addition to these areas of foci, our school's support organization, New Visions, is providing common core aligned curriculum in Global History, US History and the Sciences. Teachers are provided with professional development 4 times per semester which gives them the opportunity to provide feedback, make individual changes and examine common assessments for our specific school and students. We are using ACHIEVE 3000 as a supplemental support in both TBE and free standing ENL classes. Content areas are consistently supported with ENL teachers providing supplemental materials and in ELA classes for Emerging students in grade 10, the Spanish teacher is pushing into class to further develop fluency and vocabulary with co planning and unit study. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 67  Overall content areas are supported through collaboration during morning meetings both by grade level and content areas, using our Teachers College coaches as a springboard, along with the pilot programs in New Vision curriculum for Earth Science, Living Environment, Global History I & II and US History. Frequent professional development off site for participating teachers examines data and provides opportunities for teachers to improve practices. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? With the assistance and support of a variety of staff members and our Spanish Teacher, we consistently conduct check ins with our teachers in grade level and content area meetings. The bilingual teachers on staff offer their expertise when translation(s) is/are needed to prepare assessments or translations. Because we meet so frequently, teachers feel confident they are meeting these needs and ensuring student progress. We are also fortunate to have 2 bilingual paraprofessionals who provide push in support in classrooms when evaluations are conducted. Our school psychologist and one guidance counselor are also bilingual. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status With consistent monitoring of the ATLAS unit planning online and cycles of observations, administration and teachers have access to make corrections/additions and adaptations in all content areas across all grade levels. In addition, grade teams conduct unit protocol where teams are learning from one another the best practices in place to include the 4 modalities. Additionally, we review data and examine these specific categories in the AMAO tool and in our student sorter in grade team meetings and content meetings so that we can ensure we are addressing these needs. To meet the instructional needs of the subgroups a through e listed above, we are enrolling teachers in the ELLs initiatives for writing for ELA Regents in Grades 11 & 12, vocabulary initiative with high utility words in grades 9 through 12 across all content areas. We do not differentiate based on subgroups, but rather through individual students' needs and their performance on assessments, both formative and summative and make adjustments to lesson plans accordingly. utmost utmost During professional development, all staff, we are examining data and following the mandated services for our former Ells for the 2 years after exiting ELL status. This is of utmost importance for high school students, as it greatly impacts their performance on standardized testing. Reports are run in ATS to ensure we have included all ELLs for their mandated services, whether they are SIFE, newcomer, developing, long term or former ELLs. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? For each grade level, teachers are required to complete and submit unit plans of study. Unit plans have resources that specifically address the students with disabilities and English Language Learner needs. Alignment with unit planning for academic content and assessing are used to determine the level of rigor, the inclusion of shifts for literacy and math, and differentiation of performance assessments that promote student learning. Engage NY and Pearson are utilized in ELA classes. New Visions curriculum for Living Environment, Earth Science and Social Studies are utilized and monitored through off site Professional Development. ACHIEVE 3000 software is used both in school and at home where students have access to both laptops, computer labs and iPads. All teachers are required to use rubrics to guide students' writing that in turn can be used to provide timely and meaningful feedback that will then allow students to make corrections/additions to their submission to improve grades and increase learning. All teachers have access to ATLAS online system to submit units of study and additionally, as noted, teachers participate in the professional development of curriculum with New Visions for US History, Global Studies and Living Environment courses. Teachers College coaches spend a day bi-monthly working with teachers to ensure alignment and curriculum is accessible to all students in all grades across all content areas. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 68  7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? For curriculum, we provide professional development and additional opportunities with our support organization, New Visions, with regard to Social Studies and Science. Extended Learning Time allows physical education classes to be conducted prior and after the school day that promotes more classroom time in academic areas. Teachers are flexible in extended learning to include lunch and learn opportunities and after school for targeted tutoring. Together with administration, data used to program students is carefully examined by guidance counselors and together everyone ensures students are receiving the instructional scheduling that also takes into account their CTE coursework, ensuring a balance that meets each IEP and ELL goal. Because we consistently monitor students progress academically with guidance counselors and mentors, students are programmed according to their needs rather than via subgroups, making the flexible programming an individual experience for all of our students. Criteria for placement in ICT classes is a result of the Committee on Special Education comprised of students, parents, administration, teachers, both general education and special education, guidance counselors, and CTE teachers in auto or graphic design. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. As described in our SCEP, academic intervention is promoted within and among grade team teachers that can identify trends in student skill levels and develop/implement strategies to improve outcomes. Teacher teams work with data the 2 nd and 4 th weeks of the month to specifically identify students in need of intervention. In addition to the academic interventions, there are also social and emotional intervention strategies/structures in place. In ELA and Math classes, should a student score below grade level, fall behind in their work, demonstrate a lack of ability to complete the work, the grade teams develop a plan to put one to two specific strategies in place, work with the student to begin implementation and keep the family informed of how the strategies is working or not. If not, another strategy is developed and implemented. For our Bilingual students learning English, we have bilingual teachers in ELA and Math that work one on one or in small groups to improve instructional outcomes. In addition, we are partnered with 21 st Century partners, Vision Ed and Creative Connections that offer tutoring from a variety of instructors that include SAT Prep and technology supports in the Extended learning time. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We are considering combining grades 9 & 10 in the TBE classes for a 2-year program for Living Environment and Earth Science. This content continues to show students struggling to be successful. A 2-year program would provide additional time for students to delve deeper into the content and spend significant time in labs in order to develop a thorough understanding of the content, which in turn will allow them to be successful in the Regents Exams. The other area of struggle is Global History and with the inception of the new pilot program, it was revealed that the TBE class for grade 9 was not able to complete the curriculum in its entirety. With that in mind, a double period of instruction is being considered to ensure the breath of the curriculum will be implemented. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? As a turn-around school, we are consistently seeking programs to include versus discontinuing. At this time there are no plans to discontinue any of our programs or services. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All students are afforded equal access to all school programs and to ensure parent engagement and inform them, all materials are provided in the home language and in English at all times. A number of key staff are always on hand to translate or speak to parents and students in their home language. We have worked hard to make our school open and welcoming. We are also a uniform school, which helps to create an atmosphere of equality for all. To ensure access to all ELLs, an on site coordinator works in the school building daily to meet with students, parents, teachers and staff to promote and encourage students to participate. The coordinator runs programs for parents that include topics parents have selected and have interest in such as, cooking, resume writing, learning about grading policies and reading transcripts, etc. To date, we offer Lego Robotics in freshman and sophomore math classes, aligned with curriculum during the school day. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 69  Instructors are bilingual to ensure all participants are receiving a rich experience. After school programs include dance, fitness, Martial Arts, chess club, electric care, robotics, and tutoring in all content areas. Demonstrations and talent assemblies help to inform all students, signage is promoting the programs, announcements are made throughout the day and mentors in advisory reinforce the programs offered. ALL inclusive! 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. As a CTE school, we are enriched with computer labs, iPads and promote the use of ACHIEVE 3000 to promote reading fluency and comprehension. Students have a high interest and much success when using technology, therefore teachers in all content areas have access to it for their students, in addition to having a SMARTBOARD in every classroom. Short video clips and interaction lessons have provided a variety of entry points for students to become successful. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? With bilingual staff, bilingual paraprofessionals as additional support. in TBE classes. Materials, text books and curriculum is available in home language. In science classes, all glossaries and indices are bilingual. Use of native language is conducted in class by the Bilingual teacher with transitioning taking place daily, teacher materials and supporting supplemental materials, such as ACHIEVE 3000 and bilingual text available. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. We utilize our student sorter and reports in ATS to identify and make available the information needed to all faculty and staff. During observation cycles, Assistant Principals and administration monitor the adaptations and modifications of unit planning and lessons. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? As a CTE school, we are enriched with computer labs, iPads and promote the use of ACHIEVE 3000 to promote reading fluency and comprehension. Students have a high interest and much success when using technology, therefore teachers in all content areas have access to it for their students, in addition to having a SMARTBOARD in every classroom. Short video clips and interaction lessons have provided a variety of entry points for students to become successful. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Because we are a CTE school, we only receive students as freshmen. We send guidance counselors and teachers to city school selection events in the Bronx to promote our school and to provide information about our programs. We have not in 3 years received students in other grades once the school year has begun. Once a students selects our school for a first choice, we begin offering orientation dates prior to the end of the current school year. Parents accompany prospective students, receive a tour of the school facility and the shops for CTE and they are provided many opportunities to voice their questions/comments. Guidance counselors, Teacher from CTE department and academic courses all participate in order to promote the school's programs and to answer questions. Administration is also participator with an open door policy to meet with parents and address their concerns/questions individually. This process has been extremely effective in a clear, concise understanding of the requirements to be successful in our school and at this time parents can pu 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Spanish 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 70 d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Professional Development calendars are provided at the first day of school to all faculty and staff. The structure is one meeting per month for one hour after school for full faculty. In addition, every Monday and Friday for 45 minutes teachers meet in grade team meetings where unit planning, differentiation, assessing, data and examining student work are the focus the first and third weeks of every month. During the 2 nd and 4 th weeks, teams discuss data, examine student work and develop strategies to be used across content areas and examined for effectiveness through the student work. All content areas have common assessments for students to cite textual evidence and developing an argument/counterargument so that the student work can be examined for deficits and celebrations. The NYCDOE has 4 days dedicated to professional development every school year and there is always a section devoted to ELLs during these four days for full faculty for at least one hour. See below for the breakdown. In addition to the 1 hour monthly professional development planned for full faculty, our school has partnered with Teachers College who provides one ELA and one Social Studies coach bi-weekly to work one on one with our teachers and explore common core alignment in unit planning and lesson planning. We have provided ATLAS software for teachers to submit their unit plans on the first of the month (or just prior to the date their current unit will be completed). Assistant Principals examine the units and provide targeted feedback. In grade team meetings, unit plans are examined by all teachers one at a time using a protocol to ensure common core alignment. The focus is on standards, alignment with assessment and the structures for instructional goals and differentiation. These meetings are on-going and include adaptations/modifications for English Language learners. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Our school uses a National Academy Foundation curriculum during advisory class for 30 minutes every day in a small group setting with a teacher/adviser who stays with the students in advisory for four years. The curriculum is designed specifically to address the transitional challenges all students face when leaving middle school and entering high school. In addition, our students have CTE classes in auto tech, auto body and graphic design that are high interest level and provide hands on opportunities to learn. segues AP of ELLs conducts 2 professional development meetings per semester (total 4 per year @ 1 hour full faculty). During the meetings, professional development concentrates on the data, using the AMAO tool and segues into how we can incorporate speaking, listening, reading and writing in our units of study to specifically address the needs of the students. Strategies are discussed and teachers provide facilitation in their own best practices. In addition, one team meeting per month for 45 minutes is designated to examine student work and is facilitated by the bilingual and/or ENL teacher specifically discussing the work by ELLs. One meeting per month for 45 minutes is also designated to discuss bilingual/ENL classes in department/content meetings and to examine ELL data using the AMAO tool. This is no way identifies all of the professional development meetings devoted to bilingual/ELL students. Meeting agendas, signature sheets of teachers in attendance and minutes are all kept in the professional development binder housed in the APO's office and minutes are shared via email to all participants in an effort to offer opportunity to reflect. Evaluation sheets are attached for the 4 meetings per year with full faculty and results are kept in the professional development binder along with the minutes. Teachers are encouraged to request additional professional development throughout the school year and for the upcoming school year, we are all participating in the vocabulary initiative professional 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 71  development provided by NYCDOE through the Office of ELLs. This office provides multiple additional professional development throughout the year and teachers are offered opportunities to attend and are encouraged to further their pedagogical practices through these sessions at no cost using TITLE III funding. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Upon receipt of the NYSESLAT results, parents are sent letters in the mail requesting individual meetings as the school year begins. This opportunity to meet individually provides a time to complete their entitlement letters and answer any questions they may have. We also discuss the results of the test and talk about the skills that remain challenging as well as the curriculum in content areas that will be addressing the needs. During the planning stages of the meetings, during the meetings and afterward, there is always a school faculty or staff member that is present to translate according to the needs of the parents. If the student is an incoming ninth grade student, the data reviewed includes the NYSESLAT, ELA Performance and Math Performance results as well as the progress report from grade 8. If the students are in grades 10 through 12, the data used is the same, except for including Regents results and any ELA Performance Assessment results available. The struggle for our school has been to conduct the individual meetings in a timely fashion and to encourage participation. Many parents need to receive many follow up phone calls and reassurances that this meeting is not a request for documentation. As we progress through the years of our coming off the priority list, more parents are participating as they become comfortable and trusting. In addition, the orientation sessions for incoming ninth grade students allows additional face-to-face time in order to review the NYSESLAT results and to explain letters of continuation. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. At our school, we welcome all parents and keep an open door policy. With the orientation meetings, parents of ELL's are encouraged to sign up at a table with the Assistant Principal and family worker (Bilingual) to complete questionnaires for their perceived needs, meet with the administrative team and since we are following the return of the entitlement letters, we are consistent with a variety of staff members from the very beginning of the school year. Students are also encouraged to participate in the extended learning opportunities provided through our 21 st Century Grant. We have additional support to provide the information and obtain the encouragement the students need from families to be certain they are aware and able to participate in a variety of workshops designed with the data from their responses on the surveys/questionnaires. Every open school that is scheduled follows a similar procedure in order to ensure there is a desire on behalf of the school community to partner with our parents. The guidance counselors are integral in the communication and encouragement of our parent involvement. Their offices holds a wealth of information for all parents and ensure parents have notification of all meetings, all community workshops and extra curricular activities and partners with outside agencies that provide many services to our families. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. After school programs through our 21 st Century Grant, at no cost of TITLE III funding, allow for STEM initiatives during the school year using website development software as a push-in support weekly in order to incorporate technology in a meaningful way. In addition, we received approval for our graphics design program as a CTE certified pathway to a career. Internships will begin in the 2017 school year and for the summer following. These internships will be paid internships and monitored through our Work Based Learning Staff. Students have been on field trips to explore careers in the graphics design industry in New York City. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 72  2018-19 SCEP-SIG 73 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Evan Schwartz, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 74  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: School DBN: #INGES Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Evan Schwartz Title Principal Barbara Roman Assistant Principal Lizette Diaz Parent Coordinator Gabriela Cirasella ENL/Bilingual Teacher Jose Caban Parent Phedra Medina/ESL Teacher/Subject Area Yris Velazquez/SE, Bilingual Teacher/Subject Area Crystal Belle, TC ELA Frederick Mann, TC, SS Coach Coach Nuris Pimentel School Counselor Juan Mendez Romina Carillo Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member 562/New Visions Sal Banuelos/Teacher Other Bilingual Math Luz Rondon/Spanish Teacher Other Bilingual Spanish/SE Pablo Muriel/Teacher Other Social Studies Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 6/18/15 6/18/15 6/18/15 6/18/15 6/18/15 6/18/15 6/18/15 6/18/15 06/18/15 6/18/15 6/18/15 6/18/15 6/18/15 6/18/15 6/18/15 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 75  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 07X600 School Name: Alfred E. Smith CTE High School Superintendent: Juan Mendez The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Barbara Roman Assistant Principal Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. At the onset of the school year a review of home language surveys and interviews with students, and review of students' emergency card information as needed, with their guidance counselors. Our Guidance Counselors, Ms. Pimentel, Ms. Santos and Ms. Silva, conduct interviews. The school keeps an updated listing of students and their home languages spoken with parents. The staff was given PD with information about the Language Availability and were asked to fill out the forms of any other language than English spoken. This list is kept on file in the principal's office. Additional information is available to all in our online Pupil Path, SKEDULA system, giving detailed information. Our attendance team, guidance team and support staff make certain all phone calls home are in the home language (both through the "phone blast" system and individual calls. Special Education students and parents are supported by Ms. Rivera, bilingual family worker. All letters to home and all correspondence announcing parent events, meetings, or open houses are conducted in parents' home language. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 76  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Through home language surveys, student and parent interviews, biographical information when students enroll with parents and reports in ATS. Skedula, our online system, houses the information in a transparent system that parents can access from home. Our parent coordinator is instrumental in follow up with any information missing or not forwarded from previous schools. She meets individually with parents to ascertain their language needs and supports those needs both orally and in written formats.With 89% of our English Language Learners' home language stated as Spanish, we determine what the balance of 11% of our students who are fluent in English still require translation for parents and the records are kept as stated above. no other languages none none Spanish 100% 100% 100% n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. None 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 77  Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. All letters of announcements for meetings, upcoming events and open houses are printed in both languages sent home with students and mailed to the homes. Individual letters of personal nature are sent to parents in home languages, ensuring that bilingual staff phone numbers are clearly listed should the family require more information or have questions/concerns. We are fortunate to have several staff members in various capacities that are able to communicate orally and in written formats with parents. As noted above, we have a teacher fluent in Arabic who can review Bing Translations of all correspondence prior to sending them and to communicate with this family individually by phone. All correspondence is provided in a timely manner with follow up "phone blasts" and individual calls as needed.We utilize our full staff for registration, standards and performance, conduct, safety and discipline, special education and related services, Academic Intervention Services and when students transfer or are discharged in additional to any legal matters, entitlements (Special Education and ELLs) and after school programs. open school curriculum night open school For incoming Freshmen: July/August, With staff in real time. 10/19, 20/2017 September 2017 March 2018 With staff in real time. With staff in real time. With staff in real time. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 78  Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? For freshmen incoming students: Orientation in July and August Oral interpretations services are available every day, as several staff from all departments, from family workers to administration, are bilingual. When a parent comes to our school to meet, they are greeted by our Parent Coordinator and welcomed. They are then escorted to the meeting or individual they are meeting with and a staff member is readily available to translate if needed. For Special Education students' familiies, a designated school family worker works in conjunction with our Parent Coordinator to ensure translations services are provided and readily available. curriculum night 921/2017 Open school 10/19 & 20, 2017 Open school 3/2018 School staff Guidance Family Workers Paraprofessionals and if needed, Language Interpretation Unit via phone School staff Guidance Family Workers Paraprofessionals and if needed, Language Interpretation Unit via phone School staff Guidance Family Workers Paraprofessionals and if needed, Language Interpretation Unit via phone School staff Guidance Family Workers 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 79  Paraprofessionals and if needed, Language Interpretation Unit via phone 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Phone contact in home language Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Professional Development with signature sheets and an agenda on opening day, September 2017 and February 2018 at the start of the second semester Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) The Bill of Parents Rights and Responsibilities is provided at the onset of the school year. Copies are always available throughout the school year at the office of our Parent Coordinator. At our primary point of entry, our school posts the required signs with the languages covered, for our school, Spanish. Our safety plan contains procedures for ensuring parents have access services to reach administrative offices without challenges or barriers to their home language. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Parent surveys are provided each year and feedback/survey results are provided to the Principal. The administrative team reviews the survey results and ensures we are maintaining quality and consistently make services available. 2018-19 SCEP-SIG 80 
