 14K071 School Name: JUAN MOREL CAMPOS SECONDARY SCHOOL Principal: ESTHER SHALI OGLI 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 1  Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: Executive Summary and Organizing Principles Section 3: Community Engagement Team and School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 4: Renewal School Narrative Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Section 7: Community School Description Section 8: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 9: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 10: Title I Program Information Section 11: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Juan Morel Campos Secondary School 14K071 331400011071 6-12 School Number (DBN): 215 Heyward Street, Brooklyn, NY 11206 718-302-7900 718-302-7979 Phone Number: Catherine Bauer Fax: Email Address: CBauer2@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Community School CBO: Principal: Community School Director: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): Grand Street Settlement Esther Shali- Ogli Luciana Gonzalez Keith Miller Evelyn Collado Keith Miller Evelyn Collado N/a N/a District Information Geographical District: 14 AlicjaWinnicki Superintendent: 215 Heyward Street, Brooklyn, NY 11206 Superintendent’s Office Address: Superintendent’s Email Address: AWinnic@schools.nyc.gov 718 302 7900 ext. 2335 718-302-7979 Phone Number: Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 3  Brooklyn Nrth FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Executive Director’s Email Address: Phone Number: 718-935-3954 Bernadette Fitzgerald Executive Director: 131 Livingston Street Brooklyn, NY 11201 BFitzge2@schools.nyc.gov 718 935 3954 Fax: 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 4  Section 2: Executive Summary and Organizing Principles The Objective The intent of this Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP) is to continue to frame a three-year process for each Renewal school and design a comprehensive plan that outlines a strategic path to a paradigm shift in each school at every level. The motivation driving this work is our commitment to providing every child with a school that meets their academic and social-emotional needs. Closely accompanying this imperative is our belief that every school can be renewed and foster a community based culture of learning. The job of the district is to use our position to provide the systemic vision, strategies, and resources to facilitate school renewal through a collaborative effort including all stakeholders. The core values held as essential for the success of the School Renewal Program:  A “learning stance” must be held by all community members (district leaders, school leaders, school staff, community-based partners, students and families). The work should be approached with humility and integrity. We must all be willing learners.  A “theory of action” must guide the work to ensure clarity and coherence.  Authentic teams that collaborate in the spirit of trust, within and across the various levels of the school community, are prerequisites for successful school renewal  Schools will be places of robust engagement, anchored in positive youth development, ensuring that the school environment is welcoming and empowering for students, families and community members.  Strong professional development/learning is a fundamental part of our work.  The school renewal implementation must be simultaneously dynamic and responsive as well as sustained over the three year period of renewal. The organizing Theory of Action that guides the School Renewal Program strategy: By using the Six Elements of the Framework for Great schools as our improvement structure, we seek to align instructional coaching and leadership development with structural supports in order to build staff capacity. Using schools instructional foci, school leaders and staff will implement changes in curriculum, instruction, school culture and structures so that there are sustainable improvements in student outcomes and school culture. The arc of the School Renewal Program strategy: In order to attain high levels of achievement for all students in Renewal schools we must build capacity to increase student achievement through the adoption of new attitudes and behaviors, research based strategies that improve teacher practice, coupled with the use of clear data driven supports for building students’ skills in the content areas and increasing student engagement. We are particularly prioritizing reading and writing across the curricula. The use of student learning data will drive instruction through strong teacher teams; onsite, job embedded professional learning and problem solving, and accountability at all levels of the system: central, district and school - for results. Renewal schools are provided with intensive training, leadership and pedagogical coaching, and structural supports, monitoring of implementation and ongoing feedback and revisions as needed. Further, each Renewal school will become a Community School and strategically partner with community based organizations (CBO) to integrate social services and expanded learning time into the fabric of the school to help them better serve the needs of students. These schools will stand as centers of opportunities where families can get the supports they need to make sure students come to school ready and able to learn. School Receivership In April 2015, state lawmakers and Governor Andrew Cuomo created section 211-f of the State Education Law, which established the School Receivership program as a new intervention strategy to turn around struggling schools. This new law, and Commissioner’s regulation 100.19, requires that “Persistently Struggling Schools,” defined as Priority Schools that have been in the most severe accountability status since the 2006-07 school year, be given an initial one or two-year period under a “Superintendent Receiver”. These schools were placed in receivership under the New York City Schools Chancellor. Each school must make demonstrable improvement on specific benchmarks or it will be placed under an independent receiver. Under the Chancellor’s Receivership Plan, the School Renewal Program is NYCDOE’s 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 5  core strategy for turning around struggling schools. Renewal Schools have already begun implementing significant interventions and are receiving additional resources and support to accelerate student performance and help close achievement gaps reflected in this RSCEP. Structure of the Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP) The Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP) will serve as the organizing and overarching document for each Renewal school and will be directly aligned and developed around the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, and Strong Schools, Strong Communities, including the following:  Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks: Demonstrable improvement benchmarks located in the 2018-19 RSCEP, in the Data and Accountability Snapshot page. Receivership benchmarks have been closely aligned with the Renewal benchmarks so that schools will have one coherent set of improvement benchmarks to meet. All Receivership Benchmarks are a subset of Renewal Benchmarks. While the targets for these overlapping benchmarks are not always identical, the Receivership Benchmark targets are always equal to or lower that the Renewal Benchmarks targets. That means that any school that meets its Renewal Benchmarks targets have by definition also met its Receivership Benchmarks targets. For additional information on Receivership demonstrable improvement benchmarks go here.  Establishing an overarching summative vision aligned with elements of the Framework for Great Schools and documenting key areas of celebration and renewal through analysis of assessments and by envisioning what the desired outcome for each school will be at the end of the School Renewal process.  Setting interim assessment benchmarks that create the path for improvement by focusing on desired outcomes and goals. In this way, the plan will be mapped to the overarching summative vision. In addition to the five discrete goals formed around the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, each school will create an action plan.  Transformation into a community school in order to increase student and family access to physical and mental health services and other social-emotional supports made available in or near the school.  Expanded learning opportunities for all students, including additional instruction provided during afterschool  and/or summer programming provided in collaboration with community partners. Intensive professional development for all staff to ensure effective implementation of curriculum and instruction aligned to the Common Core State Standards (CCSS) and to support staff in effectively responding to the differentiated academic and social-emotional needs of all students.  Additional, focused strategies to increase parent and family engagement. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Information on the Framework for Great Schools and the DTSDE Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 6  The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and RSCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 7  School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets: 1. Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity 2. Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions 3. Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support 4. Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions 5. Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and 6. Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the RSCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the RSCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 8  Next Steps for RSCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists in every Renewal school and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the American Institute of Research (AIR) needs assessment, the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Create a summative vision for the elements of the Framework for Great Schools.  Step 5: Revisit your school’s current goals, and strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you have identified, and will let your school community know when you have reached your goal.  Step 6: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 7: Update your school’s AIS section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 8: Complete the Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and the Community School sections.  Step 9: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether strategies and activities outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust practices along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 9  Section 3: Community Engagement Team and School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Directions: All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP). SLT members’ signatures indicates that they have been consulted with and given the opportunity to provide feedback on the plan and the plan’s alignment with the school-based budget to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Expanded Learning Time, Community School initiative, Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. On the chart below: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the second column. 2. 3. In the first column, indicate using an “X” if the person is an SLT member. In the third column, record the position and constituent group represented such as staff, parent, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), or other contributor. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 4. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the RSCEP, not approval. 5. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Signature (Blue Ink) Check if SLT X X X X X Name Position and Constituent Group Esther Shali- Ogli Keith Miller Yvonne Lefkowitz Patricia Graham N/A Luciana Gonzalez Jose Taveras Vacancy Represented *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Community School Director (staff) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 10  Check if SLT Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Vacancy Yanet Castelan Vacancy Vacancy Laura Pawson CamilleRhoden-Stephens NiaOsborne X X X Parent Parent Parent Parent Staff Staff CBORepresentative Staff/Parent/Other Contributor Staff/Parent/Other Contributor Staff/Parent/Other Contributor Staff/Parent/Other Contributor Staff/Parent/Other Contributor Community Engagement Team (CET) Signature Page Directions: Please fill out this form and indicate members of your Community Engagement Team. On the chart below: 1. List the names of each Community Engagement Team member in the first column. 2. Record the position and constituent group represented in the second column. 3. Community Engagement Team members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If a Community Engagement Team member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original signature page. Name Position and Constituent Group Esther Shali- Ogli Keith Miller Patricia Graham 2018-19 RSCEP-PF Represented Principal UFTRepresentative DC37 Representative Signature (Blue Ink) 11 Signature (Blue Ink) Name Position and Constituent Group Yvonne Lefkowitz Laura Pawson Camille Rhoden-Stephens YanetCastelan Vacancy Vacancy Vacancy Represented PA/PTAPresident Staff Staff Parent Parent Parent Parent Luciana Gonzalez Community School Director (staff) NiaOsborne Jose Taveras Vacancy n/a CBORepresentative Student Student n/a 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 12  Section 4: Renewal School Narrative In a brief narrative, describe the current state of the Renewal school addressing the following: 1. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including your school’s mission statement and a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. 2. What are the school’s beliefs about student learning? 3. 4. Describe your school’s approach to family engagement and progress made with establishing families as Identify any special student populations that the school has and what their specific needs are. partners in furthering student achievement 5. Describe how your school is leveraging community school partnerships to support progress in elements of the Framework for Great Schools and indicate where this has been a challenge. 6. Summarize the Expanded Learning Time (ELT) opportunities that have been offered to your students this year. 1. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including your school’s mission statement and a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Juan Morel Campos Secondary School (JMCSS) is a Title I SWP school located in the South Williamsburg neighborhood of Brooklyn, NY and serves students and families who mostly reside in the communities surrounding the school, Williamsburg, Bedford-Stuyvesant, and Bushwick. More specifically, students are concentrated in a small list of New York City Housing Authority (NYCHA) developments: Bushwick, Roosevelt, Borinquen, Marcy, Sumner, and Tompkins Houses. The school currently enrolls 541 students in grades 6-12 and has high concentrations of students who grapple with multiple risk factors as learners (poverty, chronic physical and/or mental health issues, ELL status, IEP status, chronically absent, interrupted education, homelessness, etc.). The school qualifies for universal free lunch, an indicator of high poverty. Additionally, 10% of families report living in temporary housing, about 30% of students were chronically absent in the previous school year, 21% of students are Spanish speaking English language learners (ELLs), many ELLs are recent immigrants from Caribbean and Latin American countries, 6% are students with interrupted formal education (SIFE), and 33% of students have an Individualized Education Program (IEP), to name just a few of the risk factors that are present and prevalent in the school community. The student body is 77% Hispanic, 17% Black, 5% White, and 1% Asian. The student body is 55% male and 45% female. The school has completed its fourth full year of support under a federal School Improvement Grant (SIG) in the Transformation model. This grant has helped to augment existing programs and provide for additional resources, coaching, and professional learning opportunities. Despite these many challenges, the school prides itself on being a partner, advocate, and support for students and their families. The school is small enough that students can be well-known to multiple adults in the community, which ensures access to targeted and appropriate supports. Adult teams are a critical force in the school for organizing and delivering student supports. Recently, in the face of declining enrollment and reduced program offerings, the school has held firm to its beliefs about what students need and deserve, and especially its vibrant arts program. This longstanding “talent” program offers all students access to the arts program of their choice during the school day. All students take visual arts, theater, or instrumental music and the school hopes to resurrect dance and chorus programs which were lost in recent years. Furthermore, the school is committed to helping its high school graduates find acceptance to at least one two- or four-year college or university. For many students, they will be among the first generation of people in their families to have the opportunity to attend college. Lastly, the school tends to diverse needs and is proud of the adult teams who work tirelessly to individualize their efforts to meet the many social, health, and academic needs of the student body while holding them to high expectations academically. The school’s vision and mission statements encapsulate this delicate balance between meeting students where they are developmentally as social and academic beings while holding all students to lofty expectations for post-secondary and adulthood outcomes. Vision: JMCSS is an inclusive and supportive community where students explore and discover talents to enrich their lives. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 13  Mission: As a community we enrich all students' lives by ensuring that we: -Develop students academic and creative talents, -Integrate the arts and leadership with classroom experiences, -Collaborate with families to support student growth, -Celebrate diversity, equity, growth and progress, -Provide targeted interventions and cycles of support. In addition to the internal values and beliefs encapsulated by the vision and mission statements that drive the work of the school’s employees, there are crucial partnerships that have anchored student experiences in their immediate and broader communities. Long-time arts partners NURTUREart, BRIC, and the Metropolitan Museum of Art connect students to internships and gallery experiences throughout the year. Additionally, they provide for teaching artists who work with students in independent study, advanced art, and content area courses to connect art-making to post-secondary opportunities and challenging academic content. The school has begun to augment its approach to student discipline with restorative practices. These practices (peer mediation and Restorative Circles) work to access student voice in structured environments to help students develop self-awareness, self-advocacy, leadership capacities, empathy, and conflict resolution skills. Additionally, in the first year of Renewal, the school's Community Schools partner, Grand Street Settlement, implemented a range of targeted interventions and services, including individual and group counseling, tutoring, internships, enrichment field trips and workshops, and intensified family outreach. In year two, Grand Street Settlement will play an even greater role in the school's positive behavior and restorative practices by partnering with teachers to lend more structure to the peer mediation and Restorative Circles programs. The school plans for these structures and services to help more students engage with the school community more meaningfully and to overcome potentially devastating or destructive risk factors in their lives. Finally, the school is leveraging a new instructional model called Peer Enabled Restructured Classrooms / Teaching Assistant Scholars (PERC/TAS) in high school courses to engage students in meaningful and structured peer instruction. This model has a track record of improving achievement outcomes on standardized measures and is already shifting the academic culture among students in the school’s high school grades. 2. What are the school’s beliefs about student learning? The school’s staff and SLT convened at various times to develop and refine a theory of action to organize all work. This theory constitutes the school’s instructional focus for the upcoming school year. The draft theory of action developed by the school in June for the 2018-19 school year states, ”When teachers collaborate to design and deliver relevant and engaging academic tasks and supports that are aligned to the rigor of content and Common Core State Standards, student confidence, engagement, and performance will all improve.” As the vision and mission statements express, the school believes its responsibility is to meet students where they are as individuals, and push individual growth plans and expectations while holding all students to high expectations for summative performance. This belief results in an equal focus on performance and progress measures, which, in turn, drives resource allocation and staffing decisions. Additionally, integration and inclusion of all students in classroom and school activities is a core belief that drives instructional and organizational planning. Co-teaching, whether with ENL or special education teachers, is prevalent in the school and a focus on teacher inquiry teams and collaborative planning encapsulate the school’s belief that collaborative teachers have the biggest impact on student learning. As stated above, school staff and faculty are sensitive to the fact that students who face concentrated risk factors need guidance in their social-emotional and academic well-being, with stability for the former often being a prerequisite for taking advantage of learning opportunities. The school revisits its vision, mission, and definitions of how students learn best and what “rigor” means every school year. Highlights of the most recent definitions are below: 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 14  The school’s faculty and staff continue to revisit the vision and mission statements and responded in groups to questions about how students learn best and how our school community defines “rigor”. School leaders analyzed patterns in these responses and the school pursued the following definitions during this past school year: Students learn best when: Teachers - Communicate specific, challenging, and achievable learning targets in the short and long term, - Tailor instructional tasks to students' strengths, needs, and interests, - Act as facilitators and guides of student exploration and interactions, and - Balance high expectations with individualized learning and growth plans for all students. Classrooms - Are designed for student autonomy and belonging (groups, access to resources, clear procedures and routines, etc.), - Focus students on current learning and relevant resources, and - Are abuzz with intentional student activity during most of the class period. “Rigor” is balancing high expectations and individualized support for all, engaging all students in "productive struggle", and sustaining focus on high-interest, open-ended, and high impact learning activities. 3. Identify any special student populations that the school has and what their specific needs are. In addition to the student groups listed above – SWDs (33%), ELLs (21%), chronically absent (30%), STH (10%), economically disadvantaged Black and Hispanic students (universal free lunch, 100%), SIFE (6%) – other sub-groups are present. The school serves students who are overage and under-credited, students qualifying for New York State Alternate Assessment (NYSAA) who are mostly part of a bilingual Yiddish program, and many students who enter the school in 9th or 10th grade well below grade level proficiency in Math and/or English Language Arts (ELA). The specific needs of these sub-groups are generally two-fold. For many of the sub-groups, there are immediate needs to improve daily attendance, social-emotional supports, and academic engagement levels. For others, the prevalent need is to differentiate and supplement core instructional plans appropriately to sustain academic engagement and growth on key standards. 4. Describe the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which the school made the most progress over the past year, and which elements remain most challenging. Be sure to include the historical progress the school has made with establishing family and community partner engagement. As revealed in a the school's NYC Quality Review in the Spring of 2018, the school has made the most progress in Rigorous Instruction, Collaborative Teachers, and Effective School Leadership. Related QR indicators revealed “Proficient” levels of performance, which represents a significant improvement from 2016 - 2017 Quality Review and Fall 2017 IIT visit. The school has worked extensively over the last two years to increase distributed leadership, improve teacher team functioning, and align all work streams with student performance and achievement indicators. The school continues to be a place where staff place a premium on their supportive relationships with students. As such, the school continues to perform highly with regards to Trust and Supportive Environment. In addition to the academic program, which is student-centered and inclusive, the school has multiple structures to support students’ social-emotional well-being, development, and engagement with the school community. These structures were enhanced and multiplied by the school's partnership with Grand Street Settlement, its Community Schools CBO partner, during the 2018-2019 academic year. In partnership with Grand Street Settlement, the school continues to hone these abilities, refine the related systems, and increase levels of student access to such supports. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 15  The school has been most challenged by Strong Family-Community Ties as the school faculty and staff make significant efforts to invite families into the school community, but are often met with very low participation rates. During the last school year, Grand Street Settlement helped the school to augment its efforts to individualize outreach so that more families could find the time or reason to engage directly with the school by conducting home visits, engaging in individualized telephone outreach for school events, and providing families with on-site services such as benefits enrollment, OSHA certification training, and family counseling. 5. List strong partnerships that currently exist with CBOs and or indicate whether this has been a challenge. The school has longstanding partnerships with three arts organizations previously mentioned, NURTUREart, BRIC, and the Metropolitan Museum of Art. As part of New York City’s School’s Out NYC (SONYC) program, 91 middle school students are eligible to participate in a daily after-school program. This program provides art therapy, athletics, and academic enrichment activities to students at the school after the school day concludes, on weekends, and during school vacations. The Coalition for Hispanic Family Services (CHFS) provided these services in the first two years of this program. The school also has a full-time college counselor through a partnership with the College Bound Initiative, a program of the Young Women's Leadership Network. Finally, in year one of Renewal, the school established a partnership with Grand Street Settlement, the Community School provider and lead CBO. 6. Summarize the Expanded Learning Time (ELT) opportunities that have been offered to your students this year. As part of School Renewal, the school has implemented 5 Renewal Hours of extended learning each week. In order to preserve teacher PD time, the Renewal Hours are programmed as a 75-minute 9th period course on Tuesdays through Fridays. In the high school, the Renewal Hours are used for credit recovery, Regents preparation, and enrichment courses. In the middle school, the Renewal Hours include academic, enrichment, and social-emotional components. In 2015-2016, the middle school Renewal Hours were implemented using a combination of SONYC after school staff from CBO partner CHFS and school staff. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 16  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 14K071 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08,09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 534 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual YES Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 71 73 12 10 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 86 77 5 6 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 87.0% % Attendance Rate 85.8% % Reduced Lunch 27.0% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.0% 75.7% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 5.2% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 1.9 8% 9% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 25.2% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 71% 39% 64.9% 2.1% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No No Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District Yes Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO N/A YES NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A NO N/A N/A NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A YSH N/A N/A YSH Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YSH N/A N/A YSH Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A YES NO Yes N/A 140 133 7 1 88.6% 1.5% 32.8% 17.8% 0.7% 0.6% 6 23% 7.7 20.4% 8% 67% 59% 62.2% 11% N/A No No NO N/A N/A YES YSH NO N/A N/A YES NO N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A YSH N/A N/A N/A N/A YSH N/A N/A N/A N/A NO 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 17  2018-19 RSCEP-PF 18  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed X X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? Our latest Quality Review that while scaffolds for ENL and SWD students were present in the majority of lessons, students in some classes still continued to struggle with reading tasks. In addition, the Fall 2017 IIT report referenced the same area for growth. 1.1 Curriculum: While all curricula is CCLS aligned and teachers work in teams to ensure that scaffolds are built into curricula design our next steps is: a. Increase teachers understanding of data (summative and formative test data) to design scaffolds and and lessons to provide all students with the necessary tools to successfully access the curricula 1.2 Pedagogy While the staff indicated on the 2017 - 2018 Survey that they believe that all students have the ability to success on rigorous CCLS aligned tasks and assessment, we must improve in the following areas: a. Shared staff belief in how students learn best. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 19  b. Shared classroom norms that include questioning techniques and development of multiple entry points that enable all students including SWDs and ENL students to access rigorous content. c. Release of teacher control in the classroom to develop more student centered classrooms that will promote student voice and student ownership in/of learning. 2.2 Assessment While we have been successful in developing a school wide grading policy that ensures equity in grading across all classrooms and use a comprehensive school wide assessment calendar, we must improve in the following areas. a. Provide teachers with professional development on how to use formative assessments in daily lessons to assess student learning and respond appropriately to identified learning gaps. b. Improve quality and use of daily verbal and written feedback that provides students with both immediate and long term next steps for learning. Data: Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, and NYC School Survey Part 2 – Summative Vision for Rigorous Instruction What is your school’s instructional focus? What is your vision for promoting the instructional focus consistently across classrooms? Instructional Focus: Students will make their thinking visible through rich and dynamic writing tasks in all Core Content classes. Common practices aligned to the Focus are:  multiple entry points to access and navigate content (illustrations that accompany text - specifically in ENL classes, teacher read alouds of text, manipulative in mathematics and science classrooms)  differentiated scaffolds to engage in meaningful tasks (i.e. graphic organizers, vocabulary scaffolds, question prompts)  differentiated products to demonstrate critical thinking and learning (i.e. projects, quizzes and performances)  small heterogeneous groups to empower student voice When students are explicitly taught the writing skills required to engage with the tasks and to produce the written responses, they are able to make their thinking visible and their talk accountable. Once students can access all the different types of print material, they are more comfortable and better equipped to engage in student to student discussion. What is your vision for the implementation of CCLS-aligned curricula that meets the needs of your diverse learners, personally, academically, and culturally? 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 20   Teachers plan and refine curricula to meet the needs of the diverse learners at Juan Morel Campos by meeting in:  Weekly departmental meetings to discuss students’ progress in desired content outcomes and to refine and revise curriculum unit plans  Once a week grade teams engage in iterative, evidence-based cycles of inquiry using Writing Is Thinking* (WIT) tasks to gauge students’ writing across content and to modify teaching in response to student need.Teachers look at students’ work products weekly as well.  Grade and department team leaders meet weekly with administration to discuss their respective progress and to determine school-wide next action steps  Once a month meetings are facilitated by an ICT/ENL teacher to discuss best practices for specific sub-group populations  Bi-monthly teacher leaders facilitate intervisitation process o Each cycle focuses on a specific component of Danielson (for example: student engagement or questioning) o Results are debriefed during Instructional Cabinet meetings and inform both coaching sessions and grade/department meetings  Curriculum-aligned, teacher-designed formative and summative assessments are administered to all students, the results of which are used to inform the strategic, collaborative work of grade-level inquiry teams.  The Peer Enabled Restructured Classroom (PERC) transforms students who have yet to meet college-ready benchmarks into scholars by placing them in the role of teacher. In our restructured science classrooms (math was re-introduced in 2017 and will continue in this current schoolyear 18-19), four to five Teaching Assistant Scholars (TASs) work under the guidance of a teacher to instruct small groups of their peers. Along the way, the TASs deepen their content knowledge, become academic role models, and build the skills they need to succeed in college. What is your vision for diverse program offerings that allow students to develop skills, habits, and behaviors to be career and college ready? How are instructional shifts embedded in this vision? For school year 2018-19 the vision for diverse program offerings are:  Renewal hour staggered into the day so that all students have an additional instructional time within each period  Afterschool opportunities for students to take Regents Prep and SAT prep classes  College Bound program will provide the high school students with college and career access along with the program College Access for All.  The instructional shifts will be addressed through all academic programs and curriculum maps designed by the staff. What do you envision the delivery of instruction to look like so that all students are set up for success? Our core belief is that students learn best when they are provided with opportunities to engage in rigorous, cognitively challenging content and aligned, differentiated tasks and products. How do you envision teachers using multiple entry points to ensure the success of every child? Development of school wide set of strategies that enable all students to access rigorous content. Strategies will be agreed upon through the Data Wise inquiry process - Step 5 Problem of Practice. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 21  What is your vision for the use of a comprehensive assessment strategy (diagnostic, formative, benchmark, and summative) to drive curricular, instructional, and organizational decisions that impact student outcomes? Last year , our instructional team developed a schoolwide assessment calendar. This work will continue but adding an additional layer of the use of assessments through Skedula. At weekly department team meetings, teachers will create and/or update unit assessments, analyze assessment data and make the appropriate adjustments to the content curriculum maps. Data from assessments will be used to group students during intervention periods in order to provide individualized supports thus enabling all students to meet grade level expectations and succeed on NYS tests. Please indicate below the specific assessments that you are implementing and their purpose for each grade. Assessment Name Assessment Type Grades Implemented Purpose (diagnostic, formative, benchmark, summative) Formative, benchmark, summative Formative, benchmark, summative Formative, benchmark, summative Diagnostic, Formative, benchmark, summative 6-10 9-10 9 - 12 6-12 Iready Gates-McGinite Mock Regents Teacher developed CCLS aligned common assessments Part 3 – Annual Goal Reading/Math Reading All Core Contents All Core Contents Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. By June 2019, all CCLS mathematics units, lessons and classroom instruction will provide all students with daily opportunity to demonstrate the critical thinking skills required to succeed on high stakes NYS exams as evidenced by a 20% increase in the number of students passing Mathematics Regents exams and a 10% increase in the number of students achieving a level 2 or better on the NYS Math exam. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Rigorous Instruction Annual Goal: Which Renewal benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Rigorous Instruction Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve SED 4 yr Grad rate Regents Completion Rate College and Career Readiness 3-8 Math SED Growth Percentile Math Regents Percent Passed by Year 2 3-8 Math Percent Level 2 & Above Progress Toward Graduation-Years 2 and 3 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 22  Part 4 – Action Plan Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) All Students All All Students All Math teacher teams will meet weekly to analyze student tasks and assessment to understand student misconceptions in Math Teacher leaders will provide datawise training at the departmental meetings Sept. 2018 - June 2019 Principal, APs, and Teacher Leaders Strategic Inquiry Coach Sept. 2018 - June 2019 Principal, APs, and Teacher Leaders Strategic Inquiry Coach Peer Enriched Restructured Classroom (PERC/TAS) in Science and Math Classrooms Science and Algebra Students College Readiness Index Sept. 2018 - June 2019 AP, PERC Coach, PERC teachers How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Tennis Charts, Iready, Common Assessments, Mock Regents Tennis Charts, Iready, Common Assessments, Mock Regents Success rates in regents taken in Jan. 2017 and June 2018. School-wide PD on differentiation of instruction in order to provide teachers will the tools to create lessons that are scaffolded and contain multiple entry points for all learners. Professional Development on the use of Skedula to enable teachers to create standard based assessments. The data from these assessments All Students All Teacher Leaders, Special Ed and ENL teachers Danielson 1e., 3b., 3c., 3d. Sept. 2018 - June 2019 All Students All Sept. 2018 - June 2019 Teachers, Administrators, Iready and Stategic Inquiry Coach Iready assessments, teacher designed assessments, Mock Regents 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 23  will be analyzed and instruction will be adjusted. 4b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. During our curriculum night in September 2018, teachers will ensure that classroom visits and expectations are presented in both English and Spanish. In addition our ENL department will host a workshop in October for parents of students in either the ENL or Bi-lingual program. The Coordinator of Middle School will be in charge of organizing all middle school events and Grand Street Settlement will be responsible for organizing all high school events. Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, lead CBO’s community school budget, etc. The school will staff administrators, teachers, paraprofessionals, and partner organizations who provide coaches. The school will secure classroom supplies and technologies which will be integral for achieving the goals and action plans in this section as well. These supplies are necessary for day-to-day instruction, modeling, demonstration, and group work. The school will leverage professional learning time built into the daily schedule and after school on Mondays. Per session and per diem funds will be leveraged to add additional professional learning opportunities for all staff members during and outside of the school day. Per diem costs are incurred when teachers are relieved of teaching duties to attend workshops, inter-visitations, and other professional learning opportunities during the school's instructional day. Funding for Strategic Inquiry coach is of paramount importance. Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) X Title III Title I TA PTA Funded X X P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. In February progress will be assessed by reviewing results of Term 1 final exams, January 2019 regents and Mock regents. We expect to see a 10% growth in the number of students passing final exams based on the appropriate regents/state exams and a 10% growth in the number of students passing the Algebra I regents. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Term 1 finals, Iready assessments, Mock and Jan. 2019 regents. Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 24  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. X X X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? 5. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? Juan Morel Campos Secondary School has made students' social emotional health a priority by gradually enhancing the school's programming in this area over the past few years. Campos began using Overcoming Obstacles advisory curriculum in grades 6-8 during the 2017-18 school year. Additionally, we began working with Peer Group Connections during the 2017 - 2018 school year. This program matches 2 upperclassmen with a group of 12 9th grade students to provide peer mentoring to all 9th grade students during this important transition year. During the last two school years, Lead CBO partner Grand St. Settlement has also supported the growth of the school's mentoring programs to include academic- and attendance-focused Success Mentoring across all grade levels. Community Schools mental health providers, the clinician from the School-Based Mental Health Clinic, the school psychologist, school social worker, and lead dean meet weekly to coordinate mental health programming and ensure that the correct interventions are delivered to students with identified need. Additionally, the Community School Director facilitates a weekly Success Summit in which guidance counselors and administrators review academic and attendance data in order to identify trends and address student challenges through school-wide and targeted interventions. In the school's Quality Review, Campos was rated Proficient in 1.4 Positive Learning Environment, indicating that the school's efforts in this area have reaped positive results. The reviewer specifically cited as strengths teachers', parents', and students' perception of the school as a safe space, the incorporation of student voice into school programs, and the existence of multiple supports for students. Campos further enhanced it's supportive school environment to establish stronger systems and structures that ensure that social emotional supports are consistent, universally available, and appropriately integrated into other aspects of school programming. These efforts enabled us to more effectively address all four aspects of the Framework for Great 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 25  Schools Tenet 5. More routine social emotional learning using evidence-based curriculum will be implemented in order to address SOPs 5.2 and 5.3. SOP 5.2 and 5.5 will also be furthered by the development of a Behavioral and Academic Intervention Plan (BIP/AIP) that systematizes targeted intervention based on student-level data. This BIP/AIP will be developed through a collaborative planning process that integrates administrator, teacher, and school support staff's voices, thereby created broad buy-in and addressing SOP 5.4. Additionally, the BIP/AIP will utilize Skedula, which will enable more systematic tracking and sharing of behavior and attendance data, thereby addressing SOPs 5.4 and 5.5. Finally, in order to further SOPs 5.3 and 5.4, the school's Community School Team will develop a monthly parent workshop series that will enhance parents' abilities to contribute to the school's vision of a supportive environment. During the Spring 2018 semester a team of teachers, guidance counselors and administrators attended Ruler training at the Yale Center for Emotional Intelligence and we have been working over the past few months to develop a structure for rolling out the strategies during the 2018 Fall semester. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Supportive Environment What is your vision for a supportive school environment? How will you in partnership with each CBO and families enact your vision? As reflected in the school's vision statement, part of our overarching vision for Campos is for the school to be an inclusive and supportive community. As stated in the school's mission, we believe this is accomplished by integrating mentorship and leadership with classroom experiences while providing targeted interventions and supports. To further this vision for a supportive school environment, Campos will focus on three primary projects in the 2018-19 school year: implementing more routine social emotional learning that is integrated with classroom experiences, collaboratively developing and implementing a comprehensive Behavioral and Academic Intervention Plan that utilizes data housed in Skedula, and using the existing Community School Team to align parent engagement activities to the school's vision for a supportive school environment. Incoming 6th and 9th graders will receive social emotional supports before they begin the school year through participation in Summer Bridge. Both incoming 6th and 9th graders will participate in a Summer Bridge leadership course designed and taught by Grand Street Settlement social workers. This course will be designed to ease the transition to a new school and grade level by building community, addressing anxieties, and imparting self-management and study skills. Social workers will be in touch with parents throughout the summer and will use this early exposure to incoming students to identify those who may be in need of early interventions in the fall. In the fall of 2017 social emotional learning and community-building kicked off a series of overnight trips for various grades. Depending on grade level, students spent one to two nights at the Greenkill YMCA, where they participated in team building and leadership activities designed to build character and community. Throughout the school year, social emotional learning will be integrated with classroom learning through the implementation of a Middle School Advisory and the introduction of Peer Group Connection in the high school. The Middle School Advisory will use the evidence-based Overcoming Obstacles curriculum and will be taught by Grand Street Settlement social workers and youth workers in partnership with classroom teachers. Advisory classes will occur weekly beginning in October. Peer Group Connection (PGC) is an evidence-based peer leadership program developed by the non-profit, the Center for Supportive Schools. The program is designed to ease students' transition into high school while advancing the learning, growth, and development of upperclassmen peer leaders. Peer leaders will be enrolled in a daily credit-bearing leadership course that prepares them to meet with small groups of 9th graders once per week in order to develop younger students' social emotional skills and strengthen positive relationships across grades. At Campos, PGC will be implemented through a collaborative effort between school staff and staff from Lead CBO Grand Street Settlement. The PGC model incorporates parent involvement through a mid-year event for 9th grade parents planned by peer leaders. This event will introduce parents to the PGC program and the ways that social emotional health contribute to academic success. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 26  In addition to enhancing social emotional development through universal, school-wide programs, Campos will also systematize its interventions through the development of a comprehensive Behavioral and Academic Intervention Plan. The Plan will be developed with input from teachers, support staff, CBO staff, and other members of the school community. The BIP/AIP will identify a menu of available supports, as well as referral systems that incorporate routine use of data to match the right interventions to the right students at the right time. Data will be housed in Skedula, which will enable teachers to routinely input and access data for the students they teach and will support administrators and support staff to access data on individual students and to aggregate data in reports. The BIP/AIP will be developed in September/October and rolled out in Term 2. The BIP/AIP will be proactively communicated to students and parents at November Parent Teacher Conferences and will be reiterated in student town halls, in one-on-one meetings and home visits, and through routine school-wide communications (text messages, email newsletters, monthly mailings, and the school website). A collaborative development process and clear, early publicity will ensure broad buy-in among members of the school community. Finally, Campos will use its existing Community School Team to engage parents in activities that support student social emotional development and enhance parent voice in developing school culture. The Community School Team is a group of parents, teachers, administrators, and CBO staff that meets biweekly to develop and implement parent engagement initiatives. The team's goal for the 2018-19 school year is to hold a monthly parent workshop that aids parents in better supporting their children's academic and social emotional development. These workshops will be activity- and discussion-based spaced in which parents acquire skills and information, and are also given the opportunity to provide their input on school culture and systems. The first workshop in this series will address bullying, which Campos staff learned was a major concern for incoming parents when staff conducted home visits with all incoming 6th and 9th grade families. Who are your CBO partners? How will each CBO sustain and support the social-emotional and academic growth of your students? CBO Partner Grand Street Settlement Center for Supportive Schools A Fair Shake CBO Focus Implement Peer Group Connection and Middle School Advisory, facilitate leadership course during Summer Bridge, support overnight trips, lead Community School Team and parent workshop series, facilitate weekly Success Summits and mental health referral meetings, provide counseling. Support planning and implementation of Peer Group Connection. Implement a 10 week program in the middle school where a group of 8 students will work with registered therapy dogs. Students will learn empathy, self-esteem, and reduce bullying through their work with the therapy dogs. How will you in partnership with your CBO will create a supportive environment and engagement for your students’ families? Since the inception of the Community Schools program at Juan Morel Campos, Grand Street Settlement has provided individual, group, and family counseling, mentors, conflict mediation, attendance intervention, and support to teachers struggling with classroom management or working to implement social emotional learning in their classrooms. Grand Street Settlement also leads the school's weekly Success Summits and mental health referral meetings, as well as its biweekly Community School Team meetings and this team's monthly parent workshops. In 2018-19, Grand Street Settlement will enhance existing efforts to create a supportive school environment by partnering with the school to implement its supportive environment action plan. In 2018-19, the Peer Group Connection course for peer leaders will 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 27  continue to be co-taught by a licensed Campos teacher and a Grand Street Settlement social worker. Similarly, in the middle school, Grand Street Settlement staff will teach a weekly Advisory course using the Overcoming Obstacles curriculum. Grand Street will be partnering with A Fair Share which will work with two groups of 8 students that will have the opportunity to interact and work with licensed therapy dogs to help provide additional social emotional learning support. Additionally, Grand Street Settlement played a key role in supporting incoming 6th and 9th graders' transition into middle school and high school, respectively, by teaching a leadership course to the 6th and 9th grade during Summer Bridge. Finally, Grand Street Settlement will play a supporting role in planning and staffing fall overnight community-building trips. Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Supportive Environment. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. By June 2019 we will effectively embed the RULER approach to social emotional learning as evidenced by a high school attendance rate of 88%, a middle school attendance rate of 92%. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Supportive Environment Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Supportive Environment Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve Student Attendance Framework: Supportive Environment Framework: School Safety Progress to Graduation years 2 & 3 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 28  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Develop and implement a comprehensive behavioral and academic intervention plan Create a team of trained ruler coaches to meet weekly to plan PD for staff. Create lessons for 6-12 students. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) All Students Student Attendance, Framework: Supportive Environment, Progress to Graduation in Years 2 & 3 September 2018 - June 2019 Assistant Principal. Ruler Coaches, all members of the Behavioral team All students Student Attendance, Framework: Supportive Environment, Progress to Graduation in Years 2 & 3 September -June 2019 Assistant Principal. Ruler Coaches, all members of the Behavioral team Implement the Peer Group Connection peer leadership program 9th, 11th, and 12th grades Student Attendance, Framework: Supportive Environment September 2018-June 2019 Grand St. Settlement CSD and AP, teachers Implement a Middle School Advisory program and plan monthly meetings to ensure the students have a voice Plan monthly assemblies with all students to ensure school expectations are being meet 6th, 7th, and 8th grades Student Attendance, Framework: Supportive Environment October 2018-June 2019 Grand St. Settlement CSD, Coordinator of Middle School Instruction All grades Student Attendance, Framework: Supportive Environment Sept 2018 - June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Teachers, Deans and support staff. parent coordinator and PTA Organize community building overnight trips All students Framework: Supportive Environment October 2018 Principal, Grand St. Settlement CSD How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Decrease in behavioral referrals and suspensions Decrease in behavioral referrals and suspensions Decrease in behavioral referrals and suspensions; increase in attendance Decrease in behavioral referrals and suspensions; increase in attendance Decrease in behavioral referrals and suspensions; increase in attendance Decrease in behavioral referrals and suspensions 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 29  Monthly parent workshops All parents Framework: Supportive Environment September 2018-June 2019 Grand St. Settlement CSD, AP Decrease in behavioral referrals and suspensions 4b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Home visits, parent workshops, monthly newsletter. Our CSD will oversee parent outreach and family events. Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The school will staff administrators, teachers, paraprofessionals, and partner organizations who provide coaches and supplemental staff, like Grand Street Settlement, Center for Supportive Schools, and The CollegeBound Initiative and Yale Center for Emotional Intelligence.. The school will secure or maintain classroom supplies and technologies which will be integral for achieving the goals and action plans in this section as well. Additionally, per session and per diem funds will be leveraged to add additional professional learning opportunities for staff during and outside of the school day. Again, teachers participating in professional learning may require per session or class coverages. While some programs will result in schedule modifications, other supports will be built into classroom routines. Support staff will continue to schedule their supports around students’ academic schedule and needs as appropriate. Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded X X P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By February 2019, the school will demonstrate a 1% year-over-year increase in attendance in both the high school and the middle school. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Attendance rate, number of behavior referrals, number of suspensions, period attendance Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 30  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed X X 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? Even though the 2018 Quality Review, the QR reviewer found that teacher teams were proficient, this area will still remain a focus for our school as indicated in Advance Data Strengths Over the course of the past year, the school made many changes to address our areas of need: improving instructional practices and supporting structures. During the school year, we began implementing a structure for both grade and department teams throughout the school for all grade levels and subject areas. These structures allowed for more synchronized work regarding curriculum and lesson planning as well as inquiry. .During department team meetings, the teams successfully unpacked the new Common Core Curriculum in New Visions and Engage. During these team meetings teachers began the challenging work of modifying and differentiation course work to meet the needs of our student population. In order to ensure cohesiveness in instructional strategies and practices, the administration along with the Teacher leadership team conducted a cycle of work around Learning objectives and assessments which included learning walks, Professional Development Sessions during Monday PD time and during department teams. This round of work was supported further with one to one coaching. After this work, progress was monitored by a follow up learning walk focusing on the alignment of teacher;s objectives, work activities and teacher assessments. Generally the outcome of the walk was that the use of new and improved Learning Objectives, better alignment of the objective to the learning activities and the assessments. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 31  Throughout the year, the team engaged in 6 cycles of Inter-visitation. The foci for each cycle was determined after examining the data from a Needs assessment survey, administered in the beginning of the year, learning walks, and MOTP data. Needs In the past, teachers were not utilizing a common protocol when looking at the results of formative assessments. These formative assessments were analyzed in order to inform lesson design and influence teacher practice. This year, our school will focus on each teachers' data literacy and provide professional development on the use on data in order to inform daily instruction and provide the necessary supports to all students. Data sources: Quality Review, MOTP ratings, feedback from walk-throughs with district superintendent, student scores on state middle school and high school Regents exam Part 2 – Summative Vision for Collaborative Teachers What is your vision for collaborative teaching? At Juan Morel Campos, our vision for collaborative teaching embodies high expectations for all students. The school is organized in teacher teams which includes using co-teaching models to support English Language Learners, Students with Disabilities and the General Education students. Co-teachers have time built into their schedules to meet with teacher leaders, coaches and supervisors to support them in effective instructional practices. Additionally, teacher contracts allow for weekly planning time so both teachers are able to effectively design coherent instruction. Content and learning specialists both participate in unit/lesson planning that addresses the individual needs of our students. Co-teachers are committed to the academic and social/emotional growth of all students and consistently enforce high expectations throughout the year. Each teacher is a member of at least two teacher teams including a department team and a grade team. ENL and Special Education teachers are provided with opportunities to collaborate with other ENL or Special Education teachers in addition to their General Education partners. Teacher leaders plan and implement cyclical inter-visitations, professional development and inquiry work to meet the needs of our diverse staff. Through these works, Campos is able to highlight each teacher's strength while addressing the changing needs of our staff. At Campos, co-taught classrooms embody a culture of equity of voice and expertise. Within the classrooms, co-teachers are both responsible and held accountable for the consistent assessment of students, delivery of content and skills, setting and maintaining high expectations, and communication with student’s families. We believe these features to be hallmarks of engaging instruction and seek to maintain successful routines and classroom structures. How do you envision collaboration amongst your School Instructional Cabinet to improve teacher practices and student learning? The school instructional cabinet meets weekly to address the needs of both teachers and students. Administration alongside teacher leaders norm the Danielson Framework to ensure clarity of expectations to all staff members. Different structures are put into place to work with teachers at different stages of their career. Administration, coaches and teacher leaders work to develop horizontal and vertical alignment of curriculum and classroom practices. The School Instructional Cabinet works to build capacity with effective teachers whilst coaching developing teaching. The instructional cabinet works with the staff to maintain tiered levels of support to create a community of trust within the school. The instructional cabinet works with the entire staff to norm expectations for effective teacher practices and student learning regarding assessment, questioning, engagement, learning objectives, and classroom environment. The 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 32  instructional cabinet works with the staff to maintain tiered levels of support to create a community of trust within the school. The instructional cabinet works with the entire staff to norm expectations for effective teacher practices and student learning regarding assessment, questioning, engagement, learning objectives, and classroom environment. How do you envision collaboration within teacher teams to improve teacher practices and student learning? On a weekly basis, the entire staff meets in grade teams and department teams. At the grade team level, teachers are engaged in inquiry work through WITSI. (Writing is Thinking Strategic Inquiry). This provides a cycle of looking at student work and teacher practices to improve student outcomes. At the department team level, teachers unpack and modify curriculum. Teachers work to collaboratively align classroom instruction to Common Core Learning Standards. Content specific skills are targeted to ensure consistency in the student experience across grade and content. Within the co-taught classroom, both content and learning specialists are aware of the unique needs of each student. Teachers plan instruction with the goals, ENL levels and learning needs of each student in mind. Using the Universal Design for Learning, all teachers plan engaging lessons and units that connect to the diverse needs of students. How do you envision collaboration across teacher teams to improve teacher practices and student learning? Collaboration across teacher teams will work to improve classroom instruction through the sharing of best practices. Through inter-visitation, teachers are able to see exemplar practices throughout classrooms. Teachers are provided with several opportunities to debrief observations and implement learned skills. Teacher teams provide the staff with a modality to brainstorm and design coherent instruction geared towards honing their practices. Collaboration across teacher teams will work to improve student learning through inquiry at the department and grade team level. These inquiry cycles enable teachers to develop and modify lessons which will have the most impact and addressing student needs. Curriculum and lessons are adapted to meet the needs identified through the inquiry process. Teachers and students alike are flexible and adaptable learners focused on continual growth. What data will teachers and the School Instructional Cabinet regularly review to ensure that they are reflecting upon their teaching practices and meeting individual student learning needs? What is the intent for reviewing each piece of data? (ex. Teachers will regularly review student IEPs when developing lessons in order to ensure that tasks are appropriately scaffolded.) Data Reviewed MOTP ratings Intent Reviewing MOTP ratings will ensure the growth of individual teacher practices through a clear breakdown of the Danielson Framework. The School Instructional Cabinet will better differentiate professional development and coaching sessions for our diverse teachers regarding each domain. IEP goals/progress Special Education and General Education teachers will regularly review each student's IEP and progress towards their goals. Teachers will use this information in developing lessons and progress monitoring tools. Qualitative Feedback from PCTs Teacher made progress monitoring charts and data. Teachers and community organizations will use this information to guide their discussions with the families of students. Peer Collaborative Teachers will work 1:1 with teachers throughout the building to build capacity and growth teacher practice. Qualitative feedback will be obtained on a weekly basis and shared at Instructional Cabinet meetings. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 33  Regents Inquiry High School teachers and staff will use Regents Inquiry data to drive instructional decisions. Teachers will regularly collect data on students to track progress towards Regent's accumulation. Data will be collected and analyzed at the grade team and department team level. Counselors will regularly update with parents to create an ongoing cycle of communication. Staff PD and Coaching Surveys The teacher leadership team will regularly survey the staff regarding their perspectives towards professional development and coaching support. This will drive future professional development and coaching practices. Obtaining staff feedback is vital to the growth of stakeholders, to build buy-in within the school community towards instructional practices and to provide the staff with relevant opportunities for growth. Stategic Inquiry All teachers will continue to receive coaching on the use of the inquiry protocol with a focus on formative assessment data Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. By June 2019, all teachers will, through an inquiry model, effectively use data to inform classroom instruction and provide remedial support as evidence by a 20% increase in the number of student successfully completing the social studies regents exams and a 20% increase in the number of students achieving a level 2 or better on the NYS ELA exam. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Collaborative Teachers Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Collaborative Teaching Annual Goal? The Receivership Benchmarks: Regents Completion Rate English Regents Percent Passed by Year 3 ELA Growth Percentile 3-8 ELA Percent Level 2 & Above Performance Index on State ELA Exam Average ELA Proficiency Rating Grade 4 and 8 Science Percent Level 3 & Above 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 34  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. To ensure that academic tasks consistently emphasize cognitive engagement and higher-order skills across grades and subjects departments will use weekly meeting time to review and revise content specific curriculum based on assessment data. Office of Renewal Schools and school faculty conferences, professional learning opportunities around success for all learners, inter-visitation on providing scaffolding and multiple entry points for SWD's and ELL's in order to assist co-teaching partners and grade teams. Strategic Inquiry will be used in both academic and grade teams Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Core Content Teachers NYS Math, ELA, and Science exams grades 6 - 8 September 2018-June 2019 Supervisors, ORS Coaches, and Team Leaders NYS Regents completion rate All teachers n/a September 2018-June 2019 Administrators/content - supervisors, counselors, social workers and ORS Coaches All teachers n/a September 2018 - June 2019 Grade team leaders, ORS Coach and SI specialist How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Inquiry around the data collected from standard aligned benchmark assessments within department teams. Constant monitoring of SWD's and ELL's through content skill data tracking, and their programs to ensure academic achievement in all content areas. Implementation of WIT strategies across all content as formative assessment t asks 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 35 September 2018 - June 2019 Administrators, Team Leaders, and ORS Coaches FSC and District 14 schools. Nov.2018-June 2019 Examine instruction and discuss needs of staff by content/ as well as grade level meetings making PD adjusts when needed. Change in teacher practice through observation, as a results of implementation of other practices. The professional learning plan will be organized around the school's instructional focus (Students will make their thinking visible through rich and dynamic writing tasks (WIT, R.A.T.E, and Reciprocal Teaching).) to ensure that teachers receive training which will results in improved ratings in the "Component 3d" and "1e" using the danielson rubric. CET/SLT Recommendation: More meaningful professional development opportunities for teachers, including inter-visitations across the schools in District 14. Teachers n/a Teachers NA 4b – Parent and Family Engagement 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 36  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will host the following events: 1. Fall curriculum night - September 2. 8th grade parent's workshop - October 3. College expectations and preparation workshops (grades 9 - 11) - ongoing all year 4. 12th grade parent's breakfast - October Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The school will staff administrators, teachers, paraprofessionals, and partner organizations who provide coaches. Classroom supplies and technologies will be integral for achieving the goals and action plans in this section as well. The school will leverage professional learning time built into the daily schedule and after school on Mondays to support teachers as they learn and plan to implement new practices. Additionally, per session and per diem funds will be leveraged to add additional professional learning opportunities for staff during and outside of the school day. The school will utilize funds to secure coaches and partnerships that can provide teachers with professional learning opportunities to improve pedagogy and student engagement levels. Additionally, teachers will have the opportunity to collaborate with one another or coaches because per diem and per session funds will allow them to be released from daily instructional duties or to work beyond the end of the contractual school day. Also funding for the Teacher Leadership positions (portion not covered by Central DOE) must be factored into budget. Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded X X P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By February 2019 there will be an increase of 5% (yr to yr) of the number of students successfully completing regents exams. By February 2019 iready data will show a 5% increase in student performance. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. mock regents - HS, mock New York State exams - MS Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 37  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, SOP(s) Addressed Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the RSCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). X X n/a X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? Create a Leadership culture which enables all administrators to:  Evaluate staff using multiple sources of evidence such as observation, artefact's review, collegial dialogue and student-learning data that is aligned to educator performance standards, which result in improved teaching and learning.  Regularly provides clear, timely and actionable feedback based on evidence.  Proactively leads difficult conversations about performance or growth to strengthen teaching and enhance student learning  Work with key stakeholders to collaboratively develop and implement a coherent recruitment, selection and retention strategy in alignment with the school's vision, mission and goals.  Builds capacity of staff to provide high-quality, differentiated support for early career teachers 2. Communicate Effectively with all stakeholders that fosters:  A schoolwide culture in which all staff makes themselves accessible and approachable to families, students and community members through inclusive and welcoming behaviors.  Engages families and members of the community as leaders and partners in decision-making that improves schoolwide student achievement or student specific learning. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 38   Integrates cultural competencies and diversity of the community into multiple aspects of the educational program to meet the learning needs of all students. 3. Create a Culture that fosters Student Ownership of Learning:  Establishes a school culture in which students monitor themselves and peers regarding the implementation of expectations for conduct. Data Sources: Advance MOTP data, PPO feedback, QR feedback Part 2 – Summative Vision for Effective School Leadership What is your vision for effective school leadership at your school? Instructional Leadership: Grade-level teams: Grade teams complete collaborative, iterative, evidence-based action cycles (a.k.a. inquiry) to improve outcomes for target population students. Writing is Thinking* (WIT) tasks are used to target high leverage writing skills students need to clarify their thinking, to write with clarity and specificity and to communicate their ideas clearly. The WIT tasks allow teachers to formatively assess students’ acquisition of content and build students’ fluency with writing skills. Teachers collaborate to design WIT tasks and commit to an agreed upon time frame for task implementation. Each grade team has a target population on whom the inquiry is focused. The 11th grade team has focused their strategic effort on a group of students who need to pass the Global History Regents exam. A coach from Strategic Inquiry Consulting works with grade team leaders to build their capacity to facilitate purposeful team meetings, to expand their facilitation tool-kit, and to plan for responsive inquiry team meetings. All grade team meetings use an assessment checklist (Tennis Chart) that breaks skills down to specific, measurable, achievable, objective criteria. The Tennis Charts take stock of each target student’s written work and track student performance over time. In addition, the team tracks student performance (baseline, formative, interim, summative). These charts hold teachers accountable for what students can/can’t do and what students need to learn/do next while scaffolding teachers capacity to design aligned WIT tasks. Department teams: Department teams focus on implementation and facilitation of Engage, New Visions, and Passport curricula and timely, relevant pedagogical practices that meet the needs of all students and that make sense for each respective content area. Coaches from the Office of Renewal Schools work closely with the ELA, Social Studies, and Science departments. Grade/Department Leaders: Twice a month, grade and department team leaders meet with school leadership to review progress and define targeted, school-wide next action steps. Instructional Cabinet: Four a month, the Instructional Cabinet, a composition of teacher leaders and school leadership, meets to:  define school-wide priorities,  develop responsive professional development opportunities,    create a professional development calendar, articulate foci for instructional rounds and for inter-visitations, and debrief results from instructional rounds and inter-visitations. Targeted Professional Development Sessions: All PD sessions are followed by surveys that get at teachers’ key takeaways from the sessions and invite their suggestions for improvement. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 39  Instructional Walks & Inter-visitations: Instructional walks and inter-visitations look for evidence of students’ learning and for facilitation of quality WIT tasks. Inter-visitations provide the opportunity to assess the application and quality of new learning. Until teachers have had adequate time and coaching support to apply the new learning in their classrooms however, they are not held accountable for systematic implementation. During observations, verbal feedback is used to support teachers’ experimentation/integration of the new learning. Observations also include feedback regarding implementation of of Engage, New Visions, and Passport curriculum. Supervisory Leadership: Observations -The school leaders will directly supervise the cycle of observations, norming and the content of the feedback that the teachers will received from their assistant principals. The leader will share academic expectations and actionable feedback. The school leader will monitor the school’s progress and individual’s progress using the Regents results and advanced respectively. The data collected will be compared to prior years to monitor for progress. Teachers who are struggling or have a TIP plan will be partnered with an “effective “rating. These peering will consider the areas of support for struggling teachers based on advanced rating. Accountability - will be shared by teams of academic, behavior, socio emotional, attendance, supervision, clubs, etc. who will meet with the leader on regular basis to report progress and monitor the implementation of systems, benchmarks and a timeline. Evidence - Restructure of administrative and supervisory cabinet, sharing the new vision with all stakeholders, developing accountability systems to ensure that embedded leadership takes a part in the growth and success of the school. The school will use the New Vision data sorter, ATS and STARS to actively monitor the students’ progress and make accurate prediction of achieving all benchmarks. Communication - School leader will regularly communicate to parents and students the school’s priority and plans for college and career. The school leader with the community proactively develops opportunities to engage students, families and community in conversations regarding high academic expectation. The school will use multiple tools such as Skedula, the school's website, parent newsletters, and global messenger to communicate with families about school issues and events. The staff communicates regularly with parents concerning student progress, achievements and needs. The school is at the beginning stage of developing a system to monitor the effectiveness of communication. The school leader in collaboration with community base organization (CCS) has developed a plan to ensure that families are engaged and supported around students’ academic, social and emotional growth. Professional development has been planned for classroom teachers and guidance counselors to help ensure and sustain parent engagement. On which aspects of your own leadership do you plan to focus for the upcoming school year? Systematic communication of vision and expectations to all stakeholders with a focus on teachers 1. provide teachers with actionable focused feedback through the observation cycle and walkthroughs 2. monthly newsletter to teachers with information about trends seen across classrooms. 3. Weekly professional development sessions to provide teachers with information about specific expectations 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 40  4. Lead math department meetings 1 time per month to ensure teachers have clear understanding of instructional expectations. What is your vision for ensuring that everyone in your schools has a normed and shared understanding of the school’s vision, mission, and instructional focus? The professional development plan needs to include all stakeholders on the understanding of the vision, mission and instructional focus. What is your vision for developing differentiated leadership throughout your school? How will you utilize teacher leaders to build broad capacity within your school? Through the utilization of the lead teachers, differentiated PD and leadership will be incorporated to foster the interconnection of planning and adjustment to teacher practice. How will the leader foster collaborative school governance processes, and ensure full family participation together with other stakeholders? Through the SLT in collaboration with CBOs. CET/SLT will meet to review the community recommendations in the Fall of 2018. How often will the school leader conduct observations? How quickly will school leader share actionable feedback with teachers? How will school leader ensure accuracy and provide support to teachers based on observation feedback? Frequency Feedback Turnaround Accuracy Weekly Within 72 hours. Through DanielsonFramework PD. What kind of evidence based systems would a school leader put in place to ensure that the school and individuals continues to improve? What kind of supports? Who would he/she collaborate with? Evidence-Based System Support(s) Collaborator(s) MOTP Lead teachers/ School leaders Instructional Cabinet Lesson/unit plans Lead teachers/ School leaders MSQI,Instructional Cabinet Common Assessment Data Teacher Leaders Instructional Cabinet How will you organize student and teacher programs to ensure students’ needs are met? Fiscal capital? For the school year 2018-19, both our teacher and student schedules will reflect intervention periods . These intervention periods will allow us to focus on individual student needs. Students will be grouped by analyzing data and these groups will be adjusted based on their progress. Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 41  Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. By June 2019, classroom instruction and curricula artifacts (unit and lesson plans) will reflect the daily use of data to meet the needs of all students, as evidenced in a 5% increase in the 4 year graduation rate and a 5% increase in the number of students who are college and career ready upon graduation. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Effective School Leadership Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Effective School Leadership Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve 4 yr grad rate Regents completion Rate College Readiness Index 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 42  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) All Students All Develop a tracking system for interventions for all content area subjects All Students All Develop and implement a schoolwide system of grouping students for all interventions Principal, APs September 2018 - June 2019 September 2018 - June 2019 Principal, APs, lead teachers, coaches All Students All September 2018 - June 2019 Principal, APs, lead teachers, coaches All Students All September 2018 - June 2019 Principal, APs, lead teachers, Guidance Counselors, CBI counselor Provide professional development activities for all staff members including differentiation, scaffolding, multiple entry points, datawise and inquiry. Develop and Implement Calendar of Town Hall meetings with all students to clearly communicate school expectations and progress to graduation 4b – Parent and Family Engagement How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) MOTP ratings, MP grades for SWDs and ENLs, Assessment Data MOTP ratings, MP grades for SWDs and ENLs, Assessment Data MOTP ratings, MP grades for SWDs and ENLs, Assessment Data MP data, Attendance data, assessment data, OORs data How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent workshops 4 times a year provided by CBI and school 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 43  Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The school will secure administrators, faculty, staff, and coaching organizations to conduct professional learning. Additionally, the school has been programmed for significant professional learning to take place as part of the faculty’s contractual work day on Monday afternoons for 60 minutes per week. This is in addition to common learning / planning time that has also been built into the program for teachers on similar grade levels. In addition, per session for teachers to engage in activities outside of the school day. Verdant Learning and other identified organizations to help increase parent involvement. This benchmark is dependent on our ability to staff a CBI counselor. Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded X X P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By February 2019 the school will show a 3% gain in the number of students on track to graduate Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Iready data, common assessment data, mock regents data., New Visions sorter Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 44  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. NA X X NA Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? Juan Morel Campos believes that families are important partners in our work to educate children. Since becoming a Community School in 2015, the school has made great strides towards building a true family-school partnership that supports student learning and social emotional development. In the spring of 2016, Grand Street Settlement facilitated a partnership between the school and involved, a web-based attendance taking and text messaging program. Kinvolved has helped the school to communicate with parents about student attendance in real time, to send messages on the school, grade, and class levels, and to carry on conversations with parents about individual students. This customizable messaging has facilitated both reciprocal communication between school staff and parents (SOP 6.3) and the communication of high expectations (SOP 6.2). involved has been used to enhance standard modes of communication, such as school-wide mailings, robocalls, and meetings. Campos has also worked hard to improve SOP 6.4 through the development of its Community School Team and a partnership with Ramapo for Children. The Community School Team is a group composed of school staff, CBO staff, and parents that meets bimonthly to plan parent engagement initiatives, which in 2016-17 included a workshop aimed at helping parents to better support their children's learning at home and the spring Community School Forum. Ramapo for Children provides parent workshops on topics such as managing conflict at home and understanding adolescent behavior. Finally, Campos has made preliminary steps towards strengthening SOP 6.5 by enrolling more parents in Engrade in the 2016-17 school year and mailing home progress reports with academic and attendance data. In the 2018-19 school year, Campos aims to enhance all four SOPs by offering a broader array of parent workshops, doing more proactive positive outreach to families early in the school year to initiate reciprocal conversations that 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 45  maintain high expectations and identify student need, and by using more effective systems for systematically and routinely sharing data with parents. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Strong Family and Community Ties What is your vision for having strong family and community ties at your school? Campos believes that the ultimate desired outcome of family engagement efforts is the development of a true family-school partnership that promotes student social emotional growth and academic achievement. An ideal family-school partnership involves school staff who invite families to be an active partner in their children's learning and families who are equipped to fulfill their multiple roles as advocates, decision makers, supporters, and collaborators in their children's education. In the fall of 2018, the Campos Community School Team identified a set of priority action steps that must be taken in order to further a family-school partnership. These action steps included developing a parent handbook, providing more parent workshops that enhance knowledge and skills related to student academic performance and social emotional development and positive parent communication practices among school staff. These priority areas will be fully addressed in the 2017-18 school year. Within the Community School model, how will families be welcomed into the school and made a part of the school community? What support will administrators, teachers, school staff and school safety officers be given to help create a welcoming environment? Will there be a dedicated space for families in the school? Grand Street Settlement believes that family engagement contributes to student learning and social emotional growth. During the 2016-17 school year, Grand Street Settlement developed an effective Community School Team that meets twice per month and engages parents, school staff (including teachers, administrators, and support staff), and CBO staff as partners in school planning. The Community School Team will be enhanced in 2017-18 through the inclusion of more parents, as well as student leaders. The Team will coordinate planning and implementation of weekly family activities that include at least one parent workshop per month focused on building knowledge and skills linked to student learning or social emotional development. Parents will be critical partners in the planning and execution of these events. As the lead CBO, Grand Street Settlement has developed partnerships with the organizations Kinvolved (described above) and Verdant Learning. Verdant Learning is an organization that specializes in enhancing family engagement in schools by strengthening the capacity of key school personnel to engage families in student learning. In 2016-17, Verdant Learning and Grand Street Settlement partnered to develop the Community School Team, revamp the school website, strengthening fall Curriculum Night and Student-Led Conferences, implementing opportunities for adult education (primarily a weekly adult ESL class), and organize parent-teacher home visits for all incoming 6th and 9th grade students. Partnerships with Kinvolved and Verdant Learning will be continued during the 2017-2018 school year. In addition to these formal structures for engaging parents in the school community, Campos is also invested in creating a welcoming environment for any parent who enters the school building. An important part of this is providing 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 46  dedicated space for families to engage with school and CBO staff. The primary parent-oriented spaces in the school are described below:  Grand Street Settlement's Community School Office: This is the first room next to the entrance to the school and is often the first stop for visiting families. In this office, families can find Grand Street Settlement staff, such as case managers, social workers, tutors, and the Community School Director, many of whom are bilingual. Grand Street Settlement has an open door policy, which enables families to drop by at any time for support, connection to resources, or information about their child's academic and social/emotional progress. The Community School Office also houses computers that are available for parent use.  PTA Office: The PTA Office is short walk down the hall from the main entrance. The PTA President, who is also bilingual, is often at the school and supports parents by facilitating communication with school staff and connecting them to resources. The PTA Office is a space that has been set aside for parents' sole use.  Main Office: The Campos Main Office is staffed by the school's bilingual Parent Coordinator so that when parents come to the school with a question, problem, or complaint, they receive a warm welcome and immediate support. The Parent Coordinator facilitates parents' communication with other school staff members, helps connect parents to the PTA and lead CBO Grand Street Settlement, and is able to provide parents with direct information about their children through her access to ATS and STARS. There are also computers available for parent use in the Main Office. The structures and practices described above will all serve to enhance family-school partnerships at Campos during the 2018-2019 school year. How will the school identify and develop families to take leadership roles in school decision making/school governance structures? Families will be identified for leadership roles by key family engagement stakeholders and will also be given the opportunity to self-identify. PTA board members, particularly the PTA President, will play key leadership roles in school decision making and will also recommend other parents for participation in school governance structures. Other stakeholders, such as the Parent Coordinator, CBO staff, and teachers, will also be asked to refer parents for leadership roles. Finally, at all family events, families will be encouraged to completed "Count on Me" forms. These forms ask parents to check off the ways in which they are interested in being involved in the school, such as by attending a Parent Teacher Conference or PTA meeting, by participating in phone banking, or by taking on leadership roles. "Count on Me" forms will give parents the opportunity to self-identify for participation in school decision making and governance structures. How will the school engage the community and families? How will they ensure that teachers are able to learn from families about the children being taught? During the 2018-19 school year, Campos will use the following strategies to engage families in reciprocal communication with school and CBO staff regarding expectations, student need, and student performance/development:  Parent-Teacher Home Visits: In the spring and summer of 2018, teachers, guidance counselors, and CBO staff conducted home or school visits with all incoming 6th and 9th grade students. These visits provided staff with invaluable information about students and families that will help Campos to effectively support these students during the coming school year. During the 2017-18 school year, this program will be expanded to include other target student populations (e.g. 12th graders, chronically absent students).  Weekly Family Activities: The Community School Team will plan weekly family activities, including at least one parent workshop per month. The primary purpose of these workshops will be to provide parents with 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 47   information and build skills, but they will also be opportunities for school staff to learn more from and about parents and their children. Fall Family Curriculum Night: Fall open school evening will be used to give parents information about academic and behavioral expectations (codified in parent and student handbooks) and curricula. Student-Led Conferences: Instead of traditional parent-teacher conferences, Campos holds two Student-Led Conferences each year. During these Conferences, students present their work to their parents and reflect on their academic progress.  Messaging/Data Sharing Systems (Kinvolved & Skedula/PupilPath): Campos will continue to use Kinvolved to engage in text messaging with parents. Additionally, the school plans to adopt Skedula in order to facilitate transparent grading that is consistently available to both students and parents through the PupilPath portal. In addition to making academic and attendance data available to parents, Skedula/PupilPath has messaging capabilities that will facilitate sharing this data with parents. What types of supports does the school provide to families to encourage them to take an active role in what their child is learning? Type of Support Rationale Parent-Teacher Home Visits Skedula/PupilPath Parent Workshops While some parents visit the school frequently, others rarely enter the building. Parent-teacher home visits serve as an effective first step in promoting parent involvement by engaging parents in an environment that is most convenient and comfortable for them and showing the caring and effort of school staff. Skedula/PupilPath will be used to share academic and attendance data with parents. Consistent data sharing will give parents some of the information they need to become active participants in student learning. At least one parent workshop will be held every month. Workshops will communicate expectations and academic content while building the skills parents need to support student learning at home. How do families partner with the school and CBO to support student success? Will there be dedicated space for families? Family partnerships with school: PTA, SLT, Community School Team, Student-Led Conferences, parent-teacher home visits, parent workshops Family partnerships with CBO: Community School Team, parent-teacher home visits, parent workshops, parents accessing CBOresources Is there dedicated space for these partnerships? Yes (PTAOffice and Community School Office) What is your vision for the role the school will take in providing access adult education classes within the community? During the 2018-19 school year, lead CBO Grand Street Settlement developed a relationship with the Office of Adult and Continuing Education that resulted in a Saturday adult English for Speakers of Other Languages (ESL) class being opened at the school. This class was enhanced by an Adult Literacy grant that Grand Street Settlement received from City Council through the Office of Community Schools. After a successful year of Saturday ESL classes, Campos was selected 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 48  to be a summer school site for OACE. During the summer of 2018, adult ESL classes will be held at Campos on Tuesday, Wednesday, and Thursday evenings. Our vision is to build upon this moment to host both Saturday and weekday adult ESL classes at Campos during the 2018-19. school year. Eventually, we also hope to open a Spanish High School Equivalency class at the school. What data and student progress feedback loops will be present at the school to ensure that families knowledgeable of their children’s scholastic success? In previous years, Campos used Engrade to share academic data with parents. After many efforts to standardize and expand Engrade use among teachers, students, and parents, the school decided that a program with even more data tracking and sharing capabilities was necessary. As a results, Campos will transition to Skedula for the 2017-18 school year and will continue to use it in schoolyear 18-19. .Skedula will enable teachers to more effectively track student attendance and academic performance in real time and share this data with students and parents through the PupilPath portal. In addition to data tracking capabilities, Skedula/PupilPath also has messaging functions that will enable school staff and parents to engage in remote conversations about student data. Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. By June 2019 we will ensure that our outreach to families results in 75% of students' parents participating in at least one parent engagement activity (Student-Led Conference, parent workshop, Parent-Teacher Home Visit, or PTA meeting). Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Strong Family and Community Ties Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Strong Family and Community Ties Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve Attendance Progress to Graduation in Years 2 & 3 ELA & Math Percent Level 2 & Above 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 49  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) May 2018-June 2019 Grand Street Settlement CSD, Verdant Learning Attendance, Progress to Graduation in Years 2 & 3, ELA & Math Percent Level 2 & Above Parent-Teacher Home Visits 6th and 9th graders Weekly family activities, including at least one parent workshop per month All parents and students Attendance, Progress to Graduation in Years 2 & 3, ELA & Math Percent Level 2 & Above September 2018-June 2019 Grand Street Settlement CSD, members of the Community School Team Transition to Skedula/PupilPath for grading and academic/attendance data sharing All parents, students, teachers Attendance, Progress to Graduation in Years 2 & 3, ELA & Math Percent Level 2 & Above September 2018 Principal How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Year-over-year increase in attendance, high school credit accumulation after Term 1, performance on middle school ELA & Math assessments Year-over-year increase in attendance, high school credit accumulation after Term 1, performance on middle school ELA & Math assessments Year-over-year increase in attendance, high school credit accumulation after Term 1, performance 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 50  Develop a parent handbook that outlines clear goals for student academic achievement and social emotional development, corresponding academic and behavioral expectations for students, expectations for parent involvement, and what students/parents can expect of school staff regarding communication and data sharing All parents, students, teachers Attendance, Progress to Graduation in Years 2 & 3, ELA & Math Percent Level 2 & Above July 2018 - September 2018 Grand Street Settlement CSD, Principal, members of the Community School Team on middle school ELA & Math assessments Year-over-year increase in attendance, high school credit accumulation after Term 1, performance on middle school ELA & Math assessments Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Phone calls, postage mail, email, and newsletters will be used to communicate with parents about important issues that involve their children, and will take place daily. This outreach will also require personnel resources. Funds will be spent on subcontracting with Kinvolved, and Skedula. Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded X X P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding X C4E Other Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By February 2019, 50% of students' parents will have participated in at least one parent engagement activity and will have accessed their PupilPath account. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 51  Attendance and sign in sheets from all events will be the data collected. Parent access to PupilPath will be assessed using the Skedula report that indicates the number of parents that have accessed their PupilPath account. Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 52  Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Program Description Directions: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) activities are directly aligned to the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, Rigorous Instruction, Supportive Environments, and Strong Family and Community Ties. ELT provides enriching educational experiences that happen outside of the traditional school day and blend skill acquisition, relationship-building and fun to foster academic and social-emotional growth. Summer learning, afterschool programming, and extended-day ELT models, when well-implemented, play a critical role in supporting students in all grades and ensuring that they graduate from high school, college and career ready. SED requires that Priority schools offer a minimum of 200 additional student contact hours as Expanded Learning Time in addition to the current mandated length of 900 hours of instruction per year (25 hours per week) in grades K-6 and 990 hours of instruction per year (27.5 hours per week) in grades 7-12. Effective ELT models will blend school staff with community partners, and will provide a balanced curriculum that can include ELA, math, STEM, arts, physical activity, and leadership development. Complete the sections on this page to demonstrate how the school will meet these requirements. Part 1 – ELT Program Goal(s) Describe the summative goal(s) of the ELT program for the 2018-19 school year. Goals for ELT should align to the Renewal Benchmarks. How will the school will ensure that all students’ individual needs are served during the Renewal ELT and how the school’s vision for ELT will impact both academic achievement and social emotional growth? Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. By June 2019 we will have increased the number of students on track to graduate (in 4 yrs) by 4% Part 2 – ELT Program Type Is the ELT program voluntary or compulsory? Voluntary X Compulsory Renewal ELT – Describe what accountability structures the school will employ to ensure participation of all students, including special populations, will participate fully in Renewal ELT. Additional ELT - If there is a voluntary ELT program in addition to the compulsory Renewal ELT, indicate how you will actively encourage the participation of all students, with the goal of serving at least 50% of students. The Renewal Hour will be embedded into the school day. Students will attend for 9 periods while teachers are on 2 staggered 8 period days. Additional After school activities will be provided through CBOs. Part 3 – ELT Program Description Target Population: The ELT program for a Renewal School will be offered to all students in the school. Describe how the school will meet the following SED requirements for an ELT program: How will the school integrate academics, enrichment, and skill development through hands-on experiences that make learning relevant and engaging? How will CBO staff and the school’s teachers be integrated to provide a seamless learning day?  Offer a range of activities that capture student interest and strengthen student engagement in learning so as to promote higher attendance, reduces risk for retention or drop out, and increases the likelihood of graduation.  Actively address the unique learning needs and interests of all types of students, especially those who may benefit from approaches and experiences not offered in the traditional classroom setting.  What new content areas and opportunities will be offered to students? How will the school ensure all IEP and language mandates are met during ELT?  Contain components designed to improve student academic, social, and emotional outcomes, including opportunities for enrichment programs such as in music and art.  Ensure instruction in any core academic subject offered in the program will be delivered under the supervision of a teacher who is NYS certified in that particular content area. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 53   How will community educators receive professional development? Are there plans to provide joint PD to school faculty and community partner staff?  What content will be led by pedagogical staff and what content will be led by CBO partners?  How will the school best utilize CBO partners to impact student achievement?  How will effective outreach be conducted to families?  How will programming be made easily accessible to students and families in order to encourage participation? All ELT offered during the embedded Renewal Hour will be academic in nature, additional enrichment activities will be offered after school by the Coalition for Hispanic Families, Grand Street Settlement and by JMC teachers. As with any other part of the day the Renewal Hour will adhere to ENL and SWD mandates to provide students with mandated services. Since we use this time as instructional time all classes are teacher led. Part 4 – ELT Program Implementation and Oversight Part 4a. Who will implement the ELT program? Who will oversee the program? 1. Indicate the key personnel that will be responsible for implementing and overseeing the ELT program, including school-based staff and any high-quality community partners that will be involved. If applicable, describe the scope of involvement of all community partners and how the joint ELT program is structured. How will the school assess the impact of ELT on individual student achievement and social emotional development? 2. 3. The Renewal Hour ELT is part of the instructional day and will be overseen by school administration as any other part of the day. Activities run by CFHF will be overseen by the Office for Youth development and school administration. Offerings provided by Grand Street Settlement will be overseen by the CBO Director as well as school administration. We will assess the impact of the Renewal Hour using the Receivership benchmarks listed above. we will assess the impact of the CBO related activities using the Framework Element: Supportive Environment. Part 4b. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. September 2018 - June 2019 Part 5 – ELT Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the ELT program. To implement the program as described above the school will need to staff teachers, administrators, deans, guidance counselors, a parent coordinator, and CBO partners. The CBOs will need to staff their own supervisors and staff (e.g. tutors, social workers, case managers, activity specialists, etc.). The programs will run effectively when staff and students have access to instructional materials, field experiences, and classroom spaces to run effectively. Lastly, the school has already planned a daily program that provides the time for ELT to occur as described above. Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support the ELT Program. Note: If the program is funded by 21st Century Community Center Learning Funds, it must be offered in conjunction with a high quality, high capacity community partner. 21st Century X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA X P/F Set-aside 2018-19 RSCEP-PF C4E 54  Title I 1003(a) X Title III PTA Funded SIG Grant School Achievement X Other Funding Part 6 – ELT Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound and aligned to the school’s Renewal Benchmarks By February 2019 the number of students on track to graduate in June 2019 will increase by 2% Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. New Visions Student Sorter Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 55  Section 7: Community School Description Directions: The Community School program is directly aligned to the Framework for Great Schools element – Strong Family and Community Ties. Part 1 – The Community School Program Goal(s) Indicate the summative goal(s) of the Community School program for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. By June 2019, the Grand Street Settlement Community School program at Juan Morel Campos will have helped the school to create a more supportive school environment with stronger family and community ties, as evidenced by an increase in attendance to 92% in the middle school and 89% in the high school, and a family engagement rate of 75%. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Community School Program Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Community School Program Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve Attendance Framework: Supportive Environment Progress to Graduation in Years 2 & 3 Part 2 – Community School Program Description Part 2a. Identify the CBO partnerships that you will develop, their target student population(s), and scope of the services provided. As well as supporting schools’ supportive environment and attendance work, CBO’s should be helping to support your school’s instructional focus. CBO Partnership Target Population Scope of Service Grand Street Settlement All students and families Center for Supportive Schools All 9th grade students, 11th and 12th grade peer leaders Drive school-wide family engagement and attendance improvement efforts, provide tutoring to target students, provide individual and group mental health counseling, provide internships and professional development to select high school students, develop and maintain partnerships that bring additional services into the school (e.g. OACE, Food Bank, SmileNY, ActionNYC, Ramapo for Children, Common Threads). Support implementation of the Peer Group Connection peer leadership program. NYU Lutheran Family Health Centers Students with health and/or mental health needs Provide an Article 28 school-based health clinic. Coalition for Hispanic Family Services 6th, 7th, 8th grades After School and Summer Program Expanded Learning Time 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 56  2. 3. 4. Part 2b. Describe how the school will meet the NYCDOE requirements for a Community School in the School Renewal program. 1. Renewal Schools are expected to partner with a community-based partner organization (CBO) and together with members of the School Leadership Team, hire a Community School Director. The Director will lead implementation of the asset and needs assessment process, and other critically important coordinating activities. Indicate how you will leverage this aspect of the work. Renewal Schools are expected to personalize the needs of all students, through strategic programming and services, as determined by the asset and needs assessment, and must also offer Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and mental health programming. In completing this section, ensure that you think about how: (1) the right services are provided to the right students and families at the right time; and (2) how you will seamlessly coordinate services with instructional programming happening throughout and outside of the school day. Indicate how you will implement this work, and describe other programming you anticipate to be in place to strengthen this initiative. Renewal Schools are expected to emerge as Partnership Schools, which are places where parents and families feel welcome, actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. Monthly meetings and Community School Forums engaging families and community stakeholders will be a critical part of this family engagement strategy. Describe how you will implement this aspect of the work. Renewal School Principals are expected to meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. Data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter - and training will be available for schools to use. Indicate how you will implement this aspect of the work. 1. Juan Morel Campos Secondary School was matched with lead CBO partner Grand Street Settlement in the spring of 2015. A full-time Community School Director was hired in June 2018. The CSD has conducted ongoing needs assessments that inform Community Schools programming in order to ensure that programs and partnerships meet identified community needs. In addition to building partnerships with other organizations that have been brought into the school to provide services, the CSD has hired a team of Community Schools staff to implement family engagement, attendance improvement, academic support, and mental health programming at the school. Ongoing needs assessment and evaluation of existing programs and partnerships will continue in the 2018-19 school year. 2. Grand Street Settlement and its partner CBOs provide both targeted and school-wide services based on identified student and family need. Individualized student-level services include individual and group mental health counseling, tutoring, in-class support, internships, and other professional development. Grand Street Settlement also supports families through parent workshops, home visits, an on-site food pantry, adult education classes, on-site benefits enrollment through Single Stop, Peer Group Connection peer mentoring program in the High school, and connections to other services/resources. Students and parents are identified for these programs using data as well as referrals from school staff, parents, and students. Mental health services throughout the school are coordinated through weekly referral meetings chaired by the Grand Street Settlement Community School Director. All mental health providers in the school (Grand Street Settlement, NYU Langone Family Health Centers, and DOE social workers and psychologists) use one central referral form that was collaboratively developed. Weekly meetings are used to coordinate services, prevent duplication, and ensure that each referred student is seen by the clinician/organization that is most well-suited to meeting that child’s needs. In 2018-19, Grand Street Settlement will continue the services described above and partner with Day One to implement Early RAPP (Early Relationship Abuse Prevention Program. Early RAPP uses a healthy relationship training 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 57  model to provide prevention education to DOE schools serving grades 6-8. Participating schools will be assigned a Community Educator, who will provide workshops to students, parents and community members, trainings to school staff, and will facilitate relationship abuse prevention lessons, as well as connect students and families to critical support services. The Community Educator will tailor these supports around the needs of your school, and can offer trainings and curricula support during appropriate class sessions, Professional Development hours, after school workshops and student club meetings, or other times. In addition, we home to partner with A Fair Shake for Youth. A Fair Shake with youth will work with the middle school and provide an opportunity for students to work hands on with a therapy dog. ELT programming is academic and is based on identified academic need (assessments in the middle school, credit and Regents gaps in the high school). Grand Street Settlement supports by providing in-class support from tutors, as well as staffing support for the school's art programs (e.g. vocal coaches, dance instructors). 3. In 2017-18, Grand Street Settlement facilitated bimonthly Community School Team meetings and will continue to do so during school year 2018-19. The Community School Team is composed of school staff, CBO staff, students, and parents. The Team developed a vision for family-school partnership and priority action steps for realizing this vision, and also planned key family engagement events such as a parent workshop on how to support student learning at home and the annual Community School Forum. Community School Team meetings are also a place for parents to give feedback about the school that is then carried to SLT and Cabinet meetings. The Community School Team will continue to meet twice per month in 2018-19 and will expand to include more parents, as well as students. 4. The Principal, Community School Director, and APs meet weekly as a Cabinet to school policies and initiatives, as well as student data and progress towards Renewal and Receivership benchmarks. Additionally, the Community School Director facilitates a weekly Success Summit attended by guidance counselors, Success Mentors, the Principal, and other relevant staff. Success Summits focus on reviewing student-level data and school-wide trends and assigning appropriate interventions to struggling students based on this data. The New Visions Data Sorter and ATS reports are used in weekly Success Summits. Part 3 – Community School Program Implementation and Oversight Part 3a. Key Staff and Partners 1. Name and describe the scope of involvement of all community partners working in the school (include partners supporting ELT, counseling, enrichment, etc.) 2. Name the members of your Community School Team and how meetings will be organized and structured to engage all stakeholders and be focused on results. 3. Explain data strategies including the use of the data sorter, and steps that the school will take to ensure that the appropriate interventions are provided to the right students 1) As the lead CBO partner, Grand Street Settlement has developed several new partnerships with community organizations since the fall of 2015 and also supports long standing partnerships that were already present within the school. See Part 2b for more details on the scope of services provided by Grand Street Settlement school-based staff members. Additional partners that have staff based at Juan Morel Campos include the Coalition for Hispanic Family Services (CHFS), NYU Langone Family Health Centers, and the College Bound Initiative. CHFS is the school's SONYC partner and provides after school and summer programming to 91 middle school students. NYU Langone subcontracts with Grand Street Settlement to provide an Article 28 School-Based Health Clinic offering integrated physical and behavioral health services, as well as sexual health education. The health clinic is accessible to all students, provided their caregiver signs a release. The College Bound Initiative places a full-time college counselor in the school. This college counselor assists 11th and 12th grade students with college and financial aid applications and other post-secondary planning, organizes an annual college fair, and plans college trips. In addition to partners with staff based out of Juan Morel Campos, Grand Street Settlement has developed partnerships with organizations that send staff to the school on an as-needed or periodic basis. These partnerships include Single Stop (support in accessing government benefits, legal counsel, and job training), ActionNYC, (on-site immigration legal clinics and know your rights workshops), AmeriCorps (stipended service experiences and college scholarships for high school 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 58  students), Verdant Learning (consultation on family engagement initiatives), Food Bank (on-site food pantry), Office of Adult and Continuing Education (on-site English for Speakers of Other Languages classes for adults), SmileNY (on-site free dental clinics), Intrepid Sea, Air, & Space Museum (year-long STEAM and cultural exchange program for high school ENL students), and Center for Supportive Schools in order to implement the Peer Group Connection peer leadership program (see Part 2b for details). In 2018-19, Grand Street Settlement will continue these partnerships. In 2018-19, the CSD’s primary focus areas will be the implementation of Early RAPP, strengthening the school’s attendance and academic mentoring programs (Success Mentoring and Graduation Mentoring), and establishing greater structure and supports for the Grand Street Settlement tutoring program. CSD will co-chair the SEL-team which will focus on aligning PGC, Advisory, RAP/PBIS and RULER to make sure the school is enforcing the same SEL competencies and using the same language across the school. The team will be composed of guidance counselors, CBO social workers, assistant principal and SpEd teachers. 2) The Community School Team is composed of school staff, CBO staff, and parents. The Community School Team meets every other week in order to maintain momentum and provide members with more opportunities for involvement should they have to miss a meeting. Meetings are structured as collaborative work spaces in which all members have equal voice. Parent and school and CBO staff members are encouraged to co-chair projects in order to enhance collaboration and communication. In order to ensure productivity, all meetings end with a review of next steps, including responsible parties and time frame, and all meetings begin with check-ins around the next steps identified in the previous meeting. 3) The New Visions data tools, including the Student Sorter, Heat Map, Credit Gaps Tool, and others, are used frequently by the Community School DIrector and school staff. The CSD uses these tools to provide school-wide and student-level data at weekly Success Summits. This data is also used to target the correct students for interventions, such as mental health counseling, tutoring, and attendance mentoring. The CSD also supports the school's guidance counselors to use the NV data tools in programming and advising so as to ensure that students are programmed for the correct courses and Regents exams, absences are caught early, and students have access to their own data. Part 3b. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the Community School program. The Grand Street Settlement Community School Director has worked closely with the school's Principal, Assistant Principals, and other school staff to ensure that the necessary resources are available to ensure full implementation of the Community School program. The Community School program is supported by the following school-based resources: a dedicated Community School office, an office for confidential mental health counseling, a student activity room, a storage closet for program supplies, access to ATS data reports through collaboration with guidance counselors and the Pupil Accounting Secretary, school GAFE email accounts to facilitate communication with school staff and access to shared documents, permits for after hours space usage for events, teacher and student schedules, and regular meetings with the Principal and Assistant Principals regarding program implementation. Part 3c. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. July 2018  Data for 2017-2018 school year analyzed to assess successes and areas for growth in Community School implementation.  NYU Langone Family Health Centers mental health treatment and Grand Street Settlement mental health counseling continue through summer.  Grand Street Settlement staff support Summer Bridge for incoming 6th and 9th graders. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 59  Grand Street Settlement staff support summer school through attendance outreach with a particular focus on rising 12th grade students who are at risk of not graduating.  Grand Street Settlement CSD, Campos teacher and AP will meet continue implementation of PGC at Campos and plans for the school year.  Planning meetings conducted on the topics of: student recruitment and retention, family engagement and Community School Team, supportive environment initiatives.  Grand Street Settlement and Verdant Learning continue to coordinate parent teacher home visits to incoming 6th and 9th grade students (visits began in June 2018). August 2018  Collaborative planning for 2018-2019 school year continues.  New Grand Street Settlement staff hired. September 2018 Full Grand Street Settlement service implementation (mental health services begin, internship program applications released and interns selected, tutors begin in-class academic support, Community School Team resumes meetings, weekly Success Summits resume, adult education classes resume, etc.).   Initial parent workshops held (Family/Curriculum Night on 9/26, weekly family engagement activities begin; Grand Street Settlement staff support parent outreach, event planning, and workshop facilitation; these events are used to recruit additional parent members for the Community School Team). Success Mentor Program is initiated (teachers select mentees from a list of chronically absent students, mentors trained). SEL-Team meetings are scheduled with team members.   Peer Group Connection peer leadership class begins.  Peer Group Connection overnight retreat at Greenkill YMCA.  Early- RAPP program begins. October 2018  Grand Street Settlement service implementation continues (services described above continue, first family trip held, student interns begin working at internship placements, tutors add small-group tutoring to in-class academic support).  Weekly family engagement activities continue.   Peer Group Connection peer leaders begin outreaches to 9th graders. Success Mentor Program kicks off (first mentor/mentee goal-setting lunch). November 2018  Grand Street Settlement services continue.  Weekly family engagement activities continue and Student-Led Conferences are held (Grand Street Settlement staff support parent outreach). Success Mentor Program and Peer Group Connection continue.  2018-19 RSCEP-PF 60  December 2018  Grand Street Settlement services continue.  Weekly family engagement activities, Success Mentor Program, and Peer Group Connection continue. January 2019  Grand Street Settlement services and other initiatives continue (second family trip held).  Grand Street Settlement staff support January Regents exam outreach.  Grand Street Settlement CSD and social worker join Campos teacher and AP at a mid-year Peer Group Connection professional development. February 2019  Grand Street Settlement services and other initiatives continue (tutoring and mentorship needs are re-assessed based on Term 1 grades, January Regents exam scores, and Term 1 attendance data).  Peer Group Connection peer leaders plan and open house for 9th grade parents. March 2019  Grand Street Settlement services and other initiatives continue.   Community School Team begins planning the annual Community School Forum. Student-Led Conferences (Grand Street Settlement staff support parent outreach). April 2019  Grand Street Settlement services and other initiatives continue (third family trip held). May 2019  Grand Street Settlement services and other initiatives continue.  Community School Forum held (planned by Community School Team).  Community School Team debriefs Community School Forum and consolidates findings into set of recommendations for 2018-2019 RSCEP.  Collaborative budgeting for FY18 begins.  Collaborative revision of 2018-2019 RSCEP begins.  Grand Street Settlement coordinates outreach to incoming 6th and 9th grade students, including parent-teacher home visits, orientations, and Summer Bridge outreach. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 61  June 2019  Grand Street Settlement services and initiatives continue (support Regents Exam outreach, support 8th and 12th grade graduation events). Success Mentor Program celebration and wrap-up. Final Community School Team meeting held. Final Success Summit held.     Collaborative budgeting for FY20 completed and budget submitted.  Collaborative RSCEP revision completed and 2019-2020 RSCEP draft submitted.  Outreach to incoming 6th and 9th grade students continues Part 3d. Mental Health Work Plan Separate from this RSCEP, schools will complete a Mental Health Work Plan that will become an addendum to this document. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 62  Section 8: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) 2018-19 RSCEP-PF Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Students at-risk or who previously have not met proficiency levels on State ELA exams. Students at-risk or who previously have not met proficiency levels on State Math exams. Students at-risk or who previously have not met proficiency levels on State Math or Science exams. Students at-risk or who previously have not met proficiency levels on State ELA exams. Students who are mandated for services, exhibit behaviors that put their academic standing or well-being at-risk, and/or who demonstrate behaviors requiring temporary interventions and support. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Small group tutoring, reciprocal teaching, co-teaching, and the Wilson Reading System. Small group tutoring, co-teaching, and one-to-one instruction. Small group and one-to-one instruction/tutoring and co-teaching. Small group and one-to-one instruction/tutoring and co-teaching. Small group tutoring, reciprocal teaching, co-teaching, and one-to-one tutoring. Small group and one-to-one instruction/tutoring and co-teaching. Small group tutoring, co-teaching, and reciprocal teaching, Academic and social-emotional counseling and coaching sessions. Small group and one-to-one instruction/tutoring and co-teaching. Small group and one-to-one counseling sessions. When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Daily: During the school day, after-school ELT, weekend ELT, and vacation ELT. Daily: During the school day, after-school ELT, weekend ELT, and vacation ELT. Daily: During the school day, after-school ELT, weekend ELT, and vacation ELT. Daily: During the school day, after-school ELT, weekend ELT, and vacation ELT. As needed: During the school day, after-school ELT, weekend ELT, and vacation ELT. 63  2018-19 RSCEP-PF 64  Section 9: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) Currently there is 10% (60) of the student population at Juan Morel Campos IS 71 in temporary housing. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Welcome the student and the family and let them know that the school is a safe and secure place • Ensure that the student has every opportunity that a permanently housed student has to participate in after-school activities and in-school programs • Provide city bus tokens or other transportation assistance to get parents to school for conferences, school events, or PTA meetings • Establish funds to help students in temporary housing pay for school pictures, field trips, school supplies, prom tickets, etc. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). n/a 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 65  n/a 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. n;a 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 66  Section 10: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Title I funds are utilized to implement regents preparation in the Saturday Academy Program, Early and After School Hours. The school runs an academy that serves the school population in a small Saturday setting where students take classes and meet with an on-site guidance counselor to discuss their progress and tracking their credits towards graduation. Also, early and after school tutoring services are available to provide additional support and accommodate various student’s schedules. In order to recruit highly qualified staff, job posting qualifications will include overall ratings, success rate of students in regularly assigned classes, and training & experience working with ELL, IEP and Lowest Third students. Lead Teachers will be utilized to offer on-going professional development to support staff once they are hired. School leaders in collaboration with the Office of School Renewal (OSR) will provide staff with high quality professional development. OSR coaches will work directly with highly qualified teachers to provide individual support and build capacity. School administration will participate the DOE hiring fairs to recruit qualified individuals. The OSR and superintendent will work closely with the school during the recruitment, interviews and hiring process to select the most qualified candidate. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). The Professional Development Plan of JMC is comprehensive and will be based on a strategic plan targeting deficient areas found in the Quality Review and Needs Assessment by the Schools Renewal Team. The main areas of focus will be: Curriculum and Instruction; School Culture; Development of Leadership; and College and Career Readiness. Curriculum and Instruction- JMC will develop professional development to assist teachers in developing and implementing research-based literacy strategies and activities in daily lesson plans and aligning curriculum units and lessons that provide multiple entry points with the Common Core Learning Standards, including all students, as well as sub-groups, such as ELLs, ISS and the lowest third in order to promote greater student engagement in rigorous and critical thinking. Some of the areas of professional development will include: instructional focus and the instructional shifts; school wide data analysis to drive instruction; WITsi; Danielson Framework; Instructional Support Services and ELL multiple entry points; academic language; explicit modeling; Citywide Instructional Expectations; inquiry and protocols to evaluate student work; alignment of curriculum maps and units to lesson plans; strategies to support high thinking level questions (DOK); scaffolding of materials; knowledge of content-related pedagogy; and meaningful student feedback..School Culture- The professional development will target diverse areas of school culture that includes parent engagement, staff and community involvement in order to foster an academic culture by which students extend their learning at home independently and to develop a collaborative environment wherein staff 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 67  members will build toward a unified culture of teaching and learning. Some of the areas of professional development will include: Pupil path; building organization; student-related data; classroom environment; navigating the school system; and learning environment surveys. Development of Leadership -The professional development in this area will build distributive leadership capacity within JMC community by creating opportunities for all stakeholders to become vested in supporting the success of this learning environment through participation in all aspects of academic and extra-curricular activities and school sponsored events. College and Career Readiness- The professional development in this area will build a foundation for college and career readiness by focusing on course programming and training for teachers. The school will provide exposure and college and career coursework to students to prepare them for post-secondary education. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. NA 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). Na Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. The math and ELA department are using the suggested revised EngageNY Curriculum that was presented by the OSR. The social studies and science department will be using the suggested New Vision curriculum from the OSR. During specific common planning sessions, each department will develop common assessments (mid-term and endterm) and grading rubrics. These assessments will be approved by the department supervisor. All assessment must be aligned with the CCLS, school's expectations and curriculum. The school will use these common assessment to evaluate the effectiveness of the school's curriculum and make the necessary adjustments need to address students gaps in their learning 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 68  for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (RSCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Title I Part A (Basic) Federal Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Federal Federal Federal Federal Title III, Immigrant Federal Tax Levy (FSF) Local 428,794 0 111,821 0 19,150 0 5,196,001 X X X X X X X Column B Section Reference(s) Sections 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9 and 10 0 Sections 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9 and 10 0 Sections 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9 and 10 0 Sections 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9 and 10 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages: 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 69   Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/RSCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 70  Section 11: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Juan Morel Campos Secondary School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Juan Morel Campos Secondary School will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 71  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home;  provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report;  host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions:  2018-19 RSCEP-PF 72  ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) Juan Morel Campos Secondary School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 73  ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas;  providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 74  ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 75  ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 76  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): K 6 1 7 2 8 3 9 4 10 5 11 12 80 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 77  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 4 4 0 Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: This year, Juan Morel Campos Secondary School will be offering a supplemental program after school to assist middle school and high school ELLs with their skills in English literacy. Our Skill Builders Class will support Middle School English Language Learners in building and improving their skills in the reading and writing modalities. This program is needed based on the data from the 2014 NYSESLAT scores which reflected that reading and writing are the area of greatest struggle for our ELLs. This program will also support students in acquiring the necessary skills to achieve improvements in academic performance as well as on state examinations. These students will be from grades 6, 7 and 8. Twenty ELL students will participate in the Supplemental Instructional Class-Skill Builders. Using the English 3D Program from Scholastic, dictionaries and glossaries in this class will give the ELLs the opportunity to practice reading and writing skills. The students will read and write articles about current societal issues and problems. Students will engage higher order critical skills to provide solutions to a variety of societal dilemmas, and they will read and write about these as well as organize and present their thoughts to the group. Students will create portfolios of their best work. In order to also strengthen their listening skills, students will also view various content area videos and create written summaries and enter into small group debates around the topics. This program will take place afterschool on Wednesdays and Thursdays, on the dates listed below, from 2:35 pm - 4:35 pm. All classes will be taught in English by a certified ESL teacher. For our high school students, we will have an after-school program on Wednesdays and Thursdays, from 2:35 to 4:35pm. There will be three high school classes, each with 20 students. The first, taught by a licenced ESL teacher, will explore the themes from their Global History classes during the Title III programs. They are studying ancient civilizations up through modern times. The focus themes will be cultural diffusion (ideas-technology-food-disease), geography, beliefs systems, trade, arts and conflicts. This will support the ELA CCLS as students will be required to read and annotate excerpts from the Global History and World History texts, leveled online resources, and primary sources. Student will be required to respond orally, in paragraphs and essays. Students will engage in debate and defend their position using evidence from historical texts from around the world, regarding historical concepts as they relate to current events, such as “Should police officers be required to wear cameras?” and comparing ideas of radical and moderate leaders during the French Revolution and today. Students will practice reading, analyzing, writing, speaking and listening skills through these debates. Students will create a project from a select culture will help our ELLs with reading and analyzing texts, and increasing their vocabulary. Comparing and contrasting characteristics are 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 78  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information important concepts in ELA CCLS and will help students English language acquisition, score better in class and on assessments. A second high school class of 20 ELLs will run on the same schedule during after school will teach 20 ELL students key ideas in geometry and algebra in a more visual and hands-on manner to ensure understanding of those critical concepts. This will be taught by a certified ESL teacher. The course will develop the students' academic vocabulary needed to understand and explain the mathematical concepts. Hands-on materials and on line resources will be used that are not used for these students during the day program. Common Core aligned materials including selected Engage NY units that are not used for these students during the day program as well as online resources will be used. The third high school class will be for 20 ELLs and taught by a licensed ESL teacher. This class will focus on academic vocabulary development and interdisciplinary, content area reading and writing skills. This supplementary program will target the CCLS and NYS ESL standards that most directly impact ELL performance in content area classes. This class will use the Academic Vocabulary Toolkit (1 and 2) by Kate Kinsella and Reading and Vocabulary Development: Concepts and Comments, by Patricia Akert and Linda Lee. With these programs, students develop reading skills and systematically increase their active vocabulary while exploring and expanding critical thinking skills. Additionally, students will become proficient in using a thesaurus and dictionary to help themselves in content area reading and writing. To focus on the targetted non-fiction reading skills particularly needed in content area classes, this supplemental program will engage students in non-fiction reading through National Geographic's Active Skills for Reading (book 1), by Neil Anderson, which uses thematically organized reading passages to teach reading comprehension and vocabulary skills. All three of these supplemental classes will be offered in two-hour sessions on Wednesdays and Thursdays, for a total of 38 sessions. Session dates are: October 29, 30 November 4, 5, 12, 13, 19, 20 December 3,4, 10, 11, 17, 18 January 7, 8, 14, 15, 21, 22 February 11, 12, 25, 26 March 4,5, 11, 12, 18, 19, 25, April 1, 15, 16, 22, 23, 29, 30 Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: ESL faculty and other teachers of ELLs from Juan Morel Campos Secondary School will form a professional study group, the theme of which is co-teaching ELLs in the inclusive classroom. Over the past year, we have reprogrammed most of our ESL support to be in a co-teaching model with content area teachers and our teachers have been asking for more training in this. The professional study group will be comprised of 1 administrator who supervises ESL, 4 ESL teachers, 1 social studies teacher and 1 science teacher. They will read "Collaboration and Co-Teaching: Strategies for English Learners" by Andrea Honigsfeld. This reading will help ESL teachers to develop strategies and systems to co-teach with general education teachers in 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 79  Part C: Professional Development content areas. By including general education teachers in the study group, they will develop greater sensitivity to the needs of ELLs and learn to incorporate strategies to better support ELLs in the classroom and their access to the full curriculum. The administrator will gain a better understanding of the similarities and differences of ESL co-teaching as compared to special education co-teaching, and will be better able to support all co-teaching partnerships. All members of this study group will implement their learning and present their learning at a faculty conference in June 2015. The study group will meet three times, discussing a set of chapters at each meeting. At each meeting, teachers will make connections to their own practice, adapt and implement strategies laid out in the book, and report back to the group at the following meeting about the findings of those experiments. The study group sessions and the focus of each meeting will be a set of chapters of the book: Monday, January 5, from 2:35pm to 3:55pm: The essential components of an integrated, collaborative ESL program, and how co-teaching supports ELLs. Thursday, February 5, from 2:35pm to 4:05pm: Best practices for co-planning, and collaboratefly instructing and assess ELLs. Monday, March 2, from 2:35pm to 3:55pm: How ESL teachers can best help support and train content area teachers in best practices of teaching ELLs. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: This year, our school began a partnership with Coalition for Hispanic Family Services (CHFS) who are currently operating a middle school after-school progam every school day focusing on arts and literacy . Many of middle school ELLs attend the after-school program run by this organization. The Juan Morel Campos Secondary School in conjunction with CHFS hopes to provide as many opportunities as possible for our students to excel and keep their parents informed about community and academic services and support available to them at through CHFS and at Juan Morel Campos. We plan to do this by means of three 90 minute informational meetings held after the end of the school day. The meetings will be conducted by two ESL teachers from the school, one bilingual guidance counselor from the school, and the Director of the CHFS Arts and Literacy After School programs, along with the CHFS site director for Juan Morel Campos. The subjects of the meetings will include: MEETING 1: Thursday, January 22, 2014 5pm - 6:30pm: The Home and School connection for ELLs 1. An introduction from CHFS and overview of the academic and social services that they offer, focusing on their middle school literacy support, with bilingual staff members, which students can attend in addition to the Title III program. They will also focus on how CHFS can help connect families to community resources to support families with navigating the public school system and advocating for students with special needs. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 80  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities 2. Discussion with parents lead by both CHFS Arts and Literacy Director, JMC's bilingual guidance counselor and an ESL teacher about the importance of home-language literacy, and strategies to support the literacy goals of the supplemental program at home. 3. School staff will lead a workshop on communication between children/parent and parent/school in ways that best support student success in school. MEETING 2: Wednesday, March 18th, 2015, 5pm - 6:30pm Planning for College 1. The school's College Bound counselor and bilingual guidance counselor will make a presentation about the services and supports available in school through her office, as well as an overview of the college application process in the United States. How to pay for college will also be discussed. She will help middle school parents understand the benefits of early planning and help high school parents plan a timeline of steps in the application process starting with exams in 11th grade. 2. Additionally, the bilingual guidance counselor will lead a discussion to get feedback from parents about how the school is supporting their students. This feedback will be brought to the school's leadership team for planning for future improvements to our programs. MEETING 3: Wednesday, May 13th, 2015 5pm - 6:30pm Reflecting on Success and Planning for the Future 1. This meeting will be a celebration for students who have regularly attended the supplemental Title III program. Parents of ELLs need to recognize the need for positive reinforcement of their children's accademic accomplishments. The celebration will also serve to educate parents of ELLs about the importance of the connection between home and school. 2. The Title III program teachers and bilingual guidance counselor will then lead a workshop for caregivers on examining the academic progress of their ELL students through the current school year and setting goals for the coming year. Provide parents/caregivers with all available data on their student: NYSESLAT, NYS middle school reading and math exams, school report cards, transcripts, attendance and late starts, class cuts, IEP goals. School staff will provide coaching to caregivers about how to make meaning of the data and how to align supports at home with student needs. Core supports of home language literacy and academic engagement will be emphasized. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ 21872 Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. - Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. $0.00 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 81 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ 21872 Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL $0.00 $0.00 $0.00 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 82  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District School Name Borough select one School Number B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Coach Assistant Principal Coach ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher School Counselor Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Related-Service Provider Superintendent Parent Parent Coordinator Field Support Center Staff Member Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Total number of ELLs Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions ELLs as share of total student population (%) % 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 83  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 3 K 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 4 0 2 0 5 0 6 0 7 0 8 0 9 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 84  5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. b. TBE program. If applicable. c. DL program. If applicable. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 85  6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 86 d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 87 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Esther Shali Ogli, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 88  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: School DBN: Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Title Principal Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 89  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 14K071 School Name: Juan Morel Campos Secondary School Superintendent: Alicja Winnicki The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. All parents/guadians of newly enrolled students fill out a Home Language Survey when enrolling their child. This form is maintained as part of the student's record. If the parent-guagdian indicates on the HLIS that they would like to receive information from the school in their home language, forms sent home are translated either in written form or orally to the parent/guardian. Information from teachers is translated to parents by staff members who speak the home language. There are currently 136 ELLs at 14K071, with home languages of: 111 in Spanish, 19 Yiddish, 1 Hebrew, 1 Mandarin, 1 Chinese/Other, 1 Urdu, 1 Arabic and 1 Bengali. With a substantial former-ELL population, we habitually send all home communications in both English and Spanish. No parents have requested communications in any other language. All the Yiddish speaking parents are bilingual in English. However, the DOE Translation and Interpretations Unit will be utilized if a parentguardian should request these services for other languages. This was indicated on the HLIS as well as confirmed orally by a teacher or counsellor who speaks the parent's home language. During parent orientation, the parents provide requests for language preference and they document their language preference on the emergency contact cards, which are also 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 90  updated as needed. Parent surveys are distributed in Spanish and English, or another language if requested and available. If it is not available, an oral translation of the survey is provided by a staff member or the Interpretations Unit. The ATS Report of Preferred Languages (RAPO) is updated regularly in order to maintain accurate information on parent language choices. Additionally, counsellors review Blue Cards for information on home language, teachers survey students for home language preferences, and the Parent Coordinator notes language preference when parents enter the main office. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language 44% percent of the school's population reports English as the primary language, and 52% speak Spanish. Arabic, Urdu, Mandarin, other Chinese, Bengali and Hebrew are each spoken by less than 1% (one student in each of those languages). The school's demographic is made available on the school's official DOE website. Teachers survey students for their parent/guardian's prefered language, and this information communicated to them as well by the ENL teacher who serves the child. The DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit is called upon if other language needs are requested. 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 91 How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families Documents which are distrubted to parents/guardians and require translations are: annual handbooks and curriculum information (beginning of the school yar), parent-teacher conference announcements (two weeks prior to each conference date), Student rights and discipline policy (as soon as made available by the district), ELL parent orientation information letters (1-2 weeks prior to orientation), all NYS testing dates including NYSESLAT (on a rolling basis prior to each test relevant to the particular grade/group of students), ELL entitlement and non-entitlement letters, as well as letters from teachers, counsellors and school leadership. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? 14K071 holds three parent conferences throughout the school year. The first, in late September, introduces parents to their childrens' new teachers and counsellors, provides curriculum information, and an introduction/reminder of available school support services, including that which comes from our in-school Community Based Organization partner. The next two conferences, held in November and March, are focused on student progress and grades and are held directly between teachers and parent/guardians, frequently including the student. The ENL Coordinator (teacher) holds a parent orientation for any newly enrolled ELL parent/guardian as well as separate meetings for individual ELL parent/guardians throughout the year. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 92  Teachers, counsellors, deans and administrators commnicate with parents throughout the year in order to address questions/concerns as well as an possible issues in or outside of the classroom. In addition to these meetings, a designated one-to-one parent conference will take place annually in order to provide updates on studetn progress as mandated by CR Part 154. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) 14K071 has a multicultural welcome poster hanging in the main entrance to the school building so that everyone that enters the buidling is aware of language assistance services. Language ID guiedes are kept at the security desk as well as in the main office. Information for parents on the NYCDOE's translations and interpretations services are available in 10 languages, and is kept at the secruity desk and main office. Parents' Billof Rights are sent to the school in a variety of languages and they are distributed upon arrival to all parents who have indicated a preferred language other than English. At 14K071, the school staff are aware of language assistance services provided by the school by using ATS Reports, Emergency Contact Cards, IEPs, oster of bilingual staff and the guide to Translations and Interpretation Unit Services. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 93  Parent surveys are distributed at the beginning of the year which gather feedback from parents on the quality and avialbility of services. The ENL teacher also meets indiviudally with all parents/guardians of ELLs and can then also ascertain the needs and concerns that they may have. After such meetings, the ENL teacher confers with the parent coordinator and/or the classroom teachers in order to discuss the needs of the parent/guardians and students. In order to gather feedback from parents, we will have ENL teachers conduct face-to-face interviews with parents during the two conference dates in November and March, asking specific questions about their needs as well as the needs of their students. Our PTA works with the SLT to convene a group of parents of ELLs for an open conversation about how they perceive language services at the school and to solicity their suggestions for improving it. Addiitonally, our CBO partnership and attendance outreach team will use our data of ELLs to be sure a bilingual staff member is part of the outreach team to families of struggling students, asking specifically about how language services could help the families as well as the students integrate more successfully with the school community, insofar as attendance and academic success. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 94 
