 23K165 School Name: P.S. 165 IDA POSNER Principal: JASON RIVERS 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 1  Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: Executive Summary and Organizing Principles Section 3: Community Engagement Team and School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 4: Renewal School Narrative Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Section 7: Community School Description Section 8: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 9: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 10: Title I Program Information Section 11: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: PS/IS 165 Ida R. Posner 3323000010165 Pre-Kinder-5th grade School Number (DBN): 23K165 76 Lott Avenue, Brooklyn, New York, 11212 718-495-7759 718-345-8255 Phone Number: School Contact Person: Mr.Jason Rivers Community School CBO: Partnership With Children Fax: Email Address: Jrivers3@schools.nyc.gov Principal: Community School Director: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: Mr. Jason Rivers Marcus Pass Ms. AntonetteWhite Ms.Rockell Holmes Mrs. SharonWright SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): Ms. Shery Ann Farrel N/A N/A District Information Geographical District: 23 Dr.Miatheresa Pate Superintendent: 1784 Park Place, Brooklyn, New York, 11233 Superintendent’s Office Address: Mpate@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-240-7736 Phone Number: 718-385-3768 Fax: Brooklyn North FSC: 2018-19 RSCEP-PF Field Support Center (FSC) Bernadette Fitzgerald Executive Director: 3  Executive Director’s Office Address: 131 Livingston Street, Brooklyn, NY 11201 bfitzge2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-935-3954 Phone Number: 718-935-4314 Fax: 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 4  Section 2: Executive Summary and Organizing Principles The Objective The intent of this Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP) is to continue to frame a three-year process for each Renewal school and design a comprehensive plan that outlines a strategic path to a paradigm shift in each school at every level. The motivation driving this work is our commitment to providing every child with a school that meets their academic and social-emotional needs. Closely accompanying this imperative is our belief that every school can be renewed and foster a community based culture of learning. The job of the district is to use our position to provide the systemic vision, strategies, and resources to facilitate school renewal through a collaborative effort including all stakeholders. The core values held as essential for the success of the School Renewal Program:  A “learning stance” must be held by all community members (district leaders, school leaders, school staff, community-based partners, students and families). The work should be approached with humility and integrity. We must all be willing learners.  A “theory of action” must guide the work to ensure clarity and coherence.  Authentic teams that collaborate in the spirit of trust, within and across the various levels of the school community, are prerequisites for successful school renewal  Schools will be places of robust engagement, anchored in positive youth development, ensuring that the school environment is welcoming and empowering for students, families and community members.  Strong professional development/learning is a fundamental part of our work.  The school renewal implementation must be simultaneously dynamic and responsive as well as sustained over the three year period of renewal. The organizing Theory of Action that guides the School Renewal Program strategy: By using the Six Elements of the Framework for Great schools as our improvement structure, we seek to align instructional coaching and leadership development with structural supports in order to build staff capacity. Using schools instructional foci, school leaders and staff will implement changes in curriculum, instruction, school culture and structures so that there are sustainable improvements in student outcomes and school culture. The arc of the School Renewal Program strategy: In order to attain high levels of achievement for all students in Renewal schools we must build capacity to increase student achievement through the adoption of new attitudes and behaviors, research based strategies that improve teacher practice, coupled with the use of clear data driven supports for building students’ skills in the content areas and increasing student engagement. We are particularly prioritizing reading and writing across the curricula. The use of student learning data will drive instruction through strong teacher teams; onsite, job embedded professional learning and problem solving, and accountability at all levels of the system: central, district and school - for results. Renewal schools are provided with intensive training, leadership and pedagogical coaching, and structural supports, monitoring of implementation and ongoing feedback and revisions as needed. Further, each Renewal school will become a Community School and strategically partner with community based organizations (CBO) to integrate social services and expanded learning time into the fabric of the school to help them better serve the needs of students. These schools will stand as centers of opportunities where families can get the supports they need to make sure students come to school ready and able to learn. School Receivership In April 2015, state lawmakers and Governor Andrew Cuomo created section 211-f of the State Education Law, which established the School Receivership program as a new intervention strategy to turn around struggling schools. This new law, and Commissioner’s regulation 100.19, requires that “Persistently Struggling Schools,” defined as Priority Schools that have been in the most severe accountability status since the 2006-07 school year, be given an initial one or two-year period under a “Superintendent Receiver”. These schools were placed in receivership under the New York City Schools Chancellor. Each school must make demonstrable improvement on specific benchmarks or it will be placed under an independent receiver. Under the Chancellor’s Receivership Plan, the School Renewal Program is NYCDOE’s 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 5  core strategy for turning around struggling schools. Renewal Schools have already begun implementing significant interventions and are receiving additional resources and support to accelerate student performance and help close achievement gaps reflected in this RSCEP. Structure of the Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP) The Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP) will serve as the organizing and overarching document for each Renewal school and will be directly aligned and developed around the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, and Strong Schools, Strong Communities, including the following:  Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks: Demonstrable improvement benchmarks located in the 2018-19 RSCEP, in the Data and Accountability Snapshot page. Receivership benchmarks have been closely aligned with the Renewal benchmarks so that schools will have one coherent set of improvement benchmarks to meet. All Receivership Benchmarks are a subset of Renewal Benchmarks. While the targets for these overlapping benchmarks are not always identical, the Receivership Benchmark targets are always equal to or lower that the Renewal Benchmarks targets. That means that any school that meets its Renewal Benchmarks targets have by definition also met its Receivership Benchmarks targets. For additional information on Receivership demonstrable improvement benchmarks go here.  Establishing an overarching summative vision aligned with elements of the Framework for Great Schools and documenting key areas of celebration and renewal through analysis of assessments and by envisioning what the desired outcome for each school will be at the end of the School Renewal process.  Setting interim assessment benchmarks that create the path for improvement by focusing on desired outcomes and goals. In this way, the plan will be mapped to the overarching summative vision. In addition to the five discrete goals formed around the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, each school will create an action plan.  Transformation into a community school in order to increase student and family access to physical and mental health services and other social-emotional supports made available in or near the school.  Expanded learning opportunities for all students, including additional instruction provided during afterschool  and/or summer programming provided in collaboration with community partners. Intensive professional development for all staff to ensure effective implementation of curriculum and instruction aligned to the Common Core State Standards (CCSS) and to support staff in effectively responding to the differentiated academic and social-emotional needs of all students.  Additional, focused strategies to increase parent and family engagement. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Information on the Framework for Great Schools and the DTSDE Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 6  The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and RSCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 7  School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets: 1. Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity 2. Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions 3. Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support 4. Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions 5. Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and 6. Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the RSCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the RSCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 8  Next Steps for RSCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists in every Renewal school and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the American Institute of Research (AIR) needs assessment, the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Create a summative vision for the elements of the Framework for Great Schools.  Step 5: Revisit your school’s current goals, and strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you have identified, and will let your school community know when you have reached your goal.  Step 6: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 7: Update your school’s AIS section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 8: Complete the Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and the Community School sections.  Step 9: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether strategies and activities outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust practices along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 9  Section 3: Community Engagement Team and School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Directions: All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP). SLT members’ signatures indicates that they have been consulted with and given the opportunity to provide feedback on the plan and the plan’s alignment with the school-based budget to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Expanded Learning Time, Community School initiative, Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. On the chart below: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the second column. 2. 3. In the first column, indicate using an “X” if the person is an SLT member. In the third column, record the position and constituent group represented such as staff, parent, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), or other contributor. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 4. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the RSCEP, not approval. 5. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Signature (Blue Ink) Check if SLT x x x x x x Name Position and Constituent Group Jason Rivers Represented *Principal or Designee Antonette White, UFT Chapter Leader *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee Rockell Holmes Harriet Jamison SheryAnn Farrel Marcuss Pass *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Community School Director (staff) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 10 Signature (Blue Ink) Check if SLT x x x x x x x x Name Position and Constituent Group Stacy Williamson-Morilla Romeo Lewis Marie Rosalind Dalloway Natasha Rodriguez Melvina Haynes Shaneisha Smart Thembisa Felix Sharon Wright Verlie Chomondley Cynthia Smith Represented Recording Secretary/Teacher Representative Teacher Representative Parent Representative PAC Co-Chairperson/Parent Representative Parent Representative Parent Representative Parent Representative Chairperson/ Teacher Representative Staff/Parent/Other Contributor Staff/Parent/Other Contributor Staff/Parent/Other Contributor Staff/Parent/Other Contributor Community Engagement Team (CET) Signature Page Directions: Please fill out this form and indicate members of your Community Engagement Team. On the chart below: 1. List the names of each Community Engagement Team member in the first column. 2. Record the position and constituent group represented in the second column. 3. Community Engagement Team members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If a Community Engagement Team member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original signature page. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Jason Rivers Cynthia Smith 2018-19 RSCEP-PF Principal SLT Chairperson 11 Signature (Blue Ink) Name Position and Constituent Group Ann Charles Harriet Jamison Gregory Wooten Rockell Holmes SheryAnn Farrel Nadia Rodriguez Rosalind Dollaway Melvina Hayes Marcus Pass Represented UFT Designee DC37 Representative Parent Coordinator P.T.A. President Title 1 PAC Chair/ Parent Representative Title 1 Co-Chair/ Parent Representative Parent Representative Parent Representative Partnership with Children; Community School Director 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 12  Section 4: Renewal School Narrative In a brief narrative, describe the current state of the Renewal school addressing the following: 1. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including your school’s mission statement and a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. 2. What are the school’s beliefs about student learning? 3. 4. Describe your school’s approach to family engagement and progress made with establishing families as Identify any special student populations that the school has and what their specific needs are. partners in furthering student achievement 5. Describe how your school is leveraging community school partnerships to support progress in elements of the Framework for Great Schools and indicate where this has been a challenge. 6. Summarize the Expanded Learning Time (ELT) opportunities that have been offered to your students this year. PS 165 is a 3K – 5th grade school located in Brownsville, Brooklyn. Our students are 82% African American, 14% Hispanic/Latino, 3% White, and .4% Asian. We currently have 230 students, of which 2% are English Language Learners and 23% are Students with Special Needs. We have 42 students who are in temporary housing and our average student attendance rate is 86%. As a school, we crafted the mission statement, “At PS165, we inspire to nurture the hearts and minds of our scholars by preparing them to be life long learners, leaders, risk takers, prepared for college and beyond, through hands on experiences, use of technology, and integration of the arts. Our vision is to build a school community where educators and families work together as a unified team to set high expectations and encourage our students to set goals and challenge themselves in every way possible. Instructional Focus To enhance student ability to navigate across all disciplines by applying their critical thinking skills and communicating their arguments in verbal and written form. We believe that students learn best when they are engaged in learning activities that are aligned to the Common Core Standards and challenge their thinking. In this learning environment we inspire our school community to seek out knowledge through exploration, challenging learning tasks, problem-solving, and critical thinking skills. Our Theory of Action:   If administration provides targeted professional development opportunities in explicit modeling, tiered grouping with small group instruction and leveled questioning, then teachers will be equipped with the strategies and skills necessary to deliver targeted instruction. If administration conducts frequent observation cycles with actionable feedback, then teachers will be equipped with the strategies and skills necessary to deliver instruction using rigorous teaching practices, meaningful differentiation for students with diverse needs, and consistent progression as evidenced by observation ratings and student performance. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 13  As a renewal school, we are charged with a sense of urgency to improve the quality of education for our students. Considering the Framework for Great Schools we carefully targeted each element and as a result, the following successes were made: In addition, we believe that if we provide students with additional opportunities to receive targeted instruction, then we will experience an increase in our academic achievement. Therefore, our ELT program focused on Math and ELA instruction two days a week from 2:20 to 3:35pm, with two days dedicated toward ELA instruction and two days dedicated toward Math instruction. Explicit model with anchor charts Tiered grouping with small group instruction Rigorous Instruction Leveled questioning Instructional and Teacher Coach support- Targeted Professional Development -Support from Partnership With Children to provide students with social -emotional support and self-esteem building strategies. Supportive Environment -The implementation of success mentors assigned to chronically absent students; in effort to increase attendance. - The implementation of the RISE P.B.I.S program that promotes positive behaviors and celebrates students for making positive strides in regards to behavior. -Our teacher's meet during common prep period as well as two Monday's a month in grade teacher teams to analyze student work. We have also established a school wide protocol for looking at student work. This is known as the ATLAS protocol. - Administration has established teacher leaders in the building and formed an Instructional Leadership Team to collaborate and plan with. -This year we have hosted a variety of parent engagement events in effort to build community and improve school climate. some of our well attended events include: School Community Forum Lincoln Center Family Nights  Principal's Monthly Parent breakfast    Attendance awards  Bringing Literacy to Life Family Engagement Event  Family based learning trips such as visiting the African American Museum in Washington Collaborative Teachers Effective School Leadership Strong Family- Community Ties 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 14  As we enter the 2018- 2019 school year we will continue to strengthen the areas above. We aim to create action plans to improve all the framework elements and to exceed our goals. To further support the mission/vision of our school we have been titled a "Community School." As a community school, our students will continue to have opportunities to participate in several programs through our various partnerships. Sports and Arts after school provides music, soccer, dance, and art. Additionally, as a community school we were afforded the opportunity to provide our students with dental cleaning, health examinations, and vision screening that resulted in brand new prescription glasses for 200 of our students. We also ensure that there is open library access in our Robin Hood Library for our entire community. Open access library hours are offered before and after-school so that students have the opportunity to read books and utilize programs such as iReady. In addition to being a Community School, PS 165 has the proud distinction of being a Turnaround Arts school. Turnaround Arts, led by the White House advisory committee on social issues and The Kennedy Center, brings arts education resources into high needs schools as a strategic tool for targeting larger school challenges and opportunities. Our teachers attend professional development sessions to deepen understanding on how to infuse arts within the content area. Identified teachers who have shown best practices in this area have served as “In house” Turnaround Arts facilitators and have shared best practices on how to incorporate Visual Thinking Strategies (VTS) and Tableau. Our partnership with the Turnaround Arts Program will provide our students with teaching artists of various art disciplines to enrich and engage our student's learning experiences. The connection with Turnaround Arts is directly aligned with our partnership with Lincoln Center. Through the Arts in the Middle initiative, this partnership provides our students with exposure to different disciplines of art such as poetry, music, dance, visual arts and drama. Students focus on each discipline during various units of study followed by well culminating activities at school or at Lincoln Center. This infusion of the arts has helped our students think critically and built capacities of learning such as posing questions, making connections, empathy, creating meaning and taking action. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 15  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 23K165 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 229 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 75 75 11 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 32 30 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 90.0% % Attendance Rate 85.6% % Reduced Lunch 2.2% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.4% 16.6% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 3.9% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 2.09 0% 0% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 36.7% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 63% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No No Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District Yes Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 36 36 87.6% 0.0% 24.9% 79.0% 0.0% 0.4% 2 19% 7.5 43.0% 17% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No NO N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 16  2018-19 RSCEP-PF 17  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? Strengths During the 2017-2018 school year, PS 165 worked diligently to address Rigorous Instruction as this was a demonstrable benchmark set by the State Education department. To ensure that we met this benchmark we implemented the following: Big Three – Instructional “Look Fors" : 1. Explicit modeling with anchor charts - Aligned to Danielson:  1a Knowledge of Content and Pedagogy  1e Designing Coherent Instruction  3c Engaging Students in Learning 2. Tiered grouping with small group instruction -Aligned to Danielson:  1e Designing Coherent Instruction  3c Engaging Students in Learning 3. Leveled Questioning- Aligned to Danielson: 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 18   1e Designing Coherent Instruction  3b Effective Questioning and Discussion Techniques  3d Using Assessment in Instruction Based on QR feedback and observation data, we still find these areas critical to the improvement of overall pedagogy. To support teachers in the areas above, PS 165 will continue to provide instructional and teacher coach support. Coaching includes one-to one and whole group support and are focused on:  Implementation of the TC Reading Curriculum  Teacher planning and preparation  The use of student data to plan small group instruction  Explicit modeling and pacing  Use of higher order questioning We have also outlined a series of PD sessions to address the instructional look fors. Areas of Needs : An area of need that we have identified as a school community, is that there is a need for learning tasks in math and ELA to be directly aligned to the objective. These task must be rigorous and differentiated to meet the needs of all learners. We have identified this through classroom observations, student work portfolios and Quality Review Feedback. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Rigorous Instruction What is your school’s instructional focus? What is your vision for promoting the instructional focus consistently across classrooms? Our instructional focus is to enhance student ability to navigate across all disciplines by applying their critical thinking skills and communicating their arguments in verbal and written form. We believe that students learn best when they are engaged in learning activities that are aligned to the Common Core Standards and challenge their thinking. In this learning environment we inspire our school community to seek out knowledge through exploration, challenging learning tasks, problem-solving, and critical thinking skills. What is your vision for the implementation of CCLS-aligned curricula that meets the needs of your diverse learners, personally, academically, and culturally? Our vision for the implementation of the CCLS aligned curricula is that all teachers first and foremost understand the curriculum and how it is aligned to the standard. Our goal is to provide all of our teachers with on going professional development and coaching support. We envision that all of our teachers are able to scaffold instruction as needed to meet the needs of diverse learners while still ensuring that standards are met. What is your vision for diverse program offerings that allow students to develop skills, habits, and behaviors to be career and college ready? How are instructional shifts embedded in this vision? It is our expectation that all students are provided with rigorous diverse programs to ensure that students are on grade level and they are college and career ready. Examples of programming are: 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 19  -Tiered RTI intervention (Pull out-push in /small group instruction) -Saturday Academy for students needing academic intervention -Academic After school for pushable students -Accelerated math program for on level students -Winter/Spring test preparation academy What do you envision the delivery of instruction to look like so that all students are set up for success? We envision that all of our teachers implement the 3 instructional look fors consistently and effectively. The three instructional look fors are: Small group instruction Explicit modeling Anchor charts How do you envision teachers using multiple entry points to ensure the success of every child? Through the use of station teaching, teachers will ensure that students have multiple entry points. Using data and student profiles will allow the teachers to know the types of support their individual students need. Through the consistent monitoring of progress, teachers will be able to assess which techniques work best for their students and be able to maximize their use of multiple entry points best suited for their students What is your vision for the use of a comprehensive assessment strategy (diagnostic, formative, benchmark, and summative) to drive curricular, instructional, and organizational decisions that impact student outcomes? We believe in using data to drive curricular, instructional and organizational decisions that will impact student outcomes.  Teacher teams will meet weekly to conduct inquiry work. They will focus on student work, identify a skill/concept that needs to be taught, and return to the group for feedback and revise where necessary. With an instructional lead teacher in every team, support and accountability will be provided.  We will hold grade level data chat meetings with cabinet team teachers Please indicate below the specific assessments that you are implementing and their purpose for each grade. Assessment Name Assessment Type Grades Implemented Purpose (diagnostic, formative, benchmark, summative) Running Record I-Ready Formative Formative TC Writing On Demand Diagnostic K-5 K-5 K-5 Monitor student reading levels Monitor student mastery of ELA and mathematical standards Analyze and plan for TC writing Units 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 20  Math Snapshot Assessments Diagnostic/formative Go Math Summative Summative ELA & Math Ready (Paper & Pencil) Part 3 – Annual Goal 3-5 K-5 K-5 Monitor student progress as it relates to their mastery of math standards Monitor student mastery of mathematical standards Monitor student mastery of ELA and mathematical standards Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. By June 2019, we will improve the rigor of mathematical instruction for all students, with a focus on Students with Disabilities and English Language Learner subgroups by using data driven instruction and academic intervention strategies as measured by an .03 increase in average student proficiency from 2.58 to 2.61 on the New York State Math Exam. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Rigorous Instruction Annual Goal: Which Renewal benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Rigorous Instruction Annual Goal? Average math proficiency rating Framework: Rigorous Instruction 3-5 Math SED Growth Percentile 3-5 Math Percent Level 2 & Above 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 21 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) 3-5 Math Percent Level 2 & Above Students in grades k-5 3-5 Math SED Growth Percentile Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Teachers will be engaged in ongoing professional development which will focus on explicit modeling, anchor charts, and small group instruction. Additionally, professional learning focused on effective math instructional strategies will occur during the Monday Professional Development Sessions, and during Lunch and Learns. Teachers Average math proficiency rating Sept 2018 through June 2019 Administrators, Instructional Leadership Team, Coaches, Model Teachers, Teachers, Consultants How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Observation & feedback cycles monitoring teacher practice improvement PD plan, which captures sessions that hone in on math strategies. A (K-2) and (3-5) math prototype will be implemented to help make expectations clear around what strategies should be utilized, strategic grouping, and Students K-5 (SWD's) 3-5 Math Percent Level 2 & Above Sept 2018 through June 2019 Administrators, Instructional Leadership Team, Coaches, Model Teachers, ILT members, Consultants Iready data, CEP progress monitoring 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 22 3-5 Math SED Growth Percentile Students K-5 (SWD's & ELL's) Average math proficiency rating September 2018 thru June 2019 Admin, Teacher leaders, DSR how appropriate pacing should be applied to support SWD's and ELL's during mathematics instruction. Student receive movement and math as a cluster period where they do both mathematics and physical education. Students will have multiple opportunities to receive targeted instruction throughout the day, for example; (AIS) targeted pull out support, Extended learning time, tutors (central park), and after school (tue-friday). Various programs supports will be utilized to support students during this time, for example, IReady, NY math, Engage NY, Go math etc Student progress in Math will be measured by iReady assessments (September, January, May); Ready NY paper & pencil (November, March). All students, with a focus on SWD & ELL subgroups Average math proficiency rating 3-5 Math Percent Level 2 & Above iReady: September 2018, January & June 2019 3-5 Math SED Growth Percentile ILT, and School Leaders Assessments will be tracked by the classroom teacher, instructional leadership team, and ReadyNY: November 2018, March 2019 window, Ready data, Teacher observation, Advance tool Use of inquiry during teacher teams to analyze student work products. Observations, IReady math data, Ready paper & pencil math data, Go Math End of unit data Progress on iReady online & ReadyNY (paper & pencil) assessments 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 23  Administrators, with a focus on the SWD & ELL subgroups. ILT & Teacher teams will meet to discuss student progress, and choose/design interventions that address students' areas of weakness. 4b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Bi Monthly Parent Workshops for Math will be facilitated by the members of the ILT team to support parents in understanding the current unit of studies in math, and to offer strategies that can be used to support their children at home. These workshops will begin in October and run through May. Key personnel include the ILT team members facilitating the workshops, and school leaders providing oversight. Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, lead CBO’s community school budget, etc. Go Math Curriculum RTI Math Teacher Per Session for After School Intervention and Saturday Academy . General Supplies and math manipulative Do the Math (intervention books) Math Solutions Support Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 24  Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By February 2019, 50% of students will show improvement from the initial assessment to the mid-year Ready NY Math assessment. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The Instrument of measure is the data from mid-year Ready NY Math assessment data. Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 25  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and x SOP(s) Addressed sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? 5. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review?  One strength in the component of Supportive environment is the work of our Attendance team. Our chronic absenteeism rate has improved by 3.2%, we attribute the decrease in the chronic absenteeism rate to our success mentoring program, as well as to our regular Attendance Team/Student Success Summit Meetings. Our attendance team has implemented the following strategies: o Attendance Monthly Trips o Student mentoring and conferences with students and parents where student attendance profiles are reviewed o Monthly assembly to celebrate 100% attendance and improvement As a school community we are still working on reaching our school attendance benchmark of 90.8. After analyzing the New Visions data sorter we have identified that students in kindergarten through second grade has the lowest and it appears as if certain families are the ones who are consistently late or absent. Our Priority is to maintain the high attendance rate throughout the entire school year. We plan to accomplish this with help through our CBO Partnership with Children. Increased attendance rates is also a known beneficial result from participation in the Turnaround Arts Program. Our school was 1 of 4 schools chosen to participate in all of New York. Our belief is that arts integration throughout all grade levels through the Turnaround Arts program will also boost our attendance rates. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 26  Part 2 – Summative Vision for Supportive Environment What is your vision for a supportive school environment? How will you in partnership with each CBO and families enact your vision? It is our vision that the students of PS165 are provided a safe, nurturing learning environment where they can be intellectually stimulated, pushed to think critically and supported socially and emotionally. One way we will attain this is our integration of the arts. As a Turnaround Arts School we believe that students will be offered multiple modalities of learning while also tapping into their talents; this will ultimately increase student engagement. We also believe that student attendance will increase by the use of various arts techniques infused during instruction. Over the last year the school has implemented PBIS. The program has promoted a safe and respectful environment for everyone within the building. The PBIS Program is a reward based program that celebrates good behaviors and characteristics of students. Students & classes are rewarded with coins and at the end of each month the classes with the most coins get a special treat. There are also monthly grade specific assemblies run by the PBIS Team that teach skills on respect, the prevention of bullying with an emphasis on cyber bullying . Student occurrences are communicated to parents via telephone by the Dean, classroom teacher, guidance counselor or Administration. Our vision is that students will feel respected in this environment which will positively impact their desire to come to school. Partnership With Children will be working in collaboration with our school to develop an extensive attendance improvement plan for our students. We will be targeting students who historically have a yearly attendance rate below 75%. As indicated in the annual goal and action plan to follow, we expect to see an increase in attendance by 4. 4 percentage points. Who are your CBO partners? How will each CBO sustain and support the social-emotional and academic growth of your students? CBO Partner Partnership with Children Increase student social-emotional coping strategies CBO Focus Increase student attendance Build relationships between parents and staff How will you in partnership with your CBO will create a supportive environment and engagement for your students’ families? In collaboration with our CBO we will conduct community surveys for parents, teachers and students to determine the needs of our school community. Followed by creating action plans to address those areas. Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Supportive Environment. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 27 By June 2019, there will be a 4.6 percentage point increase in whole school attendance rate, as measured by the school’s Annual Attendance report. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Supportive Environment Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Supportive Environment Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve Increase of attendance rate Increase academic progress in ELA and Math 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 28 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Students & Families, Staff Students and Families -Attendance -Parent Engagement -Academic progress September 2018-June 2019 December 2018-February 2019 Partnership with Children Staff, Attendance Mentors, Parent Coordinator, School Attendance Team, Administrators Parents, Parent Coordinator, Teachers, Administrators, Outside Resources(donations How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Attendance data collection Attendance Students& Families, Staff October 2018-June 2019 Teachers, Instructional Leads, Administrators, CBO Classroom shout-outs Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Partnership with Children: will support us with increasing attendance, by calling parents every day for children who are absent. They will help us with creating an incentive program. Daily attendance charts for every class. Daily shout-outs for students and classrooms. Shout-out for staff attendance that is 100%. Incentive for parents of children who come to school every day, to support them. Attendance Outreach will include home visits and conduct parent meetings. Morning programs: Robin Hood Library hours. With this, we will create an incentive program for students who arrive early/on time for school. For example, there can be “dress down” dollars that 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 29 Parent engagement Students & Families , Staff August 2018-July 2019 Administrators, Lead Teachers, Parent Coordinators Increase in the number of parents Attendance Staff, Attendance Team Rigorous Instruction Septem- Borough Support Staff, Administrators, CBO Data meeting ber 2018-June 2019 students can earn and redeem for a day out of uniform. Weekly shout-outs and positive calls home will help to get students to school on time. School Messenger: to communicate to parents about attendance, school events. Phone calls and text messages. Social Media: celebrate and announce class attendance and school events. Ensuring that accurate data systems are kept. Strengthening practices, reinforcing protocols and procedures for record keeping. During our September PD day, reviewing in detail, attendance and lateness process. Revisit PD throughout the year to continue to support teachers in monitoring the monthly attendance. Celebrate daily class attendance. Using our New Visions Attendance Heat Map, we will have a central location where we can create groups and have various members from the team oversee a group and check in with those students and families to ensure consistent attendance. 4b – Parent and Family Engagement 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 30  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. The school community team will work to plan a series of parent workshops to support parents in understanding the value of attendance. We will also provide a series of workshops that will support parents in: -Social/emotional support -Academic Intervention -Time management It is our belief that all of these workshops will support parents and will have a positive effect of attendance. Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. School Messenger CBOs Incentives General supplies Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA X Title I 1003(a) Title III X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. We use our weekly attendance reports. Pull monthly reports to track patterns and trends. We expect to achieve a 90% attendance rate by February 2019. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Weekly and monthly attendance reports will be the instruments of measure used to assess progress (Data Sorter). Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 31  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed X 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? Strengths:  Teachers meet weekly and monthly to identify needs of students across grades  Teachers establish grade wide assessments and student tasks  Teachers share plans and revise to ensure consistency across grades  Teacher teams use the Atlas Protocol to analyze student work Needs:  Teacher teams struggle to provide targeted instruction to their specific students. Priority:  To be able to analyze student data to determine the individualized needs of students . Following analysis teachers must be able to group students according to needs to implement small group instruction. This year we will provide teachers with PD sessions and coaching support to enhance abilities in this area. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Collaborative Teachers What is your vision for collaborative teaching? 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 32  Our vision for collaborative teaching is as follows: Each grade meets weekly during their common prep period for the purpose of curriculum refinement , lesson planning and assessment development. Grade level teams work together to ensure that instruction is common core aligned and is coherent across grades. The teacher teams will also meet for the purpose of data analysis and looking at student work. Teachers will use information gathered from iReady data to determine next steps and best practices/strategies to use during small group instruction to close student learning gaps. How do you envision collaboration amongst your School Instructional Cabinet to improve teacher practices and student learning? As an instructional cabinet we will meet every Monday to discuss teacher strengths and areas of focus based on classroom observations. We will then take this information and create small group learning networks for teachers. Each network group will receive personalized professional development based on their needs. The cabinet team will also support teacher practices by providing frequent actionable feedback and in class coaching. How do you envision collaboration within teacher teams to improve teacher practices and student learning? We envision teachers using the same school wide protocol (Atlas) for looking at student work when they are within their teacher teams. During this time they will analyze student work and research/share best practices that will support students in struggling areas. Once strategies have been established , teachers will work together to collaboratively lesson plan or make adjustments to curriculum. How do you envision collaboration across teacher teams to improve teacher practices and student learning? Across teacher teams, it is our vision to have teams share best practices and action steps with other groups. For the 2018-2019 school year we are looking to incorporate vertical teams within the school. This will allow teachers to share share best practices, and analyze data across grade levels. Teacher will become familiar of content and standards that students are being taught in different grades. What data will teachers and the School Instructional Cabinet regularly review to ensure that they are reflecting upon their teaching practices and meeting individual student learning needs? What is the intent for reviewing each piece of data? (ex. Teachers will regularly review student IEPs when developing lessons in order to ensure that tasks are appropriately scaffolded.) Data Reviewed Student IEPs The "IEP" serves as the "road map" for guiding the teaching team in helping the student accomplish the important goals and objectives. Therefore, the daily lesson plans must provide specific directions for teaching the child. Intent 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 33  iReady Teachers will regularly use and review iReady data for the purpose of understanding how students are progressing in ELA and math, and to determine areas of focus for small group instruction. Running records Gives data on student ELA progress towards meeting grade level benchmarks Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. By June 2019, teacher teams will work collaboratively to analyze data and to determine targeted instruction for small groups of students in effort to minimize areas of focus in ELA. The success of this goal will be measured by a .03 increase from 2.49 to 2.52 in students’ average ELA proficiency rating. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Collaborative Teachers Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Collaborative Teaching Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve Framework: Rigorous Instruction 3-5 ELA SED Growth Percentile 3-5 ELA Percent Level 2 & Above Average ELA Proficiency Rating Performance Index on State ELA Exam 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 34  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) - We will use the ATLAS Protocol establish school wide protocols for looking at student work Teachers/ Paraprofessionals/ Parent Coordinator/ Avg ELA proficiency August through June 2019 Administrators, Instructional Leads, Teachers, Consultants, Borough Support Staff How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Monitoring student performance tasks, iReady assessment data Related Services Providers/ Guidance Counselor/School Psychologist - Admin will meet with teacher teams on bi-weekly basis to monitor planning and coherent instruction - Admin will schedule data chats after each assessment cycle to determine next steps Teachers will meet as a grade in August and September with Instructional Team and Admin Cabinet to analyze end of last year data. This meeting will focus on analyzing student reading levels, iready assessment data Ready paper and pencil, with the intent to identify Teachers, Paraprofessionals, Administrators, Instructional Team Avg ELA proficiency August through June 2019 Administrators, Instructional Leads, Model Teachers, Data Consultants, Borough Support Staff, Data Team Monthly data chats with Admin to check progress of student data 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 35  focus standards and necessary resources. Classrooms intervisitation both internally and externally, allowing teachers extended opportunity to observe best practices. Teachers in grades K-2 will implement Guided Reading 1 pd a day to address early literacy deficits. Teachers, Paraprofessionals, Administrators, Instructional Team Avg ELA proficiency September thru June 2019 ILT team, Admin, DSR Teachers, F&P Paraprofessionals, Admin, Instructional Team ILT, Admin, DSR October thru June 2019 Classroom observations Teacher reflection form Classroom observations, IReady, F&P levels 4b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Bi Monthly Parent Workshops for ELA will be facilitated by the members of the ILT team to support parents in understanding the current unit of studies in Ela, and to offer strategies that can be used to support their children at home. These workshops will begin in October and run through May. Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Common Planning time scheduled in the program where teacher teams have a minimum of two full periods for inuiry Renewal Staff Developers Research-based differentiated strategies Model Classrooms Sub money for planning time/coverages Professional Texts by Carol Ann Tomlinson, Data Driven Instruction, NSRF Harmony. Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other X X 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 36  Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. - Student iReady Data - Evidence of adjustments made to curriculum and/ or lesson plans - Evidence of small group instruction (conference notes) - Running record data - Team meeting agendas Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Data from student assessments Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 37  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 X 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the RSCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? Each month, we focus on different elements of the Danielson framework and make suggestions to our teachers on improvements that can be made based on our observations. Student intellectual engagement has increased this year through the student discussions and citing of evidence in their responses. Teachers will receive training in varied Arts integration through the Turnaround Arts program. These techniques will be used to increase student intellectual engagement as well. We will analyze the Advance Web Application data from formal and informal observations over the summer and determine our area of focus for professional development cycles. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Effective School Leadership What is your vision for effective school leadership at your school? We have worked diligently at 23K165 to incorporate a culture of feedback within the vernacular of our staff. As the principal, establishing this culture of feedback is integral to supporting successful pedagogy. Our data specialist has been invaluable in supporting the development of both individual teacher data binders as well as grade level data binders. This practice has led to greater discussion during inquiry time of student patterns and trends which subsequently supports student progress and performance. The CBO that was selected to work with us, “Partnership with Children”, 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 38  are social worker based and provide many services that will help our students and will also provide professional development that will assist our staff in helping with our student’s social-emotional development. The administrative team will develop an observation and feedback cycle calendar. It will contain the date and time of the observations, as well as when the teacher is provided feedback. Snapshot walkthroughs will be used as a weekly tool in order to provide teachers immediate feedback. Teachers will be divided amongst administrators as we will rotate the groups of teachers so they are observed by both administrators. We will have a feedback tracker, where you can find the last given feedback to the teacher and continue to support them in their practice based upon the Danielson framework. We will also schedule times to conduct co-observations as an administrative team to ensure calibration and discuss trends across the school. In order to support a shared accountability throughout the school community, we will conduct weekly Community school team meetings with all stakeholders to disseminate data points such as progress reports, attendance reports, OORS reports, parent workshops, etc., to develop action plans and appropriate next steps. The community school director will be integral in taking on the attendance initiative. He/She will take part in mobilizing efforts to increase student attendance through the use of student initiatives. In addition, he/she will be participate in Monday Cabinet meetings with Administration to discuss community events that will engage parents. On which aspects of your own leadership do you plan to focus for the upcoming school year? I will focus on providing timely feedback after implementing cycles of observations. Administrative team will meet weekly in an effort to ensure that teacher's ratings and actionable feedback are normed and calibrated. What is your vision for ensuring that everyone in your schools has a normed and shared understanding of the school’s vision, mission, and instructional focus? The school leaders will articulate a shared vision and mission to the entire school community by embracing and practicing a full-spectrum of communications on a daily basis. The administration team will continue to incorporate “community circles” as one of the daily activities so that it would cultivate a culture of positive relationships. The idea is to build a sense of community in which every member--students, teacher, parent volunteers and staff member --feel that they are seen, heard, and respected. Our ultimate goal is to strengthen the relationships between teachers and students, fostering feelings of shared purpose and collective investment. In addition, setting the tone and expectations for instruction is another vital priority. Our schools expectation is outlined in our “Theory of Action.” This Theory of Action serves as a guideline of how we will push our instructional agenda. It is our belief that with data analysis, coherent instruction and frequent observation/feedback cycles student performance will increase. This idea is re-iterated weekly in our staff newsletters which always includes areas of focus and actionable steps teachers can use to improve instruction. What is your vision for developing differentiated leadership throughout your school? How will you utilize teacher leaders to build broad capacity within your school? As a Renewal School, shared leadership is important with the belief that everyone is in the process of moving the school. Building teacher leadership has been essential to culture building this year. The administrative staff encourages 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 39  teachers who demonstrate expertise to facilitate inter-visitations and professional development sessions. This year we have identified two model teachers that will assist teachers in pedagogical teaching strategies and build their capacity as lead teachers. How will the leader foster collaborative school governance processes, and ensure full family participation together with other stakeholders? The school leadership will continue to utilize the various communication tools such as School Messenger, Weekly News, Monday PD's, Tuesday's Parent Engagement, monthly Principal's Parent Breakfast to reinforce collaborative school governance processes, and ensure family participation together with other stakeholders. There will be greater accountability and emphasis on Parent Engagement and the quality of Parent Engagement. We will continue the work of outreach to stakeholder, providing them with our need assessment as well as way in which they can provide support. How often will the school leader conduct observations? How quickly will school leader share actionable feedback with teachers? How will school leader ensure accuracy and provide support to teachers based on observation feedback? Frequency Feedback Turnaround Accuracy weekly three days observable actionable and bite size What kind of evidence based systems would a school leader put in place to ensure that the school and individuals continues to improve? What kind of supports? Who would he/she collaborate with? Evidence-Based System Support(s) Collaborator(s) Advance ratings Observations Principal, Assistant Principal, Teacher leaders How will you organize student and teacher programs to ensure students’ needs are met? Fiscal capital? The school leaders and CBO director will organize student and teacher programs to ensure students' needs are met based on students' academic data, attendance, socio-emotional and mental health needs. Fiscal capital will be monitored and discussed between the SLT and CBO director. Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. By June 2019, school leaders will provide professional development and feedback to teachers on more effective questioning techniques resulting in a 10% increase in the aggregate teacher score for Danielson Component 3B. which will be measured by using the Advance web application data. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Effective School Leadership Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Effective School Leadership Annual Goal? 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 40  List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve Framework: Rigorous Instruction 3-5 Math Percent Level 2 & Above Average ELA Proficiency Rating Performance Index on State ELA Exam 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 41  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Starting in September, the PD topic of questioning techniques will be implemented during our weekly Professional Development time. These PDs will be facilitated by staff developers, Model teachers from our building as well the administration of our building. Our plan to monitor the effectiveness of these PDs will take place during teacher observations. Feedback would be given and further observations would determine whether or not the feedback was utilized to develop such strategies. School leaders will keep track of their feedback to teachers via an observation and feedback cycle calendar. This strategy will allow for each administrator to see Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Rigorous Instruction Teachers/ Para-professionals September through June 2019 Administrators, instructional lead teachers, model teachers, Teachers’ College Increase in teacher practice Rigorous Instruction Teachers/ Para-professionals Administrators September through June 2019 Increase in Advance teacher ratings 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 42  the previously given feedback and plan for differentiated PD. ORS instructional staff will continue to provide on-site modeling and coaching for teachers in their classrooms. The coach will focus on teaching teachers various pedagogical moves that teaches can employ immediately and also on designing lesson plans that have rigorous tasks aligned to common core standards. We will have parent/family workshops to assist families in understanding DOK questioning techniques and how to implement them in everyday normal activities so families could continue this practice at home. Teachers Rigorous Instruction September through June 2019 Teacher Development Coach, Administrators Coherent instruction Parents/ families Strong family-community ties September through June 2019 Parent Coordinator PTA, Partnership with Children Parent engagment 4b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Monthly Administration breakfast with the parents Parent surveys to identify parent needs Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Renewal Staff developers Model Classrooms Alignment of administration schedule for observations and feedback 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 43  Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. During the month of February, teachers will answer a survey that will reflect on how beneficial the feedback on their instructional techniques they’ve learned have been. Evidence will be provided from the feedback that has been delivered so far. The opportunity to realize where more work needs to be done will show through the feedback that has been discussed as well. This data would be measurable through the Advance web application. Teachers would be able to review what their Advance ratings have been up to this point, read the supporting evidence and be able to determine what they can do to improve in this area if they haven't done so but also determine what techniques they have employed so far that has assisted in an improvement. At this point, teachers will be able to develop a game plan for themselves on how to continue to master this technique in a more effective way. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance Reports Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 44  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. x x Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? Our strengths for developing strong family and community ties includes our school being a welcoming space that is responsive to families and community. We also have an open-door policy to ensure appropriate access to school leaders and staff. Our school community proactively cultivates trusting and respectful relationships with diverse families and community stakeholders. Also, the school provides support to families by creating meaningful opportunities for volunteering and engaging with the school using multiple points of entry focused on student learning and development. To support parents with Social-Emotional development, we provide the following: · Parent workshops – behavior management at home, schedules and routines · Parent series – Understanding Bullying versus Conflict · Referrals to outside services including mental health, physical health, food scarcity, and substance abuse prevention To partner with parents in helping students develop academic skills we provide the following: · Open library access · Parent workshops offered on weekdays and weekends focusing on common core learning standards in math and ELA, understanding IEPs, preparing for state exams, and reading development 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 45  · Teachers participate in weekly Tuesday parent outreach where they discuss academic progress · Parents are provided with an iReady report outlining student academic progress To build strong family and community ties, we provide the following: · Monthly family engagement nights including performances provided by Lincoln Center, Turnaround Arts and Partnership with Children · Monthly Principal breakfasts where the Principal provides school updates · Weekly Zumba and Fitness classes for parents · Full-time Community School Director and Parent Coordinator managing a Parent Resource Center Lastly, parent voice is encouraged and valued through participation in School Leadership Team, Parent Advisory Council, Parent Teacher Association, and Community School Team. We ensure that during all parent events an interpreter available as needed. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Strong Family and Community Ties What is your vision for having strong family and community ties at your school? The PS 165 vision for strong family and community ties includes our school being a welcoming space that is responsive to families and community members and collaboratively designs an open-door policy to ensure appropriate access to school leaders and staff. The school community will proactively cultivate trusting and respectful relationships with diverse families and community stakeholders. Also, the school will provide support to families by creating diverse and meaningful opportunities for volunteering and engaging with the school using multiple points of entry focused on student learning and development. Families are part of the different systems and structures which exist in the school. Parents are part of the SLT, the parent academy, school safety committee, PAC (parent advisory council), PTA. Parents outside of these teams have access on a daily basis to the principal. During the regularly scheduled parent workshops, the parents have access to curriculum materials as well as to all pertinent data. Families are welcomed and made a part of the school community by being able to participate in different events. Tuesday afternoon, during Parent Engagement time, parents are welcome to speak to the various teachers their children have on their children’s progress. Each month there is a PTA Meeting and SLT Meetings are posted on the Parent Calendar that is sent home so any parent may come and be involved in the various school issues addressed during each meeting. Our partnership with Lincoln Center allows for them to provide parent workshops and performances to celebrate their child’s participation. Our Arts Specialist has provided family workshops on ways to integrate the arts to advance student learning and will continue to do so this upcoming school year. Our CBO partner, Partnership with Children, will assist us in living through our vision. Partnership with Children will have their own office in our school so there is a specific place parents, teachers, and staff can go to for help. Partnership with Children will also be providing workshops for parents and teachers as well as special programs for our students such as a girl’s group and sports activities. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 46  Our comprehensive education plan for parent and family engagement for next year involves creating a specific, delegated, and rigorously scheduled series of events, workshops, and programming to ensure consistent and multi-tiered engagement and support from and for families. We will build upon the programming and progress of the 2018-2019 school year and expand to create a more comprehensive and specific schedule to ensure that programming begins immediately and continues throughout the year. This will also ensure that parent and family engagement is robust, and will allow our school teams to address all aspects of school and community life through our parent engagement. We will begin the year with a layout of which workshops and events we will run, as well as their time frame and staff leads for each. In addition to the existing programs this year, next year we will introduce the following workshop and programs: In order to enhance and build upon parent and family engagement in the area of social/emotional learning, PS 165 will add the following events and workshops and events to our existing program from the 2018-2019 school year:  Coping with stress series of workshops for parents (series of four: tools for coping with stress, 4 steps to calm body and mind, grief and loss, self care)  Assisting Students with regulation series (series of three: behavior management, structured play at home, schedules and routines)  Caregiver Talks Series (on a monthly basis, including such topics as: foster care, talking to your student about your relationships, talking about incarcerated family members with your kids) We will further our existing parent and family engagement program in the area of of academic success by continuing to build upon our existing programs with the following events, workshops, and programs:  Literacy, Science, and Math curriculum workshops to connect parents to concepts being taught at school (series of six, two of each Math, Literacy, and Science, throughout school year)  Understanding Your Child’s IEP/Special Education series (two throughout school year, one in the fall and one in the spring)  Preparing Your Child for Testing: Positive vs Negative Self-Talk for families (series of two workshops prior to Math and ELA standardized tests in Spring)  Assisting your student with class participation and speaking workshops (series of two) The previous school year’s program for community-building will be expanded to include the following events, workshops, and programming:  Female caregiver and male caregiver groups (to begin in September and meet monthly, with at least two events per group throughout the school year)  Parenting classes (Series of six throughout the school year, to include workshops on resume writing, a college fair for families, GED programs, CPR training for families, budgeting and money management, job interview preparation) Legal support workshops with Brooklyn Defenders (to include four workshops on immigration support, navigating the system of ACS and Foster Care, and child support assistance)   This year’s career day series was so successful, that we plan to expand next year to include parents and families. This will mean employed families representing their careers, as well as families being invited to participate and assist with career day. Within the Community School model, how will families be welcomed into the school and made a part of the school community? What support will administrators, teachers, school staff and school safety officers be given to help create a welcoming environment? Will there be a dedicated space for families in the school? 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 47  Every morning parents will be greeted in front of the building by Principal, Parent coordinator, Social Work Director, and/or Community School Director. The presence of the staff will increase parent/ staff relationships, provide convenience for working families, and ensure a welcoming environment for all. School staff along with school safety officers will be given weekly PD's where they will have the opportunity to brain storm and develop ideas. Our school community will be made aware of the room that is the dedicated space for families utilize. How will the school identify and develop families to take leadership roles in school decision making/school governance structures? Families are encouraged to come in monthly for parent workshops, and school community events. Families will also be given surveys, quarterly, in which families can communicate how they would like to be included in the school community and what decision making and school governance structures they would like to be a part of. As part of the quarterly surveys, parents will be informed of the opportunity to become a parent volunteer. The parents volunteers work closely with the Parent coordinator, and current PTA board members to ensure that the needs of all in our school community are met. Through the involvement listed above the families will be made aware of when elections will be held for positions on the school's Parent Teacher Association(PTA). How will the school engage the community and families? How will they ensure that teachers are able to learn from families about the children being taught? The school has a monthly parent and staff newsletter in which all parties are kept abreast of the events occurring in our school for the month. The school has several events throughout the year where parents, teachers, and staff are encouraged and welcome to attend through social media and the remind app. We have a weekly parent engagement time, where parents and teachers have the opportunity to meet and discuss their child's / students' progress. Many teachers utilize class dojo which ensures constant and convenient communication between teacher and families. What types of supports does the school provide to families to encourage them to take an active role in what their child is learning? Type of Support Rationale Varied workshops to support families in supporting their children Open door policy for families to support their children/teachers Parent Coordinator news letter P.S 165 provides monthly parent workshops where parents are educated on building strong academic supports for their children as well as social emotional learning techniques. P.S 165 has an open door policy for all parents and students. Teachers have weekly parent engagement time on Tuesday afternoons. Counselors are available to meet with families and family supports systems. The schools administration encourages an open door policy throughout the school building. Lets parents know the type of parent activities that are taking place How do families partner with the school and CBO to support student success? Will there be dedicated space for families? 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 48  Family partnerships with school: P. S 165 has conducted a host of workshops in conjunction with the following community organizations. Community Improvement Development, SCO Family of Services, Turnaround Arts, New York Psychotherapy, NYPD 73rd Precint, Lincoln center, and Brownsville recreation center. Family partnerships with CBO: By attending community school meetings and being involved in the planning and execution of school forum. Is there dedicated space for these partnerships? Room201 designated as the schools family resource room. What is your vision for the role the school will take in providing access adult education classes within the community?  Parenting classes (Series of six throughout the school year, to include workshops on resume writing, a college fair for families, GED programs, CPR training for families, budgeting and money management, job interview preparation) Legal support workshops with Brooklyn Defenders (to include four workshops on immigration support, navigating the system of ACS and Foster Care, and child support assistance)   P.S 165's career day series was so successful, that we plan to expand next year to include parents and families. This will mean employed families representing their careers, as well as families being invited to participate and assist with career day. What data and student progress feedback loops will be present at the school to ensure that families knowledgeable of their children’s scholastic success? Teachers will continue to have open communication with parents. The current data programs is OORS, Apricot, ATS, Data sorter, Class Dojo, PBIS and WITNYS. All the data programs are used to help track academic interventions, behaviors, programs and services, staff professional developments, family and community events and de- escalation. Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. By June 2019, the school will increase family engagement and communication as measured by a 5 percentage point increase in parents who respond positively (agree or strongly agree) on the New York City School Survey to questions in the school culture section. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Strong Family and Community Ties Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Strong Family and Community Ties Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve Attendance 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 49 Supportive Environment Academic Scores 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 50  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Continue our partnership with Lincoln Center Education will help to increase our family engagement as Lincoln Center always hosts 1-2 Family Nights at our school. These Family Night Events provide parents the opportunity to participate in workshops, see a show and have dinner. Our last Family Night Event brought in over 130 people. The Turnaround National Arts Program will be providing Professional Development and will also be partnering with Lincoln Center Education. They will also work with our families and provide opportunities for Family Engagement and communication as well. Continue to provide families with interim school surveys that mirror that of the NYC Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Families/ students/ Parent Coordinator Strong family ties Only 2 sessions: Fall & Spring of 2019 LCE Personnel, PS 165 AIM Team, 165Turnaround Arts Leadership Team, Parent Coordinator, Lincoln Center Liaison Turnaround Arts Local Director How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Increase in Family engagement Families/ students/ Parent Coordinator Academic scores Various events from September through June 2019 LCE Personnel, PS 165 AIMTeam, Parent Coordinator, Lincoln Center Liaison, Turnaround Arts Leadership Team & Local Director Increase in student achievement Familily Engagement Strong family community- ties November 2018 & January 2019 Parent Coordinator, SLT Increase in student achievement 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 51 Interim survey responses Parents/families Strong families communities Sept 2018- June 2019 Parent Coordinator, CSD, Admin, Teachers Increase student achievement, School Survey. Parent Coordinator will also provide workshops for parents on how to access and complete surveys online. The SLT will monitor the survey results and create an action plan, based on the results of what needs to be modified, whether it’s in the delivery method, computer, paper & pencil, oral, or the responses, strongly disagreeing with how they are informed about their child’s progress. We will have parent/family workshops to assist families in understanding DOK questioning techniques and how to implement them in everyday normal activities so families could continue this practice at home. Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Parent Coordinator to provide specific workshops, sufficient paper/ink for copies, laptops with internet access. LCE: Lincoln Center Education Turnaround Arts Program Partnership with Children Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other 52  Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Sign in sheets will be created and used for each event. This will provide information on increases or decreases in attendance of these events as well as which particular families we are reaching and which families don’t usually participate. Knowing this, will help us develop an action plan to better incorporate families that don’t usually participate in such events. Interim school surveys will be used as a mid point benchmark. Tallying the responses of these surveys will provide us with data about how parents feel and see the school and will also inform us on the number of respondents we have completing the survey. The data collected from the interim surveys which relate to strong family and community ties section and the levels of responses will inform us if we are on track to meeting our goal. Since we want to increase the number of parents who respond, as well as the number of parents who respond positively, it’s important that we focus on those responses and target our action plan to that. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Parent survey tracker Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 53  Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Program Description Directions: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) activities are directly aligned to the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, Rigorous Instruction, Supportive Environments, and Strong Family and Community Ties. ELT provides enriching educational experiences that happen outside of the traditional school day and blend skill acquisition, relationship-building and fun to foster academic and social-emotional growth. Summer learning, afterschool programming, and extended-day ELT models, when well-implemented, play a critical role in supporting students in all grades and ensuring that they graduate from high school, college and career ready. SED requires that Priority schools offer a minimum of 200 additional student contact hours as Expanded Learning Time in addition to the current mandated length of 900 hours of instruction per year (25 hours per week) in grades K-6 and 990 hours of instruction per year (27.5 hours per week) in grades 7-12. Effective ELT models will blend school staff with community partners, and will provide a balanced curriculum that can include ELA, math, STEM, arts, physical activity, and leadership development. Complete the sections on this page to demonstrate how the school will meet these requirements. Part 1 – ELT Program Goal(s) Describe the summative goal(s) of the ELT program for the 2018-19 school year. Goals for ELT should align to the Renewal Benchmarks. How will the school will ensure that all students’ individual needs are served during the Renewal ELT and how the school’s vision for ELT will impact both academic achievement and social emotional growth? Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the percentage of students proficient in ELA will increase by .05 as measured by the New York State ELA Exam. By June 2019 the percentage of students proficient in math will increase by .05, as measured by the New York State Math Exam. Part 2 – ELT Program Type Is the ELT program voluntary or compulsory? Voluntary X Compulsory Renewal ELT – Describe what accountability structures the school will employ to ensure participation of all students, including special populations, will participate fully in Renewal ELT. Additional ELT - If there is a voluntary ELT program in addition to the compulsory Renewal ELT, indicate how you will actively encourage the participation of all students, with the goal of serving at least 50% of students. Renewal ELT: To ensure that all students are serviced including special populations for ELT we will do the following: - In September 2018 we will established staff members that will be servicing students for the ELT program in ELA and Math. - Complete a needs assessment to identify areas where students need support and design instruction to address student needs. - Every 6 weeks, assessments will be administered to monitor student progress on focused areas. Part 3 – ELT Program Description Target Population: The ELT program for a Renewal School will be offered to all students in the school. Describe how the school will meet the following SED requirements for an ELT program: How will the school integrate academics, enrichment, and skill development through hands-on experiences that make learning relevant and engaging? How will CBO staff and the school’s teachers be integrated to provide a seamless learning day? 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 54   Offer a range of activities that capture student interest and strengthen student engagement in learning so as to promote higher attendance, reduces risk for retention or drop out, and increases the likelihood of graduation.  Actively address the unique learning needs and interests of all types of students, especially those who may benefit from approaches and experiences not offered in the traditional classroom setting.  What new content areas and opportunities will be offered to students? How will the school ensure all IEP and language mandates are met during ELT?  Contain components designed to improve student academic, social, and emotional outcomes, including opportunities for enrichment programs such as in music and art.  Ensure instruction in any core academic subject offered in the program will be delivered under the supervision of a teacher who is NYS certified in that particular content area.  How will community educators receive professional development? Are there plans to provide joint PD to school faculty and community partner staff?  What content will be led by pedagogical staff and what content will be led by CBO partners?  How will the school best utilize CBO partners to impact student achievement?  How will effective outreach be conducted to families?  How will programming be made easily accessible to students and families in order to encourage participation? Our extended learning programs are designed to meet the needs of the whole child with focus on academic and social emotional growth. PS 165’s ELT focus is on academic growth and providing targeted interventions to address student needs. All ELT programs are taught by NYS certified content area teachers who concentrate on Literacy and Math Common Core Learning Standards. To ensure that teacher practice is effective and targeted the school will provide Professional Development in the areas of small group instruction, analyzing assessment data to inform instruction, and remediation strategies. These focus areas will directly support teacher instruction during ELT. Our CBO will also support ELT by contracting services from an outside partnership that will provide academic math tutoring for our level 3 and 4 students. Parents are invited to workshops that mirror what their child(ren) will be doing in order to provide support and encourage continued skill-building at home. During Tuesday parent engagement teachers will communicate with parents via telephone, email or in-person to discuss student progress. ELT is offered to all students in grades K-5, Tues-Friday and is part of our school hours (2:20-3:35). Part 4 – ELT Program Implementation and Oversight Part 4a. Who will implement the ELT program? Who will oversee the program? 1. Indicate the key personnel that will be responsible for implementing and overseeing the ELT program, including school-based staff and any high-quality community partners that will be involved. If applicable, describe the scope of involvement of all community partners and how the joint ELT program is structured. How will the school assess the impact of ELT on individual student achievement and social emotional development? 2. 3. The ELT program is designed by the Instructional Cabinet and informed by student data. The program is implemented by our staff and overseen by school administration. All ELT classes are taught by certified teachers. We will assess program quality through supervisory and administrative monitoring, including weekly supervision, observations done by administration. Informal and formal feedback will be given to teachers including conducting data chats after each cycle. Data chats will focus on cycle assessments that are administered after each focus area. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 55  Part 4b. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. Expanded Learning Time - September 2018 – June 2019 ELT Focus: Tuesday and Wednesday -ELA Thursday and Friday -Math Part 5 – ELT Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the ELT program. Teachers iReady program Laptops Materials-General Supplies Math manipulative Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support the ELT Program. Note: If the program is funded by 21st Century Community Center Learning Funds, it must be offered in conjunction with a high quality, high capacity community partner. X 21st Century Title I 1003(a) X Tax Levy X Title III Title I SWP PTA Funded Title I TA X P/F Set-aside C4E SIG Grant School Achievement X Other Funding Part 6 – ELT Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound and aligned to the school’s Renewal Benchmarks By January 2019, the percentage of students proficiency in ELA and math will increase and average of 0.025% as measured by the iReady winter assessment and the Ready Math and ELA paper test. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. iReady and Ready (ELA and Math ) paper test Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 56  Section 7: Community School Description Directions: The Community School program is directly aligned to the Framework for Great Schools element – Strong Family and Community Ties. Part 1 – The Community School Program Goal(s) Indicate the summative goal(s) of the Community School program for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. By June 2019, Partnership with Children will identify and implement strategies that increase the frequency and quality of parent involvement in the school, increase average daily attendance, and continue to build a supportive learning environment for all PS 165 stakeholders. Parent involvement will be evidenced by weekly use of parent resource room for activities including job readiness, student support and success, and wellness. Also, there will be a 5% increase in the number of parents engaging in school-based activities like assemblies, monthly family fun nights, parent teacher conferences, and the Community School Forum. Attendance will increase to meet our benchmark, 90.8%. Impact on attendance will be tracked through daily use of the New Visions tools to support weekly attendance team meetings. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Community School Program Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Community School Program Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve Attendance will improve to 90.8% The percentage of students proficient in ELA will increase by .05 as measured by the New York State ELA Exam. The percentage of students proficient in math will increase by .09 as measured by the New York State Math Exam. Part 2 – Community School Program Description Part 2a. Identify the CBO partnerships that you will develop, their target student population(s), and scope of the services provided. As well as supporting schools’ supportive environment and attendance work, CBO’s should be helping to support your school’s instructional focus. CBO Partnership Target Population Scope of Service Partnership with Children students struggling with social/emotional/behavioral needs, but who are not mandated for counseling Sports and Arts in Schools Foundation K-5th grade students needing after-school support and enriching activities PWC provides one-to-one counseling, supportive counseling, case management, small group counseling, mediation, crisis de-escalation, full classroom intervention, teacher support/coaching, classroom observation, staff Professional Development, and parent workshops. SASF provides programming in youth development, homework help, group enrichment activities including sports (basketball, soccer), arts (visual, performing, STEM/STEAM), and music. Central Park Tutors 3rd-5th grade students needing targeted support in math Central Park Tutors provides small group math tutoring to targeted 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 57 Turnaround Arts students, caregivers, and school staff students identified by Administration as "pushable." Students receive tutoring 3 days/week during ELT. Turnaround Arts connects high-quality arts education resources with PS 165 to help improve attendance, parent engagement, student motivation, and academic achievement. Arts education services and resources are designed to increase opportunities for success, build an extended community and raise the visibility of achievements. Such resources include art supplies, musical education materials, licensing rights and kits for school musicals, instructional resources, and professional learning facilitated by leaders in the field. Part 2b. Describe how the school will meet the NYCDOE requirements for a Community School in the School Renewal program. 1. Renewal Schools are expected to partner with a community-based partner organization (CBO) and together with members of the School Leadership Team, hire a Community School Director. The Director will lead implementation of the asset and needs assessment process, and other critically important coordinating activities. Indicate how you will leverage this aspect of the work. Renewal Schools are expected to personalize the needs of all students, through strategic programming and services, as determined by the asset and needs assessment, and must also offer Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and mental health programming. In completing this section, ensure that you think about how: (1) the right services are provided to the right students and families at the right time; and (2) how you will seamlessly coordinate services with instructional programming happening throughout and outside of the school day. Indicate how you will implement this work, and describe other programming you anticipate to be in place to strengthen this initiative. Renewal Schools are expected to emerge as Partnership Schools, which are places where parents and families feel welcome, actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. Monthly meetings and Community School Forums engaging families and community stakeholders will be a critical part of this family engagement strategy. Describe how you will implement this aspect of the work. Renewal School Principals are expected to meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. Data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter - and training will be available for schools to use. Indicate how you will implement this aspect of the work. 2. 3. 4. PS 165 Ida Posner is paired up to work with Partnership with Children. Through Partnership with Children, Social Workers conduct assessments of student needs by gathering information from a variety of sources including school administrators, teachers, caregivers, direct observation of and interaction with students, and analysis of relevant student data. Under the direct care of licensed Master level Social Workers and with the support of the PPT, students are then triaged into the appropriate level of care, with legal guardian consent. Students with the highest level of need, for example, students with debilitating psychiatric issues, are referred to mental health services outside of the school. The next level of service is individual counseling. Social Workers meet with assigned students either weekly, bi-weekly, or monthly for 45-minute sessions to work on social, behavioral, emotional, academic, family, and attendance goals. Social workers may have more frequent contact with these students for urgent behavioral intervention or crisis intervention. The next level of service is small group counseling. Social workers facilitate social-2018-19 RSCEP-PF 58  emotional learning lessons that help students build social skills, provide tools to effectively express themselves and manage conflict, and teach students leadership skills. Social workers also provide classroom-based interventions around topics such as Respect for All, Responsible Decision-Making, Stress Reduction, Self-Awareness, Self-Management, Social Awareness and Healthy Relationships. Partnership with Children staff are available to direct all students and families to needed concrete resources such as mental health/health care clinics, housing resources, legal aid, and emergency assistance programs. Social Workers will attend appointments with families to act as advocates and to assist in navigating systems. Partnership with Children also participates in planning and hosting school-wide events and field trips that promote positive school culture and expose students to activities that enrich their lives and engage them further in their academic success. Additionally, PWC's Social Work Director, Hannah Propp is part of the PBIS committee and has been assisting in the training of school staff on this behavior modification system. PBIS was rolled out and implemented as a school-wide intervention in September, 2017. The Community School Director is a member of various school teams including the Student Success Team (Attendance), CST, SLT, BRT, AIM team and the Safety Committee. He is involved in all community school based activities as well as all instructional support systems. Within these roles, he assists in building the school community as well as engaging our parents and caregivers. During ELT, Partnership with Children may provide counseling services including whole class and/or small group interventions. The Community School Director assists in assessing the needs and interests of students and staff in order to devise a strong plan for ELT. This includes bringing outside instructors who specialize in academic enrichment through the arts or music for selected classrooms, as well as bringing in professional tutors to work with targeted students in small groups. Caregivers will have the opportunity to be involved with renewal planning by attending monthly PTA, CST and SLT meetings. Parents are also encouraged to attend CEC meetings, PAC meetings, as well as monthly parent workshops and Family Fun Night events. Having the opportunity to attend such meetings and workshops keeps our parents informed as well as provides them with a forum in which to express their ideas and peers who can offer support. An increase in student attendance and parent/family attendance at meetings and school events, as well as a decrease in school incidents will determine whether or not our CBO, Partnership with Children is making a positive impact on our school community. Tools such as the New Visions Data Sorter/Heat Map, event/workshop sign-in sheets, and feedback surveys will be used to monitor progress. Part 3 – Community School Program Implementation and Oversight Part 3a. Key Staff and Partners 1. Name and describe the scope of involvement of all community partners working in the school (include partners supporting ELT, counseling, enrichment, etc.) 2. Name the members of your Community School Team and how meetings will be organized and structured to engage all stakeholders and be focused on results. 3. Explain data strategies including the use of the data sorter, and steps that the school will take to ensure that the appropriate interventions are provided to the right students 1. Partnership with Children's Masters level Social Workers and the Community School Director, as well as School Administrators will ensure the implementation of these programs as well as oversee their success. Each year, Partnership with Children conducts parent focus groups and surveys to determine parent satisfaction with services provided and to identify gaps. The Community School Director keeps open lines of communication with all partners and meets with them regularly to coordinate and ensure all parties work together as a team. Partnership with Children (PWC) uses the Attendance Matters Initiative, as well as the Success Mentors Initiative at PS 165. PWC staff spend a great deal of time working with students and families to increase school-wide attendance. PWC also supports 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 59  ELT through assessing the needs and interests of students and staff to determine activities that will be engaging to all. Occasionally, PWC will bring in outside vendors to lead ELT activities. For the 2018-19 school year, these vendors include the Sports & Arts in Schools Foundation and Central Park Tutors. 2. Members of the CST include: Jason Rivers, Principal, Jason Seto, CSD, Hannah Propp, Social Work Director, Aida Rondon, PWC Family Outreach Worker, Sabine Jean, Guidance Counselor, Stacey Williamson-Morilla (school staff), Rockel Holmes, PTA president, additional parents, and staff from supporting CBOs. All meetings have a detailed agenda, time-keeper, and recorder. Specific tasks are assigned during the meetings. These tasks are then followed up on in subsequent meetings. CST spends time debriefing after events and special activities. 3. During Student Success Team Meetings, the Community School Director shares up-to-date attendance statistics and areas of need from the New Visions Data Sorter and Attendance Heat Map. Decisions about which students need Success Mentors and which classes are fully utilizing the Attendance Matters incentives can be determined through review of Data Sorter and Heat Map data. All interventions are recorded and tracked in the Data Sorter and/or Heat Map to determine impact. Part 3b. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the Community School program. Partnership with Children Staff School Staff Parents/Caregivers Extended hours for 2018-19 will be Tuesday-Friday, 2:20-3:35 Agreement/Contract with Sports & Arts in Schools Foundation (SASF) Agreement/Contract with Central Park Tutors Interest/needs survey for students and staff regarding after-school activities (SASF to create) Support and training using the New Visions data tools - Student Sorter & Attendance Heat Map Part 3c. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. Partnership with Children's counseling services begin in early October, with the exception of crisis intervention and de-escalation which start the first day of school. Attendance supports begin on the first day of school. All absent students receive phone calls. During the first attendance meeting in September, chronically absent students from the 2017-18 school year will be assigned Success Mentors. Monthly attendance incentives for classrooms will be announced in early September so students and families are engaged as early as possible. The attendance team will meet weekly and attendance work will continue throughout the length of the school year. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 60  Community School Team meetings will also begin the first week of school and continue throughout the school year on a weekly schedule. After-school services provided by Sports and Arts in Schools Foundation will also begin in October and run through June, 2019. Enrichment activity surveys will be distributed in September with the goal of putting a strong plan into place by late September/early October. Part 3d. Mental Health Work Plan Separate from this RSCEP, schools will complete a Mental Health Work Plan that will become an addendum to this document. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 61  Section 8: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) 2018-2019results from the ELA Exams, EOY MOSL, IReady, Ready NY, Data Reports Identified Students ‘ Areas of Weakness, Running Records and Teacher Recommendation Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Guided Reading and I-Ready Small group instruction. Afterschool academy Tier 2 &3 RTI intervention Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small group Daily One on one with Teacher and/or Para RTI Teacher Daily Mathematics 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 2017-2018 results from the State Math Exams , EOY MOSL, iReady Data Reports Identified Students ‘ Areas of Weakness, and Teacher Recommendation I-Ready and Math Unit assessments Small group One on one with Teacher/Para Small group instruction. Afterschool Academy 2 days a weekfor 2 hours. 3-4 times per week Daily Daily 62  Saturday Academy Teacher Tier 2 & 3 RTI program Individual and/or small group instruction. Science 2017-2018 NYS Science exam -Practice Science Assessment Tutoring and/or enrichment 2 days a week for 2 hours During the school day –Monday through Friday Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) -recommendations are also made by teachers. 2017 - 2018results from the ELA Exams and Teacher Recommendation Students are recommended by the Pupil Personnel Team(PPT) , Partnership With Children, Teachers, Administrators , and/ or parents Small group instruction. Small group instruction. During the school day - Monday through Friday Individual and/or small group instruction. One on one counseling and or group small group discussions This service is provided during the school day 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 63  Section 9: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) For the school year of 2017-2018 there were 42 students in temporary housing. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Title I funds will be used to bridge the gap between students in transient homes and other students. Title I funds will assist the population of STH to manage the rigorous academic content to meet achievement standards. Urgent social needs such as basic school supplies, uniforms, counseling services, intervention programs, outreach efforts and parental involvement will be provided. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). PS 165 has 80 students in temporary housing. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 64  We will provide outreach to the families ( need assessment), and identify areas of concerns where we can give support. A pair of school uniform, shoes and a backpack with school supplies will be provided for these students. We will also seek out other partners in the medical and health professions, such as dentist, ophthalmologist, as well as nutritionist, for assistance in caring for our students. Ongoing communication will take place with the Tony Davis, the key contact Liaison expert from the DOE, who will provide PS 165 with resources and development to better service our STH. Funds will also be used to suffice educational trips and other social events for these particular students. 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. $3,000 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 65  Section 10: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. The School Renewal Program provides yearlong professional development to build the capacity for the entire staff. Our recruitment strategies include attending district and borough wide hiring fairs and keeping close connections to neighboring colleges. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). As a renewal school we are receiving professional development from a variety of sources. We are partnered with Teachers’ College which provides professional development (PD) in their Writing Program which is being implemented school wide. The Principal and Assistant Principals receive on going support from our Director of School Renewal and District Teacher Effectiveness Coach. Paraprofessionals are included in all teacher professional developments (especially the ones conducted in school) and receive targeted PD from our SESIS person. Finally, all teachers, paraprofessionals, assistant principals and principal receive specific professional development from our Field Support Team that is designed around the Common Core Learning Standards and Danielson Framework to improve pedagogy to positively impact the students. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 66  N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). Our Three-K and Pre-Kindergarten students are part of our school. They participate in all school wide activities and events. Our Three-K and Pre-kindergarten teachers meet regularly with our kindergarten and first grade teachers to discuss and plan curriculum. Our Kindergarten teachers meet with our Pre-kindergarten parents. In addition to attending targeted Pre-kindergarten professional development the Pre-kindergarten staff participates in all professional development conducted at the school. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. We have a professional development team whose members represent teachers, paraprofessionals, and administrators. The team meets to determine the professional development topics that are needed and will be covered each week. The team also determines who will lead the sessions. The instructional cabinet which also includes departmental leads design strategic plan and schedule for the development of pedagogical staff. Meetings across grades decide which common assessments will be used to measure the progress of students. Data analysis are a tool used in the decision making process for Professional Development. A data team will be in force for the 2017-2018 school year. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (RSCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Title I Part A (Basic) Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Federal Federal 2018-19 RSCEP-PF unknown unknown Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) X X Column B Section Reference(s) X X 67  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local unknown unknown unknown unknown unkown X X X X X X X X X X 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/RSCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 68   Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 69  Section 11: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. PS 165, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. PS/IS 165 will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 70  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 71  ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) PS 165 , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 72  Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 73  Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Family Fun Nights I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 74  ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 75  ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 76  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 23 School Name PS 165 Ida Posner Borough Brooklyn School Number B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Jason RIvers Coach N/A ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Ms. M. Gabriel Teacher/Subject Area Ms. C. Fabien (Common B.) Teacher/Subject Area Ms. V. Lyle (ELA) Related-Service Provider M.Gabriel Superintendent Dr.Miatheresa Pate Assistant Principal Ms. Marica Myrie Coach N/A School Counselor Ms. Velez Parent Ms. R. Holmes Parent Coordinator Mr.Gregory Wooten Field Support Center Staff Member N/A Other (Name and Title) N/A C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 1 1 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 1 D. Student Demographics 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 77  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 417 Total number of ELLs 17 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 4.08% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? At P.S /I.S 165, we use various assessments tools to drive instruction. Early literacy skills of the ELLs are assessed through a variety of methods. During the admission process, parents and students are interviewed with comprehensive questions centering their education background history and possibly SIFE status, using questions from the SIFE identification questionnaire. Literacy skills are further assessed using results from Performance Based Assessment, TC-Running records, Fundations Unit Test, Common core Codex assessment, Go Math End of chapter Test, the NYSESLAT modalities (RLAT) report, and teacher created assessments. Results from the above mentioned assessments are used on conferencing and planning. Teachers share the flagged students in need of extra supports and allow a deeper understanding of the ELLs first and second language needs as a whole. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 78  2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Small group intervention 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Common preparation periods are set where our certified ESL teacher brings in data analysis of the ELLs progress in all four components (listening, speaking, reading, and writing). From the results of the NYSESLAT, Periodic Assessment, NYS ELA/math and teachers created assessments; teachers are able to evaluate the strengths and weaknesses of our ELLs. At PS. 165, our ELLs are in need of improvement in reading and writing modalities. Our ESL teacher is intensely working to meet the students' needs in reading comprehension and in writing skills. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Small group intervention sessions 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Tier 1, results from Literacy skills Assessment are used for planning and to drive instruction. (RTI) for ELLs (K-5). Classroom teachers plan and set realistic goals to meet the needs of students. Student population is subdivided in smaller groups aiming the goal of learning. Language and vocabulary development are skills promoted throughout the day. Assessments used are TC running records. Fundatiions Unit Test (Phonics), NYSESLAT modalities, RLAT reports. Tier 2, our RTI certified teachers ensure that interventions are sufficiently intense. Intervention provided for a minimum of thirty minutes each day. Tier 3, a certified teacher in addition to our certified ESL teacher work intensely to meet students' needs. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Data from the NYSITELL and the NYSESLAT shows that 45% of our ELLs are at Entering level, 21% are at Emerging Level, 10% at Transitioning Level and 24% at Expanding Level. Many of our ELLs have transitioned from Entering to Emerging Level. We continue to register many newcomers which shows in the data of Entering students. An amount of 1/4 of our ELLs have moved to the Expanded Levels. These numbers drive instructions, aiming primarily on weaknesses in reading comprehension and writing skills; they further raise questions in the instructional decisions aimed to remediate needs of students. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Data meetings with teachers and Administration Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Our ELLs receive their subject areas in classes taught by licensed subject areas teachers who have been trained in ELLs methodology instruction is delivered in was to accommodate individual learning styles (e.g., visual, auditory and kinesthetic.) Instruction models for ELLs rely on TC workshop model, differentiated instruction and using different entry points (modalities of language learning, listening, speaking, reading and writing). At PS 165K the Department of Education requires the use of Core Curriculum Standards grade level in reading, writing, listening and speaking. A variety of structures; i.e., read-aloud, guided reading, shared reading, individual and small group conferences. PS. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 79  165K, has self contained classes, Supplemental services are provided by both Push-in and Pull-out certified staff members. Students who have scored at the Entering or Emerging levels are grouped together by grade in a pull out model. Transitioning and Expanding are grouped by grade. The ELL teacher works collaboratively with classroom teachers align instructions to the needs of ELLs. Our classes are heterogeneously grouped. All students including ELLs from grades 6-8 travel together as a group. Our ELLs have the opportunity to work with others who are proficient in English as well as native speakers. b. TBE program. If applicable. TBE program does not apply at PS165K. c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Instructional minutes are delivered accordingly. Entering/Emerging, Transitioning English Proficiency levels receive 2 units of study or 360 minutes per week. Expanding English Proficiency level 1 unit of study or 180 minutes per week from our ESL certified teacher in addition to 1 unit of study by an ESOL and Common Branch (K-6) teacher. The Home Language support mandated as per Regulations Part 154-2 (k-8) 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Our school provides a Free Standing ESL Program. The Free Standing ESL program is taught in English and students are encouraged to transfer the language skills from their first language to the target language, English. Students may use their native language for better understanding of ideas; however, strong emphasis is placed on English usage in all modalities. Students are assessed on regular basis and assessment results are used by our certified teachers during common preps to better plan instruction. Materials are aligned with the New Core Learning Standards and multiple entry points are expected throughout teaching. The ESL teacher meets with content area teachers during common preps for planning. With Common Core aligned materials, vocabulary development, glossaries, dictionaries, and visual aids, the ESL teacher uses multiple entry points to better support ELLs in the content area subjects. Content area instructions are delivered primarily through integrated model by scaffolding the teacher's lesson of content area an pre-teaching vocabulary needed to comprehend lessons. English is the language of instruction, teachers use scaffolding such as videos, TPR, Language experience approach as well as explicit instruction. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? To ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their native languages the Spanish LAB-R is offered to students, Math and Science exams are provided in native language, bilingual dictionaries, content area glossaries in native language are available. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. SIFE students will receive an extra period of instruction each day from the certified ESL instructor. The certified ESL teacher will use this time to assist SIFE students in introducing or reinforcing content and strategies that may have been missed during their academic interruption. Strategies such as scaffolding, modelling, bridging, contextualization of new concepts, and schema building are used to enhance academic development of SIFE students to accelerate language and academic development. b. The NYSITELL determines newcomer's eligibility for ESL service. New admit- students, in particular students who fall into 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 80  the category of eligibility for the NYS exams required exceptional attention. Total physical Response, visual aids, graphic organizers, vocabulary development, read aloud, and repetition will be used to enhance comprehension and learning. c. Vocabulary Development, graphic organizers, comprehension strategies and reading strategies/ skills enhancing comprehension will be tools for the ESL Teacher in collaboration with classroom teachers to work with ELLs in the Developing stage. d. Long Term ELLs are offered the opportunity to participate in various interventions throughout the school year. Our intervention focus on literacy, ESL and math, as well as prepare the students for the NYSESLAT and the English Language Arts and Math exams. Long Term ELLs will receive differentiated instructions based on multiple entry points and test taking strategies. Data from NYS exams, analysis of the NYSESLAT modalities, RLAT-RNMR reports will enable our certified ESL teacher in collaboration with classroom teachers to effectively target students' weakness. Intervention programs such as RTI, Reading Rescue have a variety of activities to enhance ELL's vocabulary, grammar, pronunciation, reading comprehension and writing skills. e. Former ELLs up to two years will receive support from the ESL teacher as needed and mandated testing accommodations will be adhere to by our testing staff. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? ELLs identified as having special needs, goals stated on their IEP are taken into consideration as well as their need as indicated by the results of their NYSESLAT and NYSITELL. Students will receive their mandated ESL services plus additional support that will be provided through RTI, related services, extended learning time or after school. ELLs with alternative placement, visual aids, graphic organizers, hands on materials, audio teaching materials are used to foster language acquisition. Prior knowledge will be used t enhance students' cognitive and academic development. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? In mathematics, ELLs identified as having special needs will receive instruction according to the needs listed on their individual educational plan. A more hands-on-approach with clearly labeled manipulative will assist the student in grasping concepts more quickly. teachers of students with special needs will meet with our certified ESL teacher to ensure students receive the mandated minutes. Programming and scheduling are taken in consideration by the ICT teachers and the ESL teacher in order to better meet the students' needs as recommended on their IEP. Students with disabilities are scheduled 1st an 2nd periods ensuring they receive their mandated minutes. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. All students are eligible for all intervention services offered by our school. From Tuesday through Friday students can attend an additional hour and fifteen minutes of Extended Learning Time. Our certified teachers, SETTS teachers, and classroom teachers work collaboratively to plan and serve our ELL students. Intervention in English Language Arts, math and other content areas i done in English with native language support, i.e., bilingual dictionaries, glossaries, google text translate. Our extended learning Time is from 2:20- 3:35 from Tuesday to Friday focusing on all content areas. Interventions during the mandated day time are aligned with students need based on assessment results. Our ESL teacher, SETTS Teachers work collaboratively with content area teachers to effectively facilitate the flow of learning. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? As of date, our ELLs are eligible to participate in all extracurricular activities. In addition to the Extended Learning Time, Saturday test taking strategies program, Century 21 After-school will be available to all ELLs for this upcoming year. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 81  11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All ELLs receive equal access to participate in all programs, i.e., Extended Learning Time, test-prep, Century 21 after school or any other extra curricular activities. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. We have a variety of materials to support our ELLs. We use a computer program Successmaker with our students. This computer based program is highly individualize and rich in visual graphics. It sets the pace according to the needs of the students and align coursework lessons to the CCLS. The following materials are used to support ELLs at our school: Beginner Visions-Basic Language and Literacy: Thomson Heinle, Linse-Yedlin Fundations-Phonics Go Math Common Core Common Core Science Social Studies: New York City: Houghton Mifflin Native Language Literature Books Native Language dictionaries and glossaries Transitioning/Expending Language- The Comprehensive Literacy Curriculum- Jane Fell Green Sopris West Common Core Science and Social Studies Native Language glossaries and dictionaries Native Language literature books 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Native Language is supported in our Free Standing ESL program by the use of bilingual dictionaries, glossaries of content areas, Spanish LAB-R, Native Language Literature books, interpreters and google translation. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All ESL students receive services accordingly. Our ESL teacher and content area teachers plan and drive instructions using results from the NYSITELL, NYSESLAT, teacher created assessments, end of unit test, NYS standardized Test, and individual educational plan for students with special needs. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? We have a variety of materials to support our ELLs. We use a computer program Successmaker with our students. This computer based program is highly individualize and rich in visual graphics. It sets the pace according to the needs of the students and align coursework lessons to the CCLS. The following materials are used to support ELLs at our school: Beginner Visions-Basic Language and Literacy: Thomson Heinle, Linse-Yedlin Fundations-Phonics Go Math Common Core Common Core Science Social Studies: New York City: Houghton Mifflin Native Language Literature Books Native Language dictionaries and glossaries Transitioning/Expending Language- The Comprehensive Literacy Curriculum- Jane Fell Green Sopris West Common Core Science and Social Studies Native Language glossaries and dictionaries 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 82  Native Language literature books 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Our school sends a Welcome Pocket including Community Resources, Parent Handbook, Translation and Interpretation Unit information, and Parent Coordinator's contact number with official registration info. Staffs involved are: ESL Teacher, Parent Coordinator, Principal's designee, and IEP or a SETTS Teacher. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? N/A 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Professional Development is provided in order for the school to better meet academic and promotional needs of our ELLs population. The purpose of this professional development is to inform and familiarize staff with the methodologies and tools to help the ELLs move toward proficiency in English. Our TESOL teacher and classroom teachers utilize this time to colloborate,, review data, to plan instruction to the needs of the students and receive training/support in the common core learning standards. Professional Development sessions take place every Monday. In addition full day staff development sessions are offered to teacherswith opportunities to engage in hands-on preparations of Ready Gen, Go Math, TC Writing programs. Professional Developmens are sessions are designed for our target audience, content area teachers, RTI and our TESOL teachers. Professional developments are geared to access data, identify individual strengths and weaknesses of students and project future goals that would be utilized in differentiation of instructions. Teachers meet during common prep periods;the thrust of these meetings is to plan strategies to improve student learning for all students including the ELLS. Training and support are given to designated teachers, particularly our ESL teacher and other personnel. Our ESL Teacher and classroom teachers will address the needs.of ELL students on a regular basis with a focus on data Analysis, NYS ELL Learning Standards. All professional developments are geared to enhance instructions. Teachers and related staff members are encouraged to participate in various content areas professional development to have a better understanding of specific content area leading to plan effectively. Professional developments are offered to all staff members. Our teachers including the certified ELL teacher are sent to various workshops at the central DOE office, Teachers college, and various schools for inter-visitations for best practice. Our ESL Teacher is encouraged to attend all professional developments i.e., Instructional Care across classrooms, Lesson Planning, Implementation of CCLs, Instructional focus, Inquiry, and grade planning. The above mentioned professional developments enhance teachers' instructional practice, support teachers in creating rigorous instructions. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 83  2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. The guidance counselor, classroom teacher, ESL teacher, and the parent coordinator work as team to explain the process of choosing a high school. The parent coordinator ensures that ll correspondence are translated in parents' preferred language. Translation services are done in hours ey qualified staff member or by the translation unit if needed Staff members are mandated to be trained for a minimum of 15% and our ESL teacher 50%of the required professional development hours. S Staff members are encouraged to register for appropriate and available courses and professional development hours. The professional development sessions focus on topics of compliance and issues dealing with curriculum and instruction. Teachers in addition to outside workshops of best instructional practices for ELLs. For details please refer to number 1 above. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? The PTA led by the Parent Coordinator, invites and encourages parents to participate in various workshops, which are conducted throughout the year. These workshops cover a wide range of topics such as "How the Common Core will affect your Child," "How to help your child become a better reader", and "how to help prepare your child for the ELA and Math Exams". All workshops have translators on hand to assist the non English families. Parents of ELLs are invited to programs that are offered by the school and other city organizations. Our parent coordinator coordinates workshops inviting parents to take active roles in the school learning culture. The PTA welcomes parents on becoming partners in their children's education. Parents are provided a welcoming atmosphere and communication is done in their preferred language throughout the year. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Parent involvement at P.S./I.S. 165 starts in the very first month of the school year. "Meet and Greet" has become a tradition at our school. This is when parents are invited to meet all of their child's teachers including the ELL teacher. At this meeting, parents have the opportunity to hear all the planned and scheduled learning assignments/activities for the school year. Parents are encouraged to participate in the school culture . The school newsletter containing information and calendar is sent to parents in their preferred language. Calendar of activities is posted in the main office. Parent volunteers are encouraged to accompany students on school trips. Parents including our ELLs are encouraged to make suggestions on topics of interest. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. N/A 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 84  2018-19 RSCEP-PF 85 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Jason Rivers, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 86  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Ida R. Posner School DBN: 23K165 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Mr. Jason Rivers Title Principal Ms. M. Myrie Assistant Principal Mr. Gregory Wooten Parent Coordinator Ms. M. Gabriel ENL/Bilingual Teacher Rockel Holmes Parent Ms. Carine Fabien (CBranch) Teacher/Subject Area Ms. V. Lyle (ELA) Teacher/Subject Area N/A N/A Coach Coach Ms. Sabien Jean School Counselor Dr.Mia Theresa Pate N/A N/A N/A N/A Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member N/A Other N/A Other N/A Other N/A Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 10/26/16 10/26/16 10/26/16 10/25/16 10/25/16 10/25/16 10/25/16 N/A N/A 10/25/16 N/A N/A 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 87  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 23 School Name: Ida R. Posner Superintendent: Ms. M. DeGovial The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. In compliance with the Chancellor's Regulation A-663, PS. 165K uses the following data and methods to assess written and oral interpretation needs of parents: 1.Collecting data from ATS Report of Preferred Languages, Blue Cards and Parent Surveys indicating parents' primary language spoken at home with children and whether such parents require language assistance to communicate with the DOE. 2. Making available translation and interpretation services for parents. Our certified ESL Teacher/ NYC Certified Interpreter/Translator Ms. Gabriel provides translation in French and in Haitian Creole, Ms. Ballesteros to translate for Spanish speakers, Multilingual Language Access flyers and brochures to parents, posting DOE/ Translation and Interpretation Unit's telephone number by the safety agents' desk. 3. Develop a school-based language access plan aligned to Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey questions pertaining to parents' language of choice with school staff. Student Emergency Contact cards are completed and noted identifying parents' particular language preference at registration. 4.Increasing parental awareness regarding their rights, the availabily of translation and interpretation 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 88  services during business hours. 5. Maintaining records regarding the provision of language assistance to monitor changes and progress. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language At registration a Parent/Guardian Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS) is administered by the certified ESL Teacher Ms. Gabriel. If the parent indicates a language of preference other than English in part III of the (HLIS), copies of that home language survey are made and kept by Ms. Gabriel and our parent coordinator. Currently at PS.165K, the preferred languages of parents are: English, Arabic, and Spanish. 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families PS.165 will provide all documents required by the Chancellor's Regulation A-663 using documents produced by the central DOE offices and schools which contain critical information regarding a How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 89  child's education. a.The school will provide the following written translation services: Registration/Home Language Survey form, application and selection. b. standards and perfomance, standard text on report cards. c. conduct, safety and discipline text.d. special education, transfers and discharges, related services. e. newsletters, monthly calendar, NYS testing dates, parent-teacher conference announcements, after-school program information. In house qualified staff members will provide translation; outside vendors with specialized linguists will translate critical communication in a timely manner in parents' preferred language. If translators are unavailble, PS/IS 165 will contact a DOE vendor "The Big Word" a language solution provider. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to To ensure parental engagement in their children' s education PS.165K offers: Curriculum nights twice a year, parent-teacher conferences several times a year, parent-workshops, scheduled parent-teacher meeting during preps, teachers or guidance counselor calls to parents.There is a monthly Principal's Breakfast with parents to discuss a specfic topic related to their children academic growth. Translation and interpretation are requested two weeks prior the event . All documents are translated in parents' preferred language. As PS/IS 165 prepares for the Parent Teacher Conferences and NYS exams, documents are submitted to translation and Interpretation Unit at least two weeks in advance. In addition, PS/IS 165 has readily available staff members as translators such as Ms. Gabriel with French and 2018-19 RSCEP-PF provide interpretation service(s)? 90  Hatian-Creole, Ms. Ballesteros, Ms. Cynthia Smith and Ms. Velez with Spanish. Translators are available during Parent Teacher Conferences that are scheduled through-out the school year. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) To fulfill parental notification requirements for translation and interpretation services, as per Section VII of the Chancellor's Regulation A-663, PS.165K will: a.Distribute the Translation & Interpretation Unit survey to parents to assess provision of language services by the Translation & Interpretation Unit. b. A copy of the Bill of Parents Rights and Responsibities is available. c.Multilingual Welcome Poster will be posted at the entrance and in the main office. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? To ensure the successful implementation of language access initiaves and gather feedback from parents on the quality and availability of services, PS.165K will make available an evaluation form to parents to rate services of translation and interpretation services received from our community school. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 91 
